[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Theosophy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Next](iu101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###### <span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### PART TWO.--RELIGION.

### CHAPTER I.

> "Yea, the time cometh, that whomsoever killeth you, will think that he
> doeth God service."--*Gospel according to John,* xvi*.* 2.

> "Let him be **A**NATHEMA . . . who shall say that human Sciences ought
> to be pursued in such a spirit of freedom that one may be allowed to
> hold as true their assertions even when opposed to revealed
> doctrines."--*Ecumenical Council of* 1870.

> "**G**LOUC.--The Church! Where is it?"--*King Henry VI.,* Act i., Sc.
> 1.

IN the United States of America, sixty thousand (60,428) men are paid
salaries to teach the Science of God and His relations to His creatures.

These men contract to impart to us the knowledge which treats of the
existence, character, and attributes of our Creator; His laws and
government; the doctrines we are to believe and the duties we are to
practice. Five thousand (5,141) of them, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) with the prospect of 1273 theological
students to help them in time, teach this science according to a formula
prescribed by the Bishop of Rome, to five million people. Fifty-five
thousand (55,287) local and travelling ministers, representing fifteen
different denominations, <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*\*](#fn_1) each
contradicting the other upon more or less vital theololical questions,
instruct, in their respective doctrines, thirty-three million
(33,500,000) other persons. Many of these teach according to the canons
of the cis-Atlantic branch of an establishment which acknowledges a
daughter of the late Duke of Kent as its spiritual

###### <span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

head. There are many hundred thousand Jews; some thousands of Orientals
of all kinds; and a very few who belong to the Greek Church. A man at
Salt Lake City, with nineteen wives and more than one hundred children
and grandchildren, is the supreme spiritual ruler over ninety thousand
people, who believe that he is in frequent intercourse with the
gods--for the Mormons are Polytheists as well as Polygamists, and their
chief god is represented as living in a planet they call Colob.

The God of the Unitarians is a bachelor; the Deity of the Presbyterians,
Methodists, Congregationalists, and the other orthodox Protestant sects
a spouseless Father with one Son, who is identical with Himself. In the
attempt to outvie each other in the erection of their sixty-two thousand
and odd churches, prayer-houses, and meeting-halls, in which to teach
these conflicting theological doctrines, $354,485,581 have been spent.
The value of the Protestant parsonages alone, in which are sheltered the
disputants and their families, is roughly calculated to approximate
$54,115,297. Sixteen million (16,179,387) dollars, are, moreover,
contributed every year for current expenses of the Protestant
denominations only. One Presbyterian church in New York cost a round
million; a Catholic altar alone, one-fourth as much!

We will not mention the multitude of smaller sects, communities, and
extravagantly original little heresies in this country which spring up
one year to die out the next, like so many spores of fungi after a rainy
day. We will not even stop to consider the alleged millions of
Spiritualists; for the majority lack the courage to break away from
their respective religious denominations. These are the back-door
Nicodemuses.

And now, with Pilate, let us inquire, What is truth? Where is it to be
searched for amid this multitude of warring sects? Each claims to be
based upon divine revelation, and each to have the keys of the celestial
gates. Is either in possession of this rare truth? Or, must we exclaim
with the Buddhist philosopher, "There is but one truth on earth, and it
is unchangeable: and this is--that there is *no* truth on it!"

Though we have no disposition whatever to trench upon the ground that
has been so exhaustively gleaned by those learned scholars who have
shown that every Christian dogma has its origin in a heathen rite, still
the facts which they have exhumed, since the enfranchisement of science,
will lose nothing by repetition. Besides, we propose to examine these
facts from a different and perhaps rather novel point of view: that of
the old philosophies as esoterically understood. These we have barely
glanced at in our first volume. We will use them as the standard by
which to compare Christian dogmas and miracles with the doctrines and
phenomena of ancient magic, and the modern "New Dispensation," as
Spiritualism is called by its votaries. Since the materialists deny the
phenomena

###### <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

without investigation, and since the theologians in admitting them offer
us the poor choice of two palpable absurdities--the Devil and
miracles--we can lose little by applying to the theurgists, and they may
actually help us to throw a great light upon a very dark subject.

Professor A. Butlerof, of the Imperial University of St. Petersburg,
remarks in a recent pamphlet, entitled *Mediumistic Manifestations,* as
follows: "Let the facts (of modern spiritualism) belong if you will to
the number of those which were more or less known by the ancients; let
them be identical with those which in the dark ages gave importance to
the office of Egyptian priest or Roman augur; let them even furnish the
basis of the sorcery of our Siberian Shaman; . . . let them be all
these, and, if they are *real facts,* it is no business of ours. All the
facts in nature *belong to science,* and every addition to the store of
science enriches instead of impoverishing her. If humanity has once
admitted a truth, and then in the blindness of self-conceit denied it,
to return to its realization is a step forward and not backward."

Since the day that modern science gave what may be considered the
death-blow to dogmatic theology, by assuming the ground that religion
was full of mystery, and mystery is unscientific, the mental state of
the educated class has presented a curious aspect. Society seems from
that time to have been ever balancing itself upon one leg, on an unseen
tight-rope stretched from our visible universe into the invisible one;
uncertain whether the end hooked on faith in the latter might not
suddenly break, and hurl it into final annihilation.

The great body of nominal Christians may be divided into three unequal
portions: materialists, spiritualists, and Christians proper. The
materialists and spiritualists make common cause against the
hierarchical pretensions of the clergy; who, in retaliation, denounce
both with equal acerbity. The materialists are as little in harmony as
the Christian sects themselves--the Comtists, or, as they call
themselves, the positivists, being despised and hated to the last degree
by the schools of thinkers, one of which Maudsley honorably represents
in England. Positivism, be it remembered, is that "religion" of the
future about whose founder even Huxley has made himself wrathful in his
famous lecture, *The Physical Basis of Life;* and Maudsley felt obliged,
in behalf of modern science, to express himself thus: "It is no wonder
that scientific men should be anxious to disclaim Comte as their
law-giver, and to protest against such a king being set up to reign over
them. Not conscious of any personal obligation to his
writings--conscious how much, in some respects, he has misrepresented
the spirit and pretensions of science--they repudiate the allegiance
which his enthusiastic disciples would force upon them, and which
popular opinion is fast coming to think a natural one. They do

###### <span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

well in thus making a timely assertion of independence; for if it be not
done soon, it will soon be too late to be done well." <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) When a materialistic doctrine is repudiated
so strongly by two such materialists as Huxley and Maudsley, then we
must think indeed that it is absurdity itself.

Among Christians there is nothing but dissension. Their various churches
represent every degree of religious belief, from the omnivorous
credulity of blind faith to a condescending and high-toned deference to
the Deity which thinly masks an evident conviction of their own deific
wisdom. All these sects believe more or less in the immortality of the
soul. Some admit the intercourse between the two worlds as a fact; some
entertain the opinion as a sentiment; some positively deny it; and only
a few maintain an attitude of attention and expectancy.

Impatient of restraint, longing for the return of the dark ages, the
Romish Church frowns at the *diabolical* manifestations, and indicates
what she would do to their champions had she but the power of old. Were
it not for the self-evident fact that she herself is placed by science
on trial, and that she is handcuffed, she would be ready at a moment's
notice to repeat in the nineteenth century the revolting scenes of
former days. As to the Protestant clergy, so furious is their common
hatred toward spiritualism, that as a secular paper very truly remarks:
"They seem willing to undermine the public faith in all the spiritual
phenomena of the past, as recorded in the *Bible,* if they can only see
the pestilent modern heresy stabbed to the heart." <span
id="fr_3"></span>[\*\*](#fn_3)

Summoning back the long-forgotten memories of the Mosaic laws, the
Romish Church claims the monopoly of miracles, and of the right to sit
in judgment over them, as being the sole heir thereto by direct
inheritance. The *Old Testament,* exiled by Colenso, his predecessors
and contemporaries, is recalled from its banishment. The prophets, whom
his Holiness the Pope condescends at last to place, if not on the same
level with himself, at least at a less respectful distance, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_4) are dusted and cleaned. The memory of
all the diabolical abracadabra is evoked anew. The blasphemous *horrors*
perpetrated by Paganism, its

###### <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

phallic worship, thaumaturgical wonders wrought by Satan, human
sacrifices, incantations, witchcraft, magic, and sorcery are recalled
and DEMONISM is confronted with *spiritualism* for mutual recognition
and identification. Our modern demonologists conveniently overlook a few
insignificant details, among which is the undeniable presence of heathen
phallism in the Christian symbols. A strong spiritual element of this
worship may be easily demonstrated in the dogma of the Immaculate
Conception of the Virgin Mother of God; and a physical element equally
proved in the fetish-worship of the holy *limbs* of Sts. Cosmo and
Damiano, at Isernia, near Naples; a successful traffic in which
*ex-voto* in wax was carried on by the clergy, annually, until barely a
half century ago. <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

We find it rather unwise on the part of Catholic writers to pour out
their vials of wrath in such sentences as these: "In a multitude of
pagodas, the phallic stone, ever and always assuming, like the Grecian
*batylos,* the brutally indecent form of the *lingham* . . . the Maha
Deva." <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*\*](#fn_6) Before casting slurs on a
symbol whose profound metaphysical meaning is too much for the modern
champions of that religion of sensualism *par excellence,* Roman
Catholicism, to grasp, they are in duty bound to destroy their oldest
churches, and change the form of the cupolas of their own temples. The
Mahody of Elephanta, the Round Tower of Bhangulpore, the minarets of
Islam--either rounded or pointed--are the originals of the *Campanile*
column of San Marco, at Venice, of the Rochester Cathedral, and of the
modern Duomo of Milan. All of these steeples, turrets, domes, and
Christian temples, are the reproductions of the primitive idea of the
*lithos,* the upright phallus. "The western tower of St. Paul's
Cathedral, London," says the author of *The Rosicrucians,* "is one of
the double *lithoi* placed always in front of every temple, Christian as
well as heathen." <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_7) Moreover, in
all Christian Churches, "particularly in Protestant churches, where they
figure most conspicuously, the two tables of stone of the Mosaic
Dispensation are placed over the altar, side by side, as a united stone,
the tops of which are rounded. . . . The right stone is *masculine,* the
left *feminine*." Therefore neither Catholics nor Protestants have a
right to talk of the "indecent forms" of heathen monuments so long as
they ornament their own churches with the symbols of the Lingham and
Yoni, and even write the laws of their God upon them.

Another detail not redounding very particularly to the honor of the
Christian clergy might be recalled in the word Inquisition. The torrents

###### <span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of human blood shed by this *Christian* institution, and the number of
its human sacrifices, are unparalleled in the annals of Paganism.
Another still more prominent feature in which the clergy surpassed their
masters, the "heathen," is *sorcery.* Certainly in no Pagan temple was
black magic, in its real and true sense, more practiced than in the
Vatican. While strongly supporting exorcism as an important source of
revenue, they neglected magic as little as the ancient heathen. It is
easy to prove that the *sortilegium,* or sorcery, was widely practiced
among the clergy and monks so late as the last century, and is practiced
occasionally even now.

Anathematizing every manifestation of occult nature outside the
precincts of the Church, the clergy--notwithstanding proofs to the
contrary--call it "the work of Satan," "the snares of the fallen
angels," who "rush in and out from the bottomless pit," mentioned by
John in his kabalistic *Revelation,* "from whence arises a smoke as the
smoke of a great furnace." "*Intoxicated by its fumes, around this pit
are daily gathering millions of Spiritualists, to worship at 'the Abyss
of Baal.' "* <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8)

More than ever arrogant, stubborn, and despotic, now that she has been
nearly upset by modern research, not daring to interfere with the
powerful champions of science, the Latin Church revenges herself upon
the unpopular phenomena. A despot without a victim, is a word void of
sense; a power which neglects to assert itself through outward,
well-calculated effects, risks being doubted in the end. The Church has
no intention to fall into the oblivion of the ancient myths, or to
suffer her authority to be too closely questioned. Hence she pursues, as
well as the times permit, her traditional policy. Lamenting the enforced
extinction of her ally, the Holy Inquisition, she makes a virtue of
necessity. The only victims now within reach are the Spiritists of
France. Recent events have shown that the meek spouse of Christ never
disdains to retaliate on helpless victims.

Having successfully performed her part of *Deus-ex-Machina* from behind
the French Bench, which has not scrupled to disgrace itself for her, the
Church of Rome sets to work and shows in the year 1876 what she can do.
From the whirling tables and dancing pencils of profane Spiritualism,
the Christian world is warned to turn to the divine "miracles" of
Lourdes. Meanwhile, the ecclesiastical authorities utilize their time in
arranging for other more easy triumphs, calculated to scare the
superstitious out of their senses. So, acting under orders, the clergy
hurl dramatic, if not very impressive anathemas from every Catholic
diocese; threaten right and left; excommunicate and curse. Perceiving,

###### <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

finally, that her thunderbolts directed even against crowned heads fall
about as harmlessly as the Jupiterean lightnings of Offenbach's
*Calchas,* Rome turns about in powerless fury against the victimized
*proteges* of the Emperor of Russia--the unfortunate Bulgarians and
Servians. Undisturbed by evidence and sarcasm, unbaffled by proof, "the
lamb of the Vatican" impartially divides his wrath between the liberals
of Italy, "the impious whose breath has the stench of the
sepulchre," <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) the "schismatic Russian
*Sarmates,*" and the heretics and spiritualists, "who worship at the
bottomless pit where the great Dragon lies in wait."

Mr. Gladstone went to the trouble of making a catalogue of what he terms
the "flowers of speech," disseminated through these Papal discourses.
Let us cull a few of the chosen terms used by this vicegerent of Him who
said that, "whosoever shall say *Thou fool,* shall be in danger of
hell-fire." They are selected from authentic discourses. Those who
oppose the Pope are "wolves, Pharisees, thieves, liars, hypocrites,
dropsical children of Satan, sons of perdition, of sin, and corruption,
satellites of Satan in human flesh, monsters of hell, demons incarnate,
stinking corpses, men issued from the pits of hell, traitors and Judases
led by the spirit of hell; children of the deepest pits of hell," etc.,
etc.; the whole piously collected and published by Don Pasquale di
Franciscis, whom Gladstone has, with perfect propriety, termed, "an
accomplished professor of *flunkeyism* in things spiritual." <span
id="fr_10"></span>[\*\*](#fn_10)

Since his Holiness the Pope has such a rich vocabulary of invectives at
his command, why wonder that the Bishop of Toulouse did not scruple to
utter the most undignified falsehoods about the Protestants and
Spiritualists of America--people doubly odious to a Catholic--in his
address to his diocese: "Nothing," he remarks, "is more common in an era
of unbelief than to see a *false revelation substitute itself for the
true one,* and minds neglect the teachings of the Holy Church, to devote
themselves to the study of divination and the occult sciences." With a
fine episcopal contempt for statistics, and strangely confounding in his
memory the audiences of the revivalists, Moody and Sankey, and the
patrons of darkened seance-rooms, he utters the unwarranted and
fallacious assertion that "it has been proven that Spiritualism, in the
United States, has caused one-sixth of all the cases of suicide and
insanity." He says that it is not possible that the spirits "teach
either an exact science, because they are lying demons, or a useful
science, because the character

###### <span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

of the word of Satan, like Satan himself, is sterile." He warns his dear
*collaborateurs,* that "the writings in favor of Spiritualism are under
the ban"; and he advises them to let it be known that "to frequent
spiritual circles with the intention of accepting the doctrine, is to
apostatize from the Holy Church, and assume the risk of
excommunication"; finally, says he, "Publish the fact that the teaching
of no spirit should prevail against that of the pulpit of Peter, which
is the teaching of the Spirit of God Himself"!!

Aware of the many false teachings attributed by the Roman Church to the
Creator, we prefer disbelieving the latter assertion. The famous
Catholic theologian, Tillemont, assures us in his work that "all the
illustrious Pagans are condemned to the eternal torments of hell,
*because* they lived before the time of Jesus, and, therefore, could not
be benefited by the redemption"!! He also assures us that the Virgin
Mary personally testified to this truth over her own signature in a
letter to a saint. Therefore, this is also a revelation--"the Spirit of
God Himself" teaching such charitable doctrines.

We have also read with great advantage the topographical descriptions of
*Hell and Purgatory* in the celebrated treatise under that name by a
Jesuit, the Cardinal Bellarmin. A critic found that the author, who
gives the description from a *divine* vision with which he was favored,
"appears to possess all the knowledge of a land-measurer" about the
secret tracts and formidable divisions of the "bottomless pit." Justin
Martyr having actually committed to paper the heretical thought that
after all Socrates might not be altogether fixed in hell, his
Benedictine editor criticises this too benevolent father very severely.
Whoever doubts the Christian charity of the Church of Rome in this
direction is invited to peruse the *Censure* of the Sorbonne, on
Marmontel's *Belisarius.* The *odium theologicum* blazes in it on the
dark sky of orthodox theology like an aurora borealis--the precursor of
God's wrath, according to the teaching of certain mediaeval divines.

We have attempted in the first part of this work to show, by historical
examples, how completely men of science have deserved the stinging
sarcasm of the late Professor de Morgan, who remarked of them that "they
wear the priest's cast-off garb, dyed to escape detection." The
Christian clergy are, in like manner, attired in the cast-off garb of
the *heathen* priesthood; acting diametrically in opposition to their
*God's* moral precepts, but nevertheless, sitting in judgment over the
whole world.

When dying on the cross, the martyred Man of Sorrows forgave his
enemies. His last words were a prayer in their behalf. He taught his
disciples to curse not, but to bless, even their foes. But the heirs of

###### <span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

St. Peter, the self-constituted representatives on earth of that same
meek Jesus, unhesitatingly curse whoever resists their despotic will.
Besides, was not the "Son" long since crowded by them into the
background? They make their obeisance only to the Dowager Mother,
for--according to their teaching--again through "the direct Spirit of
God," she alone acts as a mediatrix. The Œcumenical Council of 1870
embodied the teaching into a dogma, to disbelieve which is to be doomed
forever to the 'bottomless pit.' The work of Don Pasquale di Franciscis
is positive on that point; for he tells us that, as the Queen of Heaven
owes to the present Pope "the finest gem in her coronet," since he has
conferred on her the unexpected honor of becoming suddenly immaculate,
there is nothing she cannot obtain from her Son for "her Church." <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11)

Some years ago, certain travellers saw in Barri, Italy, a statue of the
Madonna, arrayed in a flounced pink skirt over a swelling *crinoline!*
Pious pilgrims who may be anxious to examine the regulation wardrobe of
their God's mother may do so by going to Southern Italy, Spain, and
Catholic North and South America. The Madonna of Barri must still be
there--between two vineyards and a *locanda* (gin-shop). When last seen,
a half-successful attempt had been made to clothe the infant Jesus; they
had covered his legs with a pair of dirty, scollop-edged pantaloons. An
English traveller having presented the "Mediatrix" with a green silk
parasol, the grateful population of the *contadini,* accompanied by the
village-priest, went in procession to the spot. They managed to stick
the sunshade, opened, between the infant's back and the arm of the
Virgin which embraced him. The scene and ceremony were both solemn and
highly refreshing to our religious feelings. For there stood the image
of the goddess in its niche, surrounded with a row of ever-burning
lamps, the flames of which, flickering in the breeze, infect God's pure
air with an offensive smell of olive oil. The Mother and Son truly
represent the two most conspicuous idols of *Monotheistic* Christianity!

For a companion to the idol of the poor *contadini* of Barri, go to the
rich city of Rio Janeiro. In the Church of the Duomo del Candelaria, in
a long hall running along one side of the church, there might be seen, a
few years ago, another Madonna. Along the walls of the hall there is a
line of saints, each standing on a contribution-box, which thus forms a
fit pedestal. In the centre of this line, under a gorgeously rich canopy
of blue silk, is exhibited the Virgin Mary leaning on the arm of Christ.
"Our Lady" is arrayed in a very *decollete* blue satin dress with short

###### <span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

sleeves, showing, to great advantage, a snow-white, exquisitely-moulded
neck, shoulders, and arms. The skirt equally of blue satin with an
overskirt of rich lace and gauze puffs, is as short as that of a
ballet-dancer; hardly reaching the knee, it exhibits a pair of
finely-shaped legs covered with flesh colored silk tights, and blue
satin French boots with very high red heels! The blonde hair of this
"Mother of God" is arranged in the latest fashion, with a voluminous
*chignon* and curls. As she leans on her Son's arm, her face is lovingly
turned toward her Only-Begotten, whose dress and attitude are equally
worthy of admiration. Christ wears an evening dress-coat, with
swallow-tail, black trousers, and low cut white vest; varnished boots,
and white kid gloves, *over one of which* sparkles a rich diamond ring,
worth many thousands we must suppose--a precious Brazilian jewel. Above
this body of a modern Portuguese dandy, is a head with the hair parted
in the middle; a sad and solemn face, and eyes whose patient look seems
to reflect all the bitterness of this last insult flung at the majesty
of the Crucified. <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12)

The Egyptian Isis was also represented as a Virgin Mother by her
devotees, and as holding her infant son, Horus, in her arms. In some
statues and *basso-relievos,* when she appears alone she is either
completely nude or veiled from head to foot. But in the Mysteries, in
common with nearly every other goddess, she is entirely veiled from head
to foot, as a symbol of a mother's chastity. It would not do us any harm
were we to borrow from the ancients some of the poetic sentiment in
their religions, and the innate veneration they entertained for *their*
symbols.

It is but fair to say at once that the last of the *true* Christians
died with the last of the direct apostles. Max Muller forcibly asks:
"How can a missionary in such circumstances meet the surprise and
questions of his pupils, unless he may point to that seed, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*\*](#fn_13) and tell them what Christianity was
meant to be? unless he may show that, like all other religions,
Christianity too, has had its history; that the Christianity of the
nineteenth century is not the Christianity of the middle ages, and that
the Christianity of the middle ages was not that of the early Councils;
that the Christianity of the early Councils was not that of the
Apostles, and that what has been said by Christ, that alone was well
said?" <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_14)

Thus we may infer that the only characteristic difference between modern
Christianity and the old heathen faiths is the belief of the former in a
personal devil and in hell. "The Aryan nations had no devil," says Max
Muller. "Pluto, though of a sombre character, was a very

###### <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

respectable personage; and Loki (the Scandinavian), though a mischievous
person, was not a fiend. The German Goddess, Hell, too, like Proserpine,
had once seen better days. Thus, when the Germans were indoctrinated
with the idea of a real devil, the Semitic Seth, Satan or Diabolus, they
treated him in the most good-humored way."

The same may be said of hell. Hades was quite a different place from our
region of eternal damnation, and might be termed rather an intermediate
state of purification. Neither does the Scandinavian *Hel* or Hela,
imply either a state or a place of punishment; for when Frigga, the
grief-stricken mother of Bal-dur, the white god, who died and found
himself in the dark abodes of the shadows (Hades) sent Hermod, a son of
Thor, in quest of her beloved child, the messenger found him in the
inexorable region--alas! but still comfortably seated on a rock, and
reading a book. <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15) The Norse kingdom
of the dead is moreover situated in the higher latitudes of the Polar
regions; it is a cold and cheerless abode, and neither the gelid halls
of Hela, nor the occupation of Baldur present the least similitude to
the blazing hell of eternal fire and the miserable "damned" sinners with
which the Church so generously peoples it. No more is it the Egyptian
Amenthes, the region of judgment and purification; nor the Onderah--the
abyss of darkness of the Hindus; for even the fallen angels hurled into
it by Siva, are allowed by Parabrahma to consider it as an intermediate
state, in which an opportunity is afforded them to prepare for higher
degrees of purification and redemption from their wretched condition.
The Gehenna of the *New Testament* was a locality outside the walls of
Jerusalem; and in mentioning it, Jesus used but an ordinary metaphor.
Whence then came the dreary dogma of hell, that Archimedean lever of
Christian theology, with which they have succeeded to hold in subjection
the numberless millions of Christians for nineteen centuries? Assuredly
not from the Jewish Scriptures, and we appeal for corroboration to any
well-informed Hebrew scholar.

The only designation of something approaching hell in the *Bible* is
*Gehenna* or Hinnom, a valley near Jerusalem, where was situated Tophet,
a place where a fire was perpetually kept for sanitary purposes. The
prophet Jeremiah informs us that the Israelites used to sacrifice their
children to Moloch-Hercules on that spot; and later we find Christians
quietly replacing this divinity by their god of *mercy,* whose wrath
will not be appeased, unless the Church sacrifices to him her unbaptized
children and sinning sons on the altar of "eternal damnation"!

Whence then did the divine learn so well the conditions of hell, as

###### <span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

to actually divide its torments into two kinds, the *poena damni* and
poenae sensus, the former being the privation of the beatific vision;
the latter the *eternal* pains *in a lake of fire and brimstone?* If
they answer us that it is in the *Apocalypse* (xx. 10), we are prepared
to demonstrate whence the theologist John himself derived the idea, "And
*the devil* that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where *the beast* and the false prophet are and shall be
tormented for ever and ever," he says. Laying aside the esoteric
interpretation that the "devil" or tempting demon meant our own earthly
body, which after death will surely dissolve in the *fiery* or ethereal
elements, <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16) the word "eternal" by
which our theologians interpret the words "for ever and ever" does not
exist in the Hebrew language, either as a word or meaning. There is no
Hebrew word which properly expresses *eternity*; <span
id="img_iu2-12"></span> ![](img/iu2-12.jpg)*oulam,* according to Le
Clerc, only imports a time whose beginning or end is not known. While
showing that this word does not mean *infinite* duration, and that in
the *Old Testament* the word *forever* only signifies a long time,
Archbishop Tillotson has completely perverted its sense with respect to
the idea of hell-torments. According to his doctrine, when Sodom and
Gomorrah are said to be suffering "eternal fire," we must understand it
only in the sense of that fire not being extinguished till both cities
were entirely consumed. But, as to hell-fire the words must be
understood in the strictest sense of infinite duration. Such is the
decree of the learned divine. For the duration of the punishment of the
wicked must be proportionate to the eternal happiness of the righteous.
So he says, "These (speaking of the wicked) shall go away εις κολασιν
αιονιον into *eternal* punishment; but the righteous εις ζοεν αιονιον
into life eternal."

The Reverend T. Surnden, <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*\*](#fn_17)
commenting on the speculations of his predecessors, fills a whole volume
with unanswerable arguments, tending to show that the locality *of Hell
is in the sun.* We suspect that the reverend speculator had read the
*Apocalypse* in bed, and had the nightmare in consequence. There are two
verses in the *Revelation of John* reading thus: "And the fourth angel
poured out his vial upon the sun, and power was given him to scorch men
with fire. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the
name of God." <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_18) This is simply
Pythagorean and kabalistic allegory. The idea is new neither with the
above-mentioned author nor with John. Pythagoras placed the "sphere of
purification in the sun," which sun, with its sphere, he moreover

###### <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

locates in the middle of the universe, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) the allegory having a double meaning: 1.
Symbolically, the central, spiritual sun, the Supreme Deity. Arrived at
this region every soul becomes purified of its sins, and unites itself
forever with its spirit, having previously suffered throughout all the
lower spheres. 2. By placing the sphere of *visible* fire in the middle
of the universe, he simply taught the heliocentric system which
appertained to the Mysteries, and was imparted only in the higher degree
of initiation. John gives to his Word a purely kabalistic significance,
which no "Fathers," except those who had belonged to the Neo-platonic
school, were able to comprehend. Origen understood it well, having been
a pupil of Ammonius Saccas; therefore we see him bravely denying the
perpetuity of hell-torments. He maintains that not only men, but even
devils (by which term he meant disembodied human sinners), after a
certain duration of punishment shall be pardoned and finally restored to
heaven. <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*\*](#fn_20) In consequence of this
and other such heresies Origen was, as a matter of course, exiled.

Many have been the learned and truly-inspired speculations as to the
locality of hell. The most popular were those which placed it in the
centre of the earth. At a certain time, however, skeptical doubts which
disturbed the placidity of faith in this highly-refreshing doctrine
arose in consequence of the meddling scientists of those days. As a Mr.
Swinden in our own century observes, the theory was inadmissible because
of two objections: 1st, that a fund of fuel or sulphur sufficient to
maintain so furious and constant a fire could not be there supposed;
and, 2d, that it must want the nitrous particles in the air to sustain
and keep it alive. "And how," says he, "can a fire be eternal, when, by
degrees, the whole substance of the earth must be consumed
thereby?" <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_21)

The skeptical gentleman had evidently forgotten that centuries ago St.
Augustine solved the difficulty. Have we not the word of this learned
divine that hell, nevertheless, is in the centre of the earth, for "God
supplies the central fire with air *by a miracle*"? The argument is
unanswerable, and so we will not seek to upset it.

The Christians were the first to make the existence of Satan a dogma of
the Church. And once that she had established it, she had to struggle
for over 1,700 years for the repression of a mysterious force which it
was her policy to make appear of diabolical origin. Unfortunately, in
manifesting itself, this force invariably tends to upset such a belief
by the ridiculous discrepancy it presents between the alleged cause and
the effects. If the clergy have not over-estimated the real power of

###### <span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the "Arch-Enemy of God," it must be confessed that he takes mighty
precautions against being recognized as the "Prince of Darkness" who
aims at our souls. If modern "spirits" are devils at all, as preached by
the clergy, then they can only be those "poor" or "stupid devils" whom
Max Muller describes as appearing so often in the German and Norwegian
tales.

Notwithstanding this, the clergy fear above all to be forced to
relinquish this hold on humanity. They are not willing to let us judge
of the tree by its fruits, for that might sometimes force them into
dangerous dilemmas. They refuse, likewise, to admit, with unprejudiced
people, that the phenomena of Spiritualism has unquestionably
spiritualized and reclaimed from evil courses many an indomitable
atheist and skeptic. But, as they confess themselves, what is the use in
a Pope, if there is no Devil?

And so Rome sends her ablest advocates and preachers to the rescue of
those perishing in "the bottomless pit." Rome employs her cleverest
writers for this purpose--albeit they all indignantly deny the
accusation--and in the preface to every book put forth by the prolific
des Mousseaux, the French Tertullian of our century, we find undeniable
proofs of the fact. Among other certificates of ecclesiastical approval,
every volume is ornamented with the text of a certain original letter
addressed to the very pious author by the world-known Father Ventura de
Raulica, of Rome. Few are those who have not heard this famous name. It
is the name of one of the chief pillars of the Latin Church, the
ex-General of the Order of the Theatins, Consultor of the Sacred
Congregation of Rites, Examiner of Bishops, and of the Roman Clergy,
etc., etc., etc. This strikingly characteristic document will remain to
astonish future generations by its spirit of unsophisticated demonolatry
and unblushing sincerity. We translate a fragment verbatim, and by thus
helping its circulation hope to merit the blessings of Mother
Church: <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22)

> "**M**ONSIEUR AND EXCELLENT **F**RIEND:

> "The greatest victory of Satan was gained on that day when he
> succeeded in making himself denied.

> "To demonstrate the existence of Satan, is to reestablish *one of the
> fundamental dogmas of the Church,* which serve as a basis for
> Christianity, and, without which, Satan would be but a name. . . .

> "Magic, mesmerism, magnetism, somnambulism, spiritualism, spiritism,
> hypnotism . . . are only other names for SATANISM.

> "To bring out such a truth and show it in its proper light, is to
> unmask the enemy; it is to unveil the immense danger of certain
> practices, *reputed innocent;* it is to deserve well in the eyes of
> humanity and of religion.

> "**F**ATHER **V**ENTURA DE **R**AULICA."

###### <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

A--men!

This is an unexpected honor indeed, for our American "controls" in
general, and the innocent "Indian guides" in particular. To be thus
introduced in Rome as princes of the Empire of Eblis, is more than they
could ever hope for in other lands.

Without in the least suspecting that she was working for the future
welfare of her enemies--the spiritualists and spiritists--the Church,
some twenty years since, in tolerating des Mousseaux and de Mirville as
the biographers of the Devil, and giving her approbation thereto,
tacitly confessed the literary copartnership.

M. the Chevalier Gougenot des Mousseaux, and his friend and
collaborateur, the Marquis Eudes de Mirville, to judge by their long
titles, must be aristocrats *pur sang,* and they are, moreover, writers
of no small erudition and talent. Were they to show themselves a little
more parsimonious of double points of exclamation following every
vituperation, and invective against Satan and his worshippers, their
style would be faultless. As it is, the crusade against the enemy of
mankind was fierce, and lasted for over twenty years.

What with the Catholics piling up their psychological phenomena to prove
the existence of a personal devil, and the Count de Gasparin, an ancient
minister of Louis Philippe, collecting volumes of other facts to prove
the contrary, the spiritists of France have contracted an everlasting
debt of gratitude toward the disputants. The existence of an unseen
spiritual universe peopled with invisible beings has now been
demonstrated beyond question. Ransacking the oldest libraries, they have
distilled from the historical records the quintessence of evidence. All
epochs, from the Homeric ages down to the present day, have supplied
their choicest materials to these indefatigable authors. In trying to
prove the authenticity of the miracles wrought by Satan in the days
preceding the Christian era, as well as throughout the middle ages, they
have simply laid a firm foundation for a study of the phenomena in our
modern times.

Though an ardent, uncompromising enthusiast, des Mousseaux unwittingly
transforms himself into the tempting demon, or--as he is fond of calling
the Devil--the "serpent of *Genesis.*" In his desire to demonstrate in
every manifestation the presence of the Evil One, he only succeeds in
demonstrating that Spiritualism and magic are no new things in the
world, but very ancient twin-brothers, whose origin must be sought for
in the earliest infancy of ancient India, Chaldea, Babylonia, Egypt,
Persia, and Greece.

He proves the existence of "spirits," whether these be angels or devils,
with such a clearness of argument and logic, and such an amount

###### <span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

of evidence, historical, irrefutable, and strictly authenticated, that
little is left for spiritualist authors who may come after him. How
unfortunate that the scientists, who believe neither in devil nor
spirit, are more than likely to ridicule M. des Mousseaux's books
without reading them, for they really contain so many facts of profound
scientific interest!

But what can we expect in our own age of unbelief, when we find Plato,
over twenty-two centuries ago, complaining of the same? "Me, too," says
he, in his *Euthyphron,* "when I say anything in the public assembly
concerning divine things, *and predict to them* what is going to happen,
they ridicule as mad; and although *nothing that I have predicted has
proved untrue,* yet they envy all such men as we are. However, we ought
not to heed, but pursue our own way."

The literary resources of the Vatican and other Catholic repositories of
learning must have been freely placed at the disposal of these modern
authors. When one has such treasures at hand--original manuscripts,
papyri, and books pillaged from the richest heathen libraries; old
treatises on magic and alchemy; and records of all the trials for
witchcraft, and sentences for the same to rack, stake, and torture, it
is mighty easy to write volumes of accusations against the Devil. We
affirm on good grounds that there are hundreds of the most valuable
works on the occult sciences, which are sentenced to eternal concealment
from the public, but are attentively read and studied by the privileged
who have access to the Vatican Library. The laws of nature are the same
for heathen sorcerer as for Catholic saint; and a "miracle" may be
produced as well by one as by the other, without the slightest
intervention of God or devil.

Hardly had the manifestations begun to attract attention in Europe, than
the clergy commenced their outcry that their traditional enemy had
reappeared under another name, and "divine miracles" also began to be
heard of in isolated instances. First they were confined to humble
individuals, some of whom claimed to have them produced through the
intervention of the Virgin Mary, saints and angels; others--according to
the clergy--began to suffer from *obsession* and *possession;* for the
Devil must have his share of fame as well as the Deity. Finding that,
notwithstanding the warning, the *independent,* or so-called spiritual
phenomena went on increasing and multiplying, and that these
manifestations threatened to upset the carefully-constructed dogmas of
the Church, the world was suddenly startled by extraordinary
intelligence. In 1864, a whole community became possessed of the Devil.
Morzine, and the awful stories of its demoniacs; Valleyres, and the
narratives of its well-authenticated exhibitions of sorcery; and those
of the Presbytere de Cideville curdled the blood in Catholic veins.

Strange to say, the question has been asked over and over again,

###### <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

why the "divine" miracles and most of the obsessions are so strictly
confined to Roman Catholic dioceses and countries? Why is it that since
the Reformation there has been scarcely one single divine "miracle" in a
Protestant land? Of course, the answer we must expect from Catholics is,
that the latter are peopled by *heretics,* and abandoned by God. Then
why are there no more Church-miracles in Russia, a country whose
religion differs from the Roman Catholic faith but in external forms of
rites, its fundamental dogmas being identically the same, except as to
the emanation of the Holy Ghost? Russia has her accepted saints and
thaumaturgical relics, and miracle-working images. The St. Mitrophaniy
of Voroneg is an authenticated miracle-worker, but his miracles are
limited to healing; and though hundreds upon hundreds have been healed
*through faith,* and though the old cathedral is full of magnetic
effluvia, and whole generations will go on *believing* in his power, and
some persons will always be healed, still no such miracles are heard of
in Russia as the Madonna-walking, and Madonna letter-writing, and
statue-talking of Catholic countries. Why is this so? Simply because the
emperors have strictly forbidden that sort of thing. The Czar, Peter the
Great, stopped every spurious "divine" miracle with one frown of his
mighty brow. He declared he would have *no false* miracles played by the
holy *icones* (images of saints), and they disappeared forever. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23)

There are cases on record of isolated and independent phenomena
exhibited by certain images in the last century; the latest was the
bleeding of the cheek of an image of the Virgin, when a soldier of
Napoleon cut her face in two. This miracle, alleged to have happened in
1812, in the days of the invasion by the "grand army," was the final
farewell. <span id="fr_24"></span>[\*\*](#fn_24)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

But since then, although the three successive emperors have been pious
men, their will has been respected, and the images and saints have
remained quiet, and hardly been spoken of except as connected with
religious worship. In Poland, a land of furious ultramontanism, there
were, at different times, desperate attempts at miracle-doing. They died
at birth, however, for the argus-eyed police were there; a Catholic
miracle in Poland, made public by the priests, generally meaning
political revolution, bloodshed, and war.

Is it then, not permissible to at least suspect that if, in one country
divine miracles may be arrested by civil and military law, and in
another they *never occur,* we must search for the explanation of the
two facts in some natural cause, instead of attributing them to either
god or devil? In our opinion--if it is worth anything--the whole secret
may be accounted for as follows. In Russia, the clergy know better than
to bewilder their parishes, whose piety is sincere and faith strong
without miracles; they know that nothing is better calculated than the
latter to sow seeds of distrust, doubt, and finally of skepticism which
leads directly to atheism. Moreover the climate is less propitious, and
the magnetism of the average population too positive, *too healthy,* to
call forth *independent* phenomena; and fraud would not answer. On the
other hand, neither in Protestant Germany, nor England, nor yet in
America, since the days of the Reformation, has the clergy had access to
any of the Vatican secret libraries. Hence they are all but poor hands
at the magic of Albertus Magnus.

As for America being overflowed with sensitives and mediums, the reason
for it is partially attributable to climatic influence and especially to
the physiological condition of the population. Since the days of the
Salem witchcraft, 200 years ago, when the comparatively few settlers had
pure and unadulterated blood in their veins, nothing much had been heard
of "spirits" or "mediums" until 1840. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25) The phenomena then first appeared among
the ascetic and exalted Shakers, whose religious aspirations, peculiar
mode of life, moral purity, and physical chastity all led to the
production of independent phenomena of a psychological

###### <span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

as well as physical nature. Hundreds of thousands, and even millions of
men from various climates and of different constitutions and habits,
have, since 1692, invaded North America, and by intermarrying have
substantially changed the physical type of the inhabitants. Of what
country in the world do the women's constitutions bear comparison with
the delicate, nervous, and sensitive constitutions of the feminine
portion of the population of the United States? We were struck on our
arrival in the country with the semi-transparent delicacy of skin of the
natives of both sexes. Compare a hard-working Irish factory girl or boy,
with one from a genuine American family. Look at their hands. One works
as hard as the other; they are of equal age, and both seemingly healthy;
and still, while the hands of the one, after an hour's soaping, will
show a skin little softer than that of a young alligator, those of the
other, notwithstanding constant use, will allow you to observe the
circulation of the blood under the thin and delicate epidermis. No
wonder, then, that while America is the conservatory of sensitives the
majority of its clergy, unable to produce divine or any other miracles,
stoutly deny the possibility of any phenomena except those produced by
tricks and juggling. And no wonder also that the Catholic priesthood,
who are practically aware of the existence of magic and spiritual
phenomena, and believe in them while dreading their consequences, try to
attribute the whole to the agency of the Devil.

Let us adduce one more argument, if only for the sake of circumstantial
evidence. In what countries have "divine miracles" flourished most, been
most frequent and most stupendous? Catholic Spain, and Pontifical Italy,
beyond question. And which more than these two, has had access to
ancient literature? Spain was famous for her libraries; the Moors were
celebrated for their profound learning in alchemy and other sciences.
The Vatican is the storehouse of an immense number of ancient
manuscripts. During the long interval of nearly 1,500 years they have
been accumulating, from trial after trial, books and manuscripts
confiscated from their sentenced victims, to their own profit. The
Catholics may plead that the books were generally committed to the
flames; that the treatises of famous sorcerers and enchanters perished
with their accursed authors. But the Vatican, if it could speak, could
tell a different story. It knows too well of the existence of certain
closets and rooms, access to which is had but by the very few. It knows
that the entrances to these secret hiding-places are so cleverly
concealed from sight in the carved frame-work and under the profuse
ornamentation of the library-walls, that there have even been Popes who
lived and died within the precincts of the palace without ever
suspecting their existence. But these Popes were neither Sylvester
**II**., Benedict **IX**., John **XX**., nor

###### <span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the **VI**th and **VII**th Gregory; nor yet the famous Borgia of
toxicological memory. Neither were those who remained ignorant of the
hidden lore friends of the sons of Loyola.

Where, in the records of European Magic, can we find cleverer enchanters
than in the mysterious solitudes of the cloister? Albert Magnus, the
famous Bishop and conjurer of Ratisbon, was never surpassed in his art.
Roger Bacon was a monk, and Thomas Aquinas one of the most learned
pupils of Albertus. Trithemius, Abbott of the Spanheim Benedictines, was
the teacher, friend, and confidant of Cornelius Agrippa; and while the
confederations of the Theosophists were scattered broadcast about
Germany, where they first originated, assisting one another, and
struggling for years for the acquirement of esoteric knowledge, any
person who knew how to become the favored pupil of certain monks, might
very soon be proficient in all the important branches of occult
learning.

This is all in history and cannot be easily denied. Magic, in all its
aspects, was widely and nearly openly practiced by the clergy till the
Reformation. And even he who was once called the "Father of the
Reformation," the famous John Reuchlin, <span
id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26) author of the *Mirific Word* and friend
of Pico di Mirandola, the teacher and instructor of Erasmus, Luther, and
Melancthon, was a kabalist and occultist.

The ancient *Sortilegium,* or divination by means of *Sortes* or
lots--an art and practice now decried by the clergy as an abomination,
designated by *Stat.* 10 *Jac.* as felony, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[\*\*](#fn_27) and by *Stat.* 12 *Carolus II* excepted
out of the general pardons, on the ground of being *sorcery--*was widely
practiced by the clergy and monks. Nay, it was sanctioned by St.
Augustine himself, who does not "disapprove of this method of learning
futurity, provided it be not used for worldly purposes." More than that,
he confesses having practiced it himself. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_28)

Aye; but the clergy called it *Sortes Sanctorum,* when it was they who
practiced it; while the *Sortes Praenestinae,* succeeded by the *Sortes
Homericae* and *Sortes Virgilianae,* were abominable *heathenism,* the
worship of the Devil, when used by any one else.

Gregory de Tours informs us that when the clergy resorted to the
*Sortes* their custom was to lay the *Bible* on the altar, and to pray
the Lord that He would discover His will, and disclose to them futurity
in one of the verses of the book. Gilbert de Nogent writes that in his
days

###### <span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

(about the twelfth century) the custom was, at the consecration of
bishops, to consult the *Sortes Sanctorum,* to thereby learn the success
and fate of the episcopate. On the other hand, we are told that the
*Sortes Sanctorum* were condemned by the Council of Agda, in 506. In
this case again we are left to inquire, in which instance has the
infallibility of the Church failed? Was it when she prohibited that
which was practiced by her greatest saint and patron, Augustine, or in
the twelfth century, when it was openly and with the sanction of the
same Church practiced by the clergy for the benefit of the bishop's
elections? Or, must we still believe that in both of these contradictory
cases the Vatican was inspired by the direct "spirit of God"?

If any doubt that Gregory of Tours approved of a practice that prevails
to this day, more or less, even among strict Protestants, let them read
this: "Lendastus, Earl of Tours, who was for ruining me with Queen
Fredegonde, coming to Tours, big with evil designs against me, I
withdrew to my oratory under a deep concern, where I took the *Psalms,*
. . . My heart revived within me when I cast my eyes on this of the
seventy-seventh *Psalm:* 'He caused them to go on with confidence,
whilst the sea swallowed up their enemies.' Accordingly, the count spoke
not a word to my prejudice; and leaving Tours that very day, the boat in
which he was, sunk in a storm, but his skill in swimming saved him."

The sainted bishop simply confesses here to having practiced a bit of
sorcery. *Every mesmerizer knows the power of will during an intense
desire bent on any particular subject.* Whether in consequence of
"co-incidents" or otherwise, the opened verse suggested to his mind
revenge by drowning. Passing the remainder of the day in "deep concern,"
and possessed by this all-absorbing thought, the saint--it may be
unconsciously--exercises his will on the subject; and thus while
imagining in the accident the hand of God, he simply becomes a sorcerer
exercising his magnetic will which reacts on the person feared; and the
count barely escapes with his life. Were the accident decreed by God,
the culprit would have been drowned; for a simple bath could not have
altered his malevolent resolution against St. Gregory had he been very
intent on it.

Furthermore, we find anathemas fulminated against this lottery of fate,
at the council of Varres, which forbids "all ecclesiastics, under pain
of excommunication, to perform that kind of divination, or to pry into
futurity, by looking into any book, or writing, whatsoever." The same
prohibition is pronounced at the councils of Agda in 506, of Orleans, in
511, of Auxerre in 595, and finally at the council of Aenham in 1110;
the latter condemning "sorcerers, witches, diviners, such as occasioned
death by magical operations, and who practiced fortune-telling by the

###### <span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

holy-book lots"; and the complaint of the joint clergy against de
Garlande, their bishop at Orleans, and addressed to Pope Alexander
**III**., concludes in this manner: "Let your apostolical hands put on
strength to *strip naked* the iniquity of this man, that the curse
prognosticated on the day of his consecration may overtake him; for the
gospels being opened on the altar *according to custom,* the first words
were: *and the young man, leaving his linen cloth, fled from them
naked.*" <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29)

Why then roast the lay-magicians and consulters of books, and canonize
the ecclesiastics? Simply because the mediaeval as well as the modern
phenomena, manifested through laymen, whether produced through occult
knowledge or happening independently, upset the claims of both the
Catholic and Protestant Churches to divine miracles. In the face of
reiterated and unimpeachable evidence it became impossible for the
former to maintain successfully the assertion that seemingly miraculous
manifestations by the "good angels" and God's direct intervention could
be produced exclusively by her chosen ministers and holy saints. Neither
could the Protestant well maintain on the same ground that miracles had
ended with the apostolic ages. For, whether of the same nature or not,
the modern phenomena claimed close kinship with the biblical ones. The
magnetists and healers of our century came into direct and open
competition with the apostles. The Zouave Jacob, of France, had
outrivalled the prophet Elijah in recalling to life persons who were
seemingly dead; and Alexis, the somnambulist, mentioned by Mr. Wallace
in his work, <span id="fr_30"></span>[\*\*](#fn_30) was, by his
lucidity, putting to shame apostles, prophets, and the Sibyls of old.
Since the burning of the last witch, the great Revolution of France, so
elaborately prepared by the league of the secret societies and their
clever emissaries, had blown over Europe and awakened terror in the
bosom of the clergy. It had, like a destroying hurricane, swept away in
its course those best allies of the Church, the Roman Catholic
aristocracy. A sure foundation was now laid for the right of individual
opinion. The world was freed from ecclesiastical tyranny by opening an
unobstructed path to Napoleon the Great, who had given the deathblow to
the Inquisition. This great slaughter-house of the Christian
Church--wherein she butchered, in the name of the Lamb, all the sheep
arbitrarily declared scurvy--was in ruins, and she found herself left to
her own responsibility and resources.

So long as the phenomena had appeared only sporadically, she had always
felt herself powerful enough to repress the consequences. Superstition

###### <span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

and belief in the Devil were as strong as ever, and Science had not yet
dared to publicly measure her forces with those of supernatural
Religion. Meanwhile the enemy had slowly but surely gained ground. All
at once it broke out with an unexpected violence. "Miracles" began to
appear in full daylight, and passed from their mystic seclusion into the
domain of natural law, where the profane hand of Science was ready to
strip off their sacerdotal mask. Still, for a time, the Church held her
position, and with the powerful help of superstitious fear checked the
progress of the intruding force. But, when in succession appeared
mesmerists and somnambulists, reproducing the physical and mental
phenomenon of ecstasy, hitherto believed to be the special gift of
saints; when the passion for the turning tables had reached in France
and elsewhere its climax of fury; when the psychography--alleged
spiritual--from a simple curiosity had developed itself and settled into
an unabated interest, and finally ebbed into religious mysticism; when
the echoes aroused by the first raps of Rochester, crossing the oceans,
spread until they were re-percussed from nearly every corner of the
world--then, and only then, the Latin Church was fully awakened to a
sense of danger. Wonder after wonder was reported to have occurred in
the spiritual circles and the lecture-rooms of the mesmerists; the sick
were healed, the blind made to see, the lame to walk, the deaf to hear.
J. R. Newton in America, and Du Potet in France, were healing the
multitude without the slightest claim to divine intervention. The great
discovery of Mesmer, which reveals to the earnest inquirer the mechanism
of nature, mastered, as if by magical power, organic and inorganic
bodies.

But this was not the worst. A more direful calamity for the Church
occurred in the evocation from the upper and nether worlds of a
multitude of "spirits," whose private bearing and conversation gave the
direct lie to the most cherished and profitable dogmas of the Church.
These "spirits" claimed to be the identical entities, in a disembodied
state, of fathers, mothers, sons, and daughters, friends and
acquaintances of the persons viewing the weird phenomena. The Devil
seemed to have no objective existence, and this struck at the very
foundation upon which the chair of St. Peter rested. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31) Not a spirit except the mocking manni-

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

kins of Planchette would confess to the most distant relationship with
the Satanic majesty, or accredit him with the governorship of a single
inch of territory. The clergy felt their prestige growing weaker every
day, as they saw the people impatiently shaking off, in the broad
daylight of truth, the dark veils with which they had been blindfolded
for so many centuries. Then finally, fortune, which previously had been
on their side in the long-waged conflict between theology and science,
deserted to their adversary. The help of the latter to the study of the
occult side of nature was truly precious and timely, and science has
unwittingly widened the once narrow path of the phenomena into a broad
highway. Had not

###### <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

this conflict culminated at the nick of time, we might have seen
reproduced on a miniature scale the disgraceful scenes of the episodes
of Salem witchcraft and the Nuns of Loudun. As it was, the clergy were
muzzled.

But if Science has unintentionally helped the progress of the occult
phenomena, the latter have reciprocally aided science herself. Until the
days when newly-reincarnated philosophy boldly claimed its place in the
world, there had been but few scholars who had undertaken the difficult
task of studying comparative theology. This science occupies a domain
heretofore penetrated by few explorers. The necessity which it involved
of being well acquainted with the dead languages, necessarily limited
the number of students. Besides, there was less popular need for it so
long as people could not replace the Christian orthodoxy by something
more tangible. It is one of the most undeniable facts of psychology,
that the average man can as little exist out of a religious element of
some kind, as a fish out of the water. The voice of truth, "a voice
stronger than the voice of the mightiest thunder," speaks to the inner
man in the nineteenth century of the Christian era, as it spoke in the
corresponding century B.C. It is a useless and unprofitable task to
offer to humanity the choice between a future life and annihilation. The
only chance that remains for those friends of human progress who seek to
establish for the good of mankind a faith, henceforth stripped entirely
of superstition

###### <span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and dogmatic fetters is to address them in the words of Joshua: "Choose
ye this day whom you will serve; whether the gods which your fathers
served that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the
Amorites, in whose land ye dwell." <span id="fr_32"></span>[\*](#fn_32)

"The science of religion," wrote Max Muller in 1860, "is only just
beginning. . . . During the last fifty years the authentic documents of
the most important religions in the world *have been recovered in a most
unexpected and almost miraculous manner. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[\*\*](#fn_33)* We have now before us the Canonical
books of Buddhism; the *Zend-Avesta* of Zoroaster is no longer a sealed
book; and the hymns of the *Rig-Veda* have revealed a state of religions
anterior to the first beginnings of that mythology which in Homer and
Hesiod stands before us as a mouldering ruin." <span
id="fr_34"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_34)

In their insatiable desire to extend the dominion of blind faith, the
early architects of Christian theology had been forced to conceal, as
much as it was possible, the true sources of the same. To this end they
are said to have burned or otherwise destroyed all the original
manuscripts on the *Kabala,* magic, and occult sciences upon which they
could lay their hands. They ignorantly supposed that the most dangerous
writings of this class had perished with the last Gnostic; but some day
they may discover their mistake. Other authentic and as important
documents will perhaps reappear in a "most unexpected and almost
miraculous manner."

###### <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

There are strange traditions current in various parts of the East--on
Mount Athos and in the Desert of Nitria, for instance--among certain
monks, and with learned Rabbis in Palestine, who pass their lives in
commenting upon the *Talmud.* They say that not all the rolls and
manuscripts, reported in history to have been burned by Caesar, by the
Christian mob, in 389, and by the Arab General Amru, perished as it is
commonly believed; and the story they tell is the following: At the time
of the contest for the throne, in 51 B.C., between Cleopatra and her
brother Dionysius Ptolemy, the Bruckion, which contained over seven
hundred thousand rolls, all bound in wood and *fire-proof* parchment,
was undergoing repairs, and a great portion of the original manuscripts,
considered among the most precious, and which were not duplicated, were
stored away in the house of one of the librarians. As the fire which
consumed the rest was but the result of accident, no precautions had
been taken at the time. But they add, that several hours passed between
the burning of the fleet, set on fire by Caesar's order, and the moment
when the first buildings situated near the harbor caught fire in their
turn; and that all the librarians, aided by several hundred slaves
attached to the museum, succeeded in saving the most precious of the
rolls. So perfect and solid was the fabric of the parchment, that while
in some rolls the inner pages and the wood-binding were reduced to
ashes, of others the parchment binding remained unscorched. These
particulars were all written out in Greek, Latin, and the Chaldeo-Syriac
dialect, by a learned youth named Theodas, one of the scribes employed
in the museum. One of these manuscripts is alleged to be preserved till
now in a Greek convent; and the person who narrated the tradition to us
had seen it himself. He said that many more will see it and learn where
to look for important documents, when a certain prophecy will be
fulfilled; adding, that most of these works could be found in Tartary
and India. <span id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_35) The monk showed us a
copy of the original, which, of course, we could read but poorly, as we
claim but little erudition in the matter of dead languages. But we were
so particularly struck by the

###### <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the vivid and picturesque translation of the holy father, that we
perfectly remember some curious paragraphs, which run, as far as we can
recall them, as follows:--"When the Queen of the Sun (Cleopatra) was
brought back to the half-ruined city, after the fire had devoured the
*Glory of the World;* and when she saw the mountains of books--or
rolls--covering the half-consumed steps of the *estrada;* and when she
perceived that the inside was gone and the indestructible covers alone
remained, she wept in rage and fury, and cursed the meanness of her
fathers who had grudged the cost of the real Pergamos for the inside as
well as the outside of the precious rolls." Further, our author,
Theodas, indulges in a joke at the expense of the queen for believing
that nearly all the library was burned; when, in fact, hundreds and
thousands of the choicest books were safely stored in his own house and
those of other scribes, librarians, students, and philosophers.

No more do sundry very learned Copts scattered all over the East in Asia
Minor, Egypt, and Palestine believe in the total destruction of the
subsequent libraries. For instance, they say that out of the library of
Attalus **III**. of Pergamus, presented by Antony to Cleopatra, not a
volume was destroyed. At that time, according to their assertions, from
the moment that the Christians began to gain power in Alexandria--about
the end of the fourth century--and Anatolius, Bishop of Laodicea, began
to insult the national gods, the Pagan philosophers and learned
theurgists adopted effective measures to preserve the repositories of
their sacred learning. Theophilus, a bishop, who left behind him the
reputation of a most rascally and mercenary villain, was accused by one
named Antoninus, a famous theurgist and eminent scholar of occult
science of Alexandria, with bribing the slaves of the Serapion to steal
books which he sold to foreigners at great prices. History tells us how
Theophilus had the best of the philosophers, in A.D. 389; and how his
successor and nephew, the no less infamous Cyril, butchered Hypatia.
Suidas gives us some details about Antoninus, whom he calls Antonius,
and his eloquent friend Olympus, the defender of the Serapion. But
history is far from being complete in the miserable remnants of books,
which, crossing so many ages, have reached our own learned century; it
fails to give the facts relating to the first five centuries of
Christianity which are preserved in the numerous traditions current in
the East. Unauthenticated as these may appear, there is unquestionably
in the heap of chaff much good grain. That these traditions are not
oftener communicated to Europeans is not strange, when we consider how
apt our travellers are to render themselves antagonistic to the natives
by their skeptical bearing and, occasionally, dogmatic intolerance. When
exceptional men like some archaeologists, who knew how to win the

###### <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

confidence and even friendship of certain Arabs, are favored with
precious documents, it is declared simply a "coincidence." And yet there
are widespread traditions of the existence of certain subterranean, and
immense galleries, in the neighborhood of Ishmonia--the "petrified
City," in which are stored numberless manuscripts and rolls. For no
amount of money would the Arabs go near it. At night, they say, from the
crevices of the desolate ruins, sunk deep in the unwatered sands of the
desert, stream the rays from lights carried to and fro in the galleries
by no human hands. The Afrites study the literature of the antediluvian
ages, according to their belief, and the Djin learns from the magic
rolls the lesson of the following day.

The *Encyclopedia Britannica,* in its article on Alexandria, says: "When
the temple of Serapis was demolished . . . the valuable library was
*pillaged* or destroyed; and *twenty* years afterwards <span
id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36) the *empty shelves* excited the regret .
. . etc." But it does not state the subsequent fate of the *pillaged*
books.

In rivalry of the fierce Mary-worshippers of the fourth century, the
modern clerical persecutors of liberalism and "heresy" would willingly
shut up all the heretics and their books in some modern Serapion and
burn them alive. <span id="fr_37"></span>[\*\*](#fn_37) The cause of
this hatred is natural. Modern research has more than ever unveiled the
secret. "Is not the worship of saints and angels now," said Bishop
Newton, years ago, "in all respects the same that the worship of demons
was in former times? The name only is different, the thing is
identically the same . . . the very same temples, the very same images,
which were once consecrated to Jupiter and the other demons, are now
consecrated to the Virgin Mary and other saints . . . the whole of
Paganism is converted and applied *to Popery.*"

Why not be impartial and add that "a good portion of it was adopted by
Protestant religions also"?

The very apostolic designation *Peter* is from the Mysteries. The
hierophant or supreme pontiff bore the Chaldean title *Peter,* or
interpreter. The names Phtah, Peth'r, the residence of Balaam, Patara,
and Patras, the names of oracle-cities, *pateres* or *pateras* and,
perhaps,

###### <span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

Buddha, <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_38) all come from the same
root. Jesus says: "Upon this *petra* I will build my Church, and the
gates, or rulers of Hades, shall not prevail against it"; meaning by
*petra* the rock-temple, and by metaphor, the Christian Mysteries; the
adversaries to which were the old mystery-gods of the underworld, who
were worshipped in the rites of Isis, Adonis, Atys, Sabazius, Dionysus,
and the Eleusinia. No *apostle* Peter was ever at Rome; but the Pope,
seizing the sceptre of the *Pontifex Maximus,* the keys of Janus and
Kubele, and adorning his Christian head with the cap of the *Magna
Mater,* copied from that of the tiara of Brahmatma, the Supreme Pontiff
of the Initiates of old India, became the successor of the Pagan high
priest, the real Peter-Roma, or *Petroma.* <span
id="fr_39"></span>[\*\*](#fn_39)

The Roman Catholic Church has two far mightier enemies than the
"heretics" and the "infidels"; and these are--Comparative Mythology and
Philology. When such eminent divines as the Rev. James Freeman Clarke go
so much out of their way to prove to their readers that "Critical
Theology from the time of Origen and Jerome . . . and the Controversial
Theology during fifteen centuries, has not consisted in accepting on
authority the opinions of other people," but has shown, on the contrary,
much "acute and comprehensive reasoning," we can but regret that so much
scholarship should have been wasted in attempting to prove that which a
fair survey of the history of theology upsets at every step. In these
"controversies" and critical treatment of the doctrines of the Church
one can certainly find any amount of "acute reasoning," but far more of
a still acuter sophistry.

Recently the mass of cumulative evidence has been re-inforced to an
extent which leaves little, if any, room for further controversy. A
conclusive opinion is furnished by too many scholars to doubt the fact
that India was the *Alma-Mater,* not only of the civilization, arts, and
sciences, but also of all the great religions of antiquity; Judaism, and
hence Christianity, included. Herder places the cradle of humanity in
India, and shows Moses as a clever and relatively *modern* compiler of
the ancient Brahmanical traditions: "The river which encircles the
country (India) is the sacred Ganges, which all Asia considers as the
paradisaical river. There, also, is the biblical Gihon, which is none
else but the Indus. The Arabs call it so unto this day, and the names of
the countries watered by it are yet existing among the Hindus."
Jacolliot claims to have translated every ancient palm-leaf manuscript
which he had the fortune of being allowed by the Brahmans of the pagodas
to see. In one of his

###### <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

translations, we found passages which reveal to us the *undoubted origin
of the keys* of St. Peter, and account for the subsequent adoption of
the symbol by their Holinesses, the Popes of Rome.

He shows us, on the testimony of the *Agrouchada Parikshai,* which he
freely translates as "the *Book of Spirits*" (Pitris), that centuries
before our era the *initiates* of the temple chose a Superior Council,
presided over by the Brahm-atma or supreme chief of all these
*Initiates.* That this pontificate, which could be exercised only by a
Brahman who had reached the age of eighty years; <span
id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40) that the Brahm-atma was sole guardian of
the mystic formula, *resume* of every science, contained in the three
mysterious letters,

<span id="img_iu2-31"></span> ![](img/iu2-31.jpg)

which signify *creation, conservation,* and *transformation.* He alone
could expound its meaning in the presence of the initiates of the third
and supreme degree. Whomsoever among these initiates revealed to a
profane a single one of the truths, even the smallest of the secrets
entrusted to his care, was put to death. He who received the confidence
had to share his fate.

"Finally, to crown this able system," says Jacolliot, "there existed a
word still more superior to the mysterious monosyllable--**A U M**, and
which rendered him who came into the possession of its key nearly the
equal of Brahma himself. The Brahm-atma alone possessed this key, and
transmitted it in a sealed casket to his successor.

"This unknown word, of which no human power could, even to-day, when the
Brahmanical authority has been crushed under the Mongolian and European
invasions, to-day, when each pagoda has its Brahm-atma <span
id="fr_41"></span>[\*\*](#fn_41) *force the disclosure,* was engraved in
a golden triangle and preserved in a sanctuary of the temple of
Asgartha, whose Brahm-atma alone held the keys. He also bore upon his
tiara *two crossed keys* supported by two kneeling Brahmans, symbol of
the precious deposit of which he had the keeping. . . . This word and
this triangle were engraved upon the tablet of the ring that this
religious chief wore as one of the signs of his dignity; it was also
framed in a golden sun on the altar, where every morning the Supreme
Pontiff offered the sacrifice of the sarvameda, or sacrifice to all the
forces of nature." <span id="fr_42"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_42)

###### <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Is this clear enough? And will the Catholics still maintain that it was
the Brahmans of 4,000 years ago who copied the ritual, symbols, and
dress of the Roman Pontiffs? We would not feel in the least surprised.

Without going very far back into antiquity for comparisons, if we only
stop at the fourth and fifth centuries of our era, and contrast the
so-called "heathenism" of the third Neo-platonic Eclectic School with
the growing Christianity, the result may not be favorable to the latter.
Even at that early period, when the new religion had hardly outlined its
contradictory dogmas; when the champions of the bloodthirsty Cyril knew
not themselves whether Mary was to become "the Mother of God," or rank
as a "demon" in company with Isis; when the memory of the meek and lowly
Jesus still lingered lovingly in every Christian heart, and his words of
mercy and charity vibrated still in the air, even then the Christians
were outdoing the Pagans in every kind of ferocity and religious
intolerance.

And if we look still farther back, and seek for examples of true
*Christism,* in ages when Buddhism had hardly superseded Brahmanism in
India, and the name of Jesus was only to be pronounced three centuries
later, what do we find? Which of the holy pillars of the Church has ever
elevated himself to the level of religious tolerance and noble
simplicity of character of some heathen? Compare, for instance, the
Hindu Asoka, who lived 300 B.C., and the Carthaginian St. Augustine, who
flourished three centuries after Christ. According to Max Muller, this
is what is found engraved on the rocks of Girnar, Dhauli, and
Kapurdigiri:

"Piyadasi, the king beloved of the gods, desires that the ascetics *of
all creeds* might reside in all places. All these ascetics profess alike
the command which people should exercise over themselves, and the purity
of the soul. *But people have different opinions and different
inclinations*."

And here is what Augustine wrote after his baptism: "Wondrous depth of
thy words! whose surface, behold! is before us, inviting to little ones;
yet are they a wondrous depth, O my God, a wondrous depth! It is awful
to look therein; yes . . . an awfulness of honor, and a trembling of
love. Thy enemies \[read Pagans\] thereof I *hate* vehemently; Oh, *that
thou wouldst slay them* with thy two-edged sword, that they might no
longer be enemies to it; for *so do I love to have them slain*." <span
id="fr_43"></span>[\*](#fn_43)

Wonderful spirit of Christianity; and that from a Manichean converted to
the religion of one who even on his cross prayed for his enemies!

###### <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

Who the enemies of the "Lord" were, according to the Christians, is not
difficult to surmise; the few inside the Augustinian fold were His new
children and favorites, who had supplanted in His affections the sons of
Israel, His "chosen people." The rest of mankind were His natural foes.
The teeming multitudes of heathendom were proper food for the flames of
hell; the handful within the Church communion, "heirs of salvation."

But if such a proscriptive policy was just, and its enforcement was
"sweet savor" in the nostrils of the "Lord," why not scorn also the
Pagan rites and philosophy? Why draw so deep from the wells of wisdom,
dug and filled up to brim by the same heathen? Or did the fathers, in
their desire to imitate the chosen people whose time-worn shoes they
were trying to fit upon their feet, contemplate the reenaction of the
spoliation-scene of the *Exodus?* Did they propose, in fleeing from
heathendom as the Jews did from Egypt, to carry off the valuables of its
religious allegories, as the "chosen ones" did the gold and silver
ornaments?

It certainly does seem as if the events of the first centuries of
Christianity were but the reflection of the images thrown upon the
mirror of the future at the time of the Exodus. During the stormy days
of Irenaeus the Platonic philosophy, with its mystical submersion into
Deity, was not so obnoxious after all to the new doctrine as to prevent
the Christians from helping themselves to its abstruse metaphysics in
every way and manner. Allying themselves with the ascetical
therapeutae--forefathers and models of the Christian monks and hermits,
it was in Alexandria, let it be remembered, that they laid the first
foundations of the purely Platonic trinitarian doctrine. It became the
Plato-Philonean doctrine later, and such as we find it now. Plato
considered the divine nature under a three-fold modification of the
*First Cause,* the reason or *Logos,* and the soul or spirit of the
universe. "The three archial or original principles," says Gibbon, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_44) "were represented in the Platonic system
as three gods, united with each other by a mysterious and ineffable
generation." Blending this transcendental idea with the more hypostatic
figure of the *Logos* of Philo, whose doctrine was that of the oldest
Kabala, and who viewed the King Messiah, as the metatron, or "the angel
of the Lord," the *Legatus* descended in flesh, but not the *Ancient of
Days* Himself; <span id="fr_45"></span>[\*\*](#fn_45) the Christians
clothed with this mythical representation of the Mediator for the fallen
race of Adam, Jesus, the son of Mary. Under this unexpected garb his
personality was all but lost. In the modern Jesus of the Christian
Church, we find the ideal of the imaginative Irenaeus, not the adept

###### <span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

of the Essenes, the obscure reformer from Galilee. We see him under the
disfigured Plato-Philonean mask, not as the disciples heard him on the
mount.

So far then the heathen philosophy had helped them in the building of
the principal dogma. But when the theurgists of the third Neo-platonic
school, deprived of their ancient Mysteries, strove to blend the
doctrines of Plato with those of Aristotle, and by combining the two
philosophies added to their theosophy the primeval doctrines of the
Oriental *Kabala,* then the Christians from rivals became persecutors.
Once that the metaphysical allegories of Plato were being prepared to be
discussed in public in the form of Grecian dialectics, all the elaborate
system of the Christian trinity would be unravelled and the divine
prestige completely upset. The eclectic school, reversing the order, had
adopted the inductive method; and this method became its death-knell. Of
all things on earth, logic and reasonable explanations were the most
hateful to the new religion of mystery; for they threatened to unveil
the whole ground-work of the trinitarian conception; to apprise the
multitude of the doctrine of emanations, and thus destroy the unity of
the whole. It could not be permitted, and it was not. History records
the *Christ*-like means that were resorted to.

The universal doctrine of emanations, adopted from time immemorial by
the greatest schools which taught the kabalistic, Alexandrian, and
Oriental philosophers, gives the key to that panic among the Christian
fathers. That spirit of Jesuitism and clerical craft, which prompted
Parkhurst, many centuries later, to suppress in his *Hebrew Lexicon* the
true meaning of the first word of *Genesis,* originated in those days of
war against the expiring Neo-platonic and eclectic school. The fathers
had decided to pervert the meaning of the word "*daimon,*"* <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_46)* and they dreaded above all to have the
esoteric and true meaning of the word *Rasit* unveiled to the
multitudes; for if once the true sense of this sentence, as well as that
of the Hebrew word *asdt* (translated in the Septuagint "*angels,*"
while it means emanations), <span id="fr_47"></span>[\*\*](#fn_47) were
understood rightly, the mystery of the Christian trinity would have
crumbled, carrying in its downfall the new religion into the same heap
of ruins with the ancient Mysteries. This is the true reason why
dialecticians, as well as Aristotle himself, the "prying philosopher,"
were ever obnoxious to Christian theology. Even Luther, while on his
work of reform, feeling the ground insecure under his feet,
notwithstanding that the dogmas had

###### <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

been reduced by him to their simplest expression, gave full vent to his
fear and hatred for Aristotle. The amount of abuse he heaped upon the
memory of the great logician can only be equalled--never surpassed--by
the Pope's anathemas and invectives against the liberals of the Italian
government. Compiled together, they might easily fill a copy of a new
encyclopaedia with models for monkish diatribes.

Of course the Christian clergy can never get reconciled with a doctrine
based on the application of strict logic to discursive reasoning? The
number of those who have abandoned theology on this account has never
been made known. They have asked questions and been forbidden to ask
them; hence, separation, disgust, and often a despairing plunge into the
abyss of atheism. The Orphean views of ether as chief *medium between*
God and created matter were likewise denounced. The Orphic Æther
recalled too vividly the *Archeus,* the Soul of the World, and the
latter was in its metaphysical sense as closely related to the
emanations, being the first manifestation--Sephira, or Divine Light. And
when could the latter be more feared than at that critical moment?

Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, Chalcidius, Methodius, and Maimonides, on
the authority of the *Targum* of Jerusalem, the orthodox and greatest
authority of the Jews, held that the first two words in the book of
*Genesis--*B-RASIT, mean *Wisdom,* or the *Principle.* And that the idea
of these words meaning "*in the beginning*" was never shared but by the
profane, who were not allowed to penetrate any deeper into the esoteric
sense of the sentence. Beausobre, and after him Godfrey Higgins, have
demonstrated the fact. "All things," says the *Kabala,* "are derived
from one great Principle, and this principle is the *unknown* and
*invisible* God. From Him a substantial power immediately proceeds,
which is the *image of God,* and the source of all subsequent
emanations. This second principle sends forth, by the *energy* (or
*will* and *force*) of emanation, other natures, which are more or less
perfect, according to their different degrees of distance, in the scale
of emanation, from the First Source of existence, and which constitute
different worlds, or orders of being, all united to the eternal power
from which they proceed. *Matter is nothing more than the most remote
effect of the emanative energy* of the Deity. The material world
receives its form from the immediate agency of powers far beneath the
First Source of Being <span id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48) . . .
Beausobref <span id="fr_49"></span>[\*\*](#fn_49) makes St. Augustine
the Manichean say thus: 'And if by *Rasit* we understand the *active
Principle* of the creation, instead of its *beginning,* in such a case
we will clearly perceive that Moses never meant to say

###### <span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

that heaven and earth were the first works of God. He only said that God
created heaven and earth *through the Principle,* who is His Son. It is
not the *time* he points to, but to the immediate author of the
creation.' Angels, according to Augustine, were created *before* the
firmament, and according to the esoteric interpretation, the heaven and
earth were created after that, evolving from the *second* Principle or
the Logos--the creative Deity. "The word *principle*," says Beausobre,
"does not mean that the heaven and earth were created before anything
else, for, to begin with, the *angels* were created before that; but
that God did everything through His Wisdom, which is His *Verbum,* and
which the Christian *Bible* named the *Beginning*," thus adopting the
exoteric meaning of the word abandoned to the multitudes. The
*Kabala--*the Oriental as well as the Jewish--shows that a number of
*emanations* (the Jewish Sephiroth) issued from the *First* Principle,
the chief of which was *Wisdom.* This Wisdom is the Logos of Philo, and
Michael, the chief of the Gnostic Eons; it is the Ormazd of the
Persians; *Minerva,* goddess of wisdom, of the Greeks, who emanated from
the head of Jupiter; and the second Person of the Christian Trinity. The
early Fathers of the Church had not much to exert their imagination;
they found a ready-made doctrine that had existed in every theogony for
thousands of years before the Christian era. Their trinity is but the
trio of Sephiroth, the first three kabalistic *lights* of which Moses
Nachmanides says, that "*they have never been seen by any one;* there is
not any defect in them, nor any disunion." The first eternal number is
the Father, or the Chaldean primeval, invisible, and incomprehensible
*chaos,* out of which proceeded the *Intelligible* one. The Egyptian
Phtah, or "the *Principle of Light--*not the light itself, and the
Principle of Life, though himself *no* life." The *Wisdom* by which the
Father created the heavens is the *Son,* or the kabalistic androgynous
Adam Kadmon. The Son is at once the male *Ra*, or Light of Wisdom,
Prudence or *Intelligence,* Sephira, the female part of Himself; while
from this dual being proceeds the third emanation, the Binah or Reason,
the second Intelligence--the Holy Ghost of the Christians. Therefore,
strictly speaking, there is a **T**ETRAKTIS or quaternary, consisting of
the Unintelligible First monad, and its triple emanation, which properly
constitute our Trinity.

How then avoid perceiving at once, that had not the Christians purposely
disfigured in their interpretation and translation the Mosaic *Genesis*
to fit their own views, their religion, with its present dogmas, would
have been impossible? The word Rasit, once taught in its new sense of
the *Principle* and not the *Beginning,* and the anathematized doctrine
of emanations accepted, the position of the second trinitarian personage

###### <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

becomes untenable. For, if the angels are the *first* divine emanations
from the Divine Substance, and were in existence *before* the Second
Principle, then the anthropomorphized *Son* is at best an emanation like
themselves, and cannot be God *hypostatically* any more than our visible
works are ourselves. That these metaphysical subtleties never entered
into the head of the honest-minded, sincere Paul, is evident; as it is
furthermore evident, that like all learned Jews he was well acquainted
with the doctrine of emanations and never thought of corrupting it. How
can any one imagine that Paul identified the *Son* with the *Father,*
when he tells us that God made Jesus "a *little lower* than the angels"
(*Hebrews* ii. 9), and a *little higher* than Moses! "For this MAN was
counted worthy of more glory than Moses" (*Hebrews* iii. 3). Of
whatever, or how many forgeries, interlined later in the *Acts,* the
Fathers are guilty we know not; but that Paul never considered Christ
more than a man "full of the Spirit of God" is but too evident: "In the
*arche* was the *Logos,* and the Logos was adnate to the Theos."

Wisdom, the first emanation of En-Soph; the Protogonos, the Hypostasis;
the Adam Kadmon of the kabalist, the Brahma of the Hindu; the Logos of
Plato, and the "*Beginning*" of St. John--is the Rasit--<span
id="img_iu2-37"></span> ![](img/iu2-37.jpg), of the *Book of Genesis.*
If rightly interpreted it overturns, as we have remarked, the whole
elaborate system of Christian theology, for it proves that behind the
*creative* Deity, there was a HIGHER god; a planner, an architect; and
that the former was but His executive agent--a simple POWER!

They persecuted the Gnostics, murdered the philosophers, and burned the
kabalists and the masons; and when the day of the great reckoning
arrives, and the light shines in darkness, what will they have to offer
in the place of the departed, expired religion? What will they answer,
these pretended monotheists, these worshippers and *pseudo*-servants of
the one living God, to their Creator? How will they account for this
long persecution of them who were the true followers of the grand
Megalistor, the supreme great master of the Rosicrucians, the FIRST of
masons. "For he is the Builder and Architect of the Temple of the
universe; He is the *Verbum Sapienti.*" <span
id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_50)

"Every one knows," wrote the great Manichean of the third century,
Fauste, "that the Evangeliums were written neither by Jesus Christ,

###### <span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

nor his apostles, but long after their time by some unknown persons,
who, judging well that they would hardly be believed when telling of
things they had not seen themselves, headed their narratives with the
names of the apostles or of disciples contemporaneous with the latter."

Commenting upon the subject, A. Franck, the learned Hebrew scholar of
the Institute and translator of the *Kabala,* expresses the same idea.
"Are we not authorized," he asks, "to view the *Kabala* as a precious
remnant of religious philosophy of the Orient, which, transported into
Alexandria, got mixed to the doctrine of Plato, and under the usurped
name of Dionysius the Areopagite, bishop of Athens, converted and
consecrated by St. Paul, was thus enabled to penetrate into the
mysticism of the mediaeval ages?" <span id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51)

Says Jacolliot: "What is then this religious philosophy of the Orient,
which has penetrated into the mystic symbolism of Christianity? We
answer: This philosophy, the traces of which we find among the Magians,
the Chaldeans, the Egyptians, the Hebrew kabalists and the Christians,
is none other than that of the Hindu Brahmans, the sectarians of the
*pitris,* or the spirits of the invisible worlds which surround
us." <span id="fr_52"></span>[\*\*](#fn_52)

But if the Gnostics were destroyed, the *Gnosis,* based on the secret
science of sciences, still lives. It is the earth which helps the woman,
and which is destined to open her mouth to swallow up mediaeval
Christianity, the usurper and assassin of the great master's doctrine.
The ancient *Kabala,* the Gnosis, or traditional *secret* knowledge, was
never without its representatives in any age or country. The trinities
of initiates, whether passed into history or concealed under the
impenetrable veil of mystery, are preserved and impressed throughout the
ages. They are known as Moses, Aholiab, and Bezaleel, the son of Uri,
the son of Hur, as Plato, Philo, and Pythagoras, etc. At the
Transfiguration we see them as Jesus, Moses, and Elias, the three
Trismegisti; and three kabalists, Peter, James, and John--whose
*revelation* is the key to all wisdom. We found them in the twilight of
Jewish history as Zoroaster, Abraham, and Terah, and later as Henoch,
Ezekiel, and Daniel.

Who, of those who ever studied the ancient philosophies, who understand
intuitionally the grandeur of their conceptions, the boundless sublimity
of their views of the Unknown Deity, can hesitate for a moment to give
the preference to their doctrines over the incomprehensible dogmatic and
contradictory theology of the hundreds of Christian sects? Who that ever
read Plato and fathomed his Το Ον*,* "*whom no person has seen except
the Son,*" can doubt that Jesus was a disciple of the same

###### <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

secret doctrine which had instructed the great philosopher? For, as we
have shown before now, Plato never claimed to be the inventor of all
that he wrote, but gave credit for it to Pythagoras, who, in his turn,
pointed to the remote East as the source whence he derived his
information and his philosophy. Colebrooke shows that Plato confesses it
in his epistles, and says that he has taken his teachings from ancient
and sacred doctrines! <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_53) Moreover, it
is undeniable that the theologies of all the great nations dovetail
together and show that each is a part of "one stupendous whole." Like
the rest of the initiates we see Plato taking great pains to conceal the
true meaning of his allegories. Every time the subject touches the
greater secrets of the Oriental *Kabala,* secret of the true cosmogony
of the universe and of the *ideal,* preexisting world, Plato shrouds his
philosophy in the profoundest darkness. His *Timaeus* is so confused
that no one but an *initiate* can understand the secret meaning. And
Mosheim thinks that Philo has filled his works with passages directly
contradicting each other for the sole purpose of concealing the true
doctrine. For once we see a critic on the right track.

And this very trinitarian idea, as well as the so bitterly denounced
doctrine of emanations, whence their remotest origin? The answer is
easy, and every proof is now at hand. In the sublime and profoundest of
all philosophies, that of the universal "Wisdom-Religion," the first
traces of which, historical research now finds in the old pre-Vedic
religion of India. As the much-abused Jacolliot well remarks, "It is not
in the religious works of antiquity, such as the *Vedas,* the *Zend
Avesta,* the *Bible,* that we have to search for the exact expression of
the ennobling and sublime beliefs of those epochs." <span
id="fr_54"></span>[\*\*](#fn_54)

"The holy primitive syllable, composed of the three letters **A** ----
**U** ---- **M**., in which is contained the Vedic Trimurti (Trinity),
must be kept secret, like another triple Veda," says Manu, in book xi.,
sloka 265.

Swayambhouva is the unrevealed Deity; it is the Being existent through
and of itself; he is the central and immortal germ of all that exists in
the universe. Three trinities emanate and are confounded in him, forming
a Supreme *unity*. These trinities, or the triple *Trimurti,* are: the
Nara, Nari, and Viradyi--the *initial* triad; the Agni, Vaya, and
Sourya--the *manifested* triad; Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, the *creative*
triad. Each of these triads becomes less metaphysical and more adapted
to the vulgar intelligence as it descends. Thus the last becomes but the
symbol in its concrete expression; the necessarianism of a purely meta-

###### <span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

physical conception. Together with Swayambhouva, they are the ten
*Sephiroth* of the Hebrew kabalists, the ten Hindu Prajapatis--the
En-Soph of the former, answering to the great *Unknown,* expressed by
the mystic **A U M** of the latter.

Says Franck, the translator of the

Kabala:

"The ten Sephiroth are divided into *three classes,* each of them
presenting to us the divinity *under a different aspect,* the whole
still remaining an

indivisible Trinity.

"The first three Sephiroth are purely intellectual in metaphysics, they
express the absolute identity of existence and thought, and form what
the modern kabalists called the intelligible world--which is the first
manifestation of God.

"The three that follow, make us conceive God in one of their aspects, as
the identity of goodness and wisdom; in the other they show to us, in
the Supreme good, the origin of beauty and magnificence (in the
creation). Therefore, they are named the *virtues,* or the

sensible world.

"Finally, we learn, by the last three Sephiroth, that the Universal
Providence, that the Supreme artist is also *absolute Force,* the
all-powerful cause, and that, at the same time, this cause *is the
generative element of all that is.* It is these last Sephiroth that
constitute the *natural world,* or nature in its essence and in its
*active* principle. *Natura naturans.*" <span
id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_55)

This kabalistic conception is thus proved identical with that of the
Hindu philosophy. Whoever reads Plato and his *Dialogue* Timaeus, will
find these ideas as faithfully re-echoed by the Greek philosopher.
Moreover, the injunction of secrecy was as strict with the kabalists, as
with the initiates of the Adyta and the Hindu Yogis.

"Close thy mouth, lest thou shouldst speak of *this* (the mystery), and
thy heart, lest thou shouldst think aloud; and if thy heart has escaped
thee, bring it back to its place, for such is the object of our
alliance" (*Sepher Jezireh, Book of Creation*).

"This is a secret which gives death: close thy mouth lest thou shouldst
reveal to the vulgar; compress thy brain lest something should escape
from it and fall outside" (*Agrouchada-Parikshai*).

Truly the fate of many a future generation hung on a gossamer thread, in
the days of the third and fourth centuries. Had not the Emperor sent in
389 to Alexandria a rescript--which was forced from him by the
Christians--for the destruction of every idol, our own century would
never have had a Christian mythological Pantheon of its own. Never

###### <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

did the Neo-platonic school reach such a height of philosophy as when
nearest its end. Uniting the mystic theosophy of old Egypt with the
refined philosophy of the Greeks; nearer to the ancient Mysteries of
Thebes and Memphis than they had been for centuries; versed in the
science of soothsaying and divination, as in the art of the
Therapeutists; friendly with the acutest men of the Jewish nation, who
were deeply imbued with the Zoroastrian ideas, the Neo-platonists tended
to amalgamate the old wisdom of the Oriental *Kabala* with the more
refined conceptions of the Occidental Theosophists. Notwithstanding the
treason of the Christians, who saw fit, for political reasons, after the
days of Constantine, to repudiate their tutors, the influence of the new
Platonic philosophy is conspicuous in the subsequent adoption of dogmas,
the origin of which can be traced but too easily to that remarkable
school. Though mutilated and disfigured, they still preserve a strong
family likeness, which nothing can obliterate.

But, if the knowledge of the occult powers of nature opens the spiritual
sight of man, enlarges his intellectual faculties, and leads him
unerringly to a profounder veneration for the Creator, on the other hand
ignorance, dogmatic narrow-mindedness, and a childish fear of looking to
the bottom of things, invariably leads to fetish-worship and
superstition.

When Cyril, the Bishop of Alexandria, had openly embraced the cause of
Isis, the Egyptian goddess, and had anthropomorphized her into Mary, the
mother of God; and the trinitarian controversy had taken place; from
that moment the Egyptian doctrine of the emanation of the creative God
out of Emepht began to be tortured in a thousand ways, until the
Councils had agreed upon the adoption of it as it now stands--the
disfigured Ternary of the kabalistic Solomon and Philo! But as its
origin was yet too evident, the *Word* was no longer called the
"Heavenly man," the *primal* Adam Kadmon, but became the Logos--Christ,
and was made as old as the "Ancient of the Ancient," his father. The
*concealed* **WISDOM** became identical with its emanation, the
**D**IVINE **T**HOUGHT, and made to be regarded coequal and coeternal
with its first manifestation.

If we now stop to consider another of the fundamental dogmas of
Christianity, the doctrine of atonement, we may trace it as easily back
to heathendom. This corner-stone of a Church which had believed herself
built on a firm rock for long centuries, is now excavated by science and
proved to come from the Gnostics. Professor Draper shows it as hardly
known in the days of Tertullian, and as having "*originated* among the
Gnostic heretics." <span id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_56) We will not
permit ourselves to contradict such a

###### <span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

learned authority, farther than to state that it *originated* among them
no more than their "anointed" Christos and Sophia. The former they
modelled on the original of the "King Messiah," the male principle of
wisdom, and the latter on the third Sephiroth, from the Chaldean
*Kabala*, <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_57) and even from the Hindu
Brahma and Sara-asvati, <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*\*](#fn_58) and the
Pagan Dionysus and Demeter. And here we are on firm ground, if it were
only because it is now proved that the *New Testament* never appeared in
its complete form, such as we find it now, till 300 years after the
period of apostles, <span id="fr_59"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_59) and the
*Sohar* and other kabalistic books are found to belong to the first
century before our era, if not to be far older still.

The Gnostics entertained many of the Essenean ideas; and the Essenes had
their "greater" and "minor" Mysteries at least two centuries before our
era. They were the *Isarim* or *Initiates,* the descendants of the
Egyptian hierophants, in whose country they had been settled for several
centuries before they were converted to Buddhistic monasticism by the
missionaries of King Asoka, and amalgamated later with the earliest
Christians; and they existed, probably, before the old Egyptian temples
were desecrated and ruined in the incessant invasions of Persians,
Greeks, and other conquering hordes. The hierophants had their
*atonement* enacted in the Mystery of Initiation ages before the
Gnostics, or even the Essenes, had appeared. It was known among
hierophants as the **B**APTISM OF **B**LOOD, and was considered not as
an atonement for the "fall of man" in Eden, but simply as an expiation
for the past, present, and future sins of ignorant but nevertheless
polluted mankind. The hierophant had the option of either offering his
pure and sinless life as a sacrifice for his race to the gods whom he
hoped to rejoin, or an animal victim. The former depended entirely on
their own will. At the last moment of the solemn "new birth," the
initiator passed "the word" to the initiated, and immediately after that
the latter had a weapon placed in his right hand, and was ordered *to
strike*. <span id="fr_60"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_60) This is the true
origin of the Christian dogma of atonement.

###### <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Verily the "Christs" of the pre-Christian ages were many. But they died
unknown to the world, and disappeared as silently and as mysteriously
from the sight of man as Moses from the top of Pisgah, the mountain of
Nebo (oracular wisdom), after he had laid his hands upon Joshua, who
thus became "full of the spirit of wisdom" (*i.e., initiated*).

Nor does the Mystery of the Eucharist pertain to Christians alone.
Godfrey Higgins proves that it was instituted many hundreds of years
before the "Paschal Supper," and says that "the sacrifice of bread and

###### <span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

wine was common to many ancient nations." <span
id="fr_61"></span>[\*](#fn_61) Cicero mentions it in his works, and
wonders at the strangeness of the rite. There had been an esoteric
meaning attached to it from the first establishment of the Mysteries,
and the Eucharistia is one of the oldest rites of antiquity. With the
hierophants it had nearly the same significance as with the Christians.
Ceres was *bread,* and Bacchus was *wine*; the former meaning
regeneration of life from the seed, and the latter--the grape--the
emblem of wisdom and knowledge; the accumulation of the spirit of
things, and the fermentation and subsequent strength of that esoteric
knowledge being justly symbolized by wine. The mystery related to the
drama of Eden; it is said to have been first taught by Janus, who was
also the first to introduce in the temples the sacrifices of "bread" and
"wine" in commemoration of the "fall into generation" as the symbol of
the "seed." "I am the vine, and my Father is the husbandman," says
Jesus, alluding to the secret knowledge that could be imparted by him.
"I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine until that day that I
drink it new in the kingdom of God."

The festival of the Eleusinian Mysteries began in the month of
Boedromion, which corresponds with the month of September, the time of
grape-gathering, and lasted from the 15th to the 22d of the month,
*seven* days. <span id="fr_62"></span>[\*\*](#fn_62) The Hebrew festival
of the Feast of Tabernacles began on the 15th and ended on the 22d of
the month of Ethanim, which Dunlap shows as derived from Adonim, Adonia,
Attenim, Ethanim; <span id="fr_63"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_63) and this
feast is named in *Exodus* (xxiii. 16) the feast of *ingatherings.* "All
the men of Israel assembled unto King Solomon at the feast in the month
Ethanim, which is the *seventh.*" <span
id="fr_64"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_64)

Plutarch thinks the feast of the booths to be the Bacchic rites, not the

###### <span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the Eleusinian. Thus "Bacchus was directly called upon," he says. The
*Sabazian* worship was *Sabbatic;* the names Evius, or Hevius, and
Luaios are identical with *Hivite* and *Levite.* The French name Louis
is the Hebrew *Levi*; Iacchus again is Iao or Jehovah; and Baal or Adon,
like Bacchus, was a phallic god. "Who shall ascend into the hill (the
high place) of the Lord?" asks the holy king David, "who shall stand in
the place of his *Kadushu* <span id="img_sd2-460"></span>
![](img/sd2-460.jpg)"? (*Psalms* xxiv. 3). Kadesh may mean in one sense
to *devote, hallow, sanctify,* and even to initiate or to set apart; but
it also means the ministers of lascivious rites (the Venus-worship) and
the true interpretation of the word Kadesh is bluntly rendered in
*Deuteronomy* xxiii. 17; *Hosea* iv. 14; and *Genesis* xxxviii., from
verses 15 to 22. The "holy" Kadeshuth of the *Bible* were identical as
to the duties of their office with the Nautch-girls of the later Hindu
pagodas. The Hebrew *Kadeshim* or galli lived "by the house of the Lord,
where the women wove hangings for the grove," or bust of Venus-Astarte,
says verse the seventh in the twenty-third chapter of 2 Kings.

The dance performed by David round the ark was the "circle-dance" said
to have been prescribed by the Amazons for the Mysteries. Such was the
dance of the daughters of Shiloh (*Judges* xxi*.* 21, 23 *et passim*),
and the leaping of the prophets of Baal (I *Kings* xviii. 26). It was
simply a characteristic of the Sabean worship, for it denoted the motion
of the planets round the sun. That the dance was a Bacchic frenzy is
apparent. Sistra were used on the occasion, and the taunt of Michael and
the king's reply are very expressive. "The king of Israel uncovered
himself before his maid-servants as one of the *vain* (or debauched)
fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself." And he retorts: "I will play
(act wantonly) before <span id="img_sd1-355b"></span>
![](img/sd1-355b.jpg), and I will be yet more vile than this, and I will
be base in my own sight." When we remember that David had sojourned
among the Tyrians and Philistines, where their rites were common; and
that indeed he had conquered that land away from the house of Saul, by
the aid of mercenaries from their country, the countenancing and even,
perhaps, the introduction of such a Pagan-like worship by the weak
"psalmist" seems very natural. David knew nothing of Moses, it seems,
and if he introduced the Jehovah-worship it was not in its monotheistic
character, but simply as that of one of the many gods of the neighboring
nations--a tutelary deity to whom he had given the preference, and
chosen among "all other gods."

Following the Christian dogmas seriatim, if we concentrate our attention
upon one which provoked the fiercest battles until its recognition, that
of the Trinity, what do we find? We meet it, as we have shown, northeast
of the Indus; and tracing it to Asia Minor and Europe, recognize it
among every people who had anything like an established religion.

###### <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

It was taught in the oldest Chaldean, Egyptian, and Mithraitic schools.
The Chaldean Sun-god, Mithra, was called "Triple," and the trinitarian
idea of the Chaldeans was a doctrine of the Akkadians, who, themselves,
belonged to a race which was the first to conceive a metaphysical
trinity. The Chaldeans are a tribe of the Akkadians, according to
Rawlinson, who lived in Babylonia from the earliest times. They were
Turanians, according to others, and instructed the Babylonians into the
first notions of religion. But these same Akkadians, who were they?
Those scientists who would ascribe to them a Turanian origin, make of
them the inventors of the cuneiform characters; others call them
Sumerians; others again, respectively, make their language, of which
(for very good reasons) no traces whatever remain--Kasdean, Chaldaic,
Proto-Chaldean, Kasdo-Scythic, and so on. The only tradition worthy of
credence is that these Akkadians instructed the Babylonians in the
Mysteries, and taught them the sacerdotal or Mystery-language. These
Akkadians were then simply a tribe of the Hindu-Brahmans, now called
Aryans--their vernacular language, the Sanscrit <span
id="fr_65"></span>[\*](#fn_65) of the Vedas; and the sacred or
*Mystery*-language, that which, even in our own age, is used by the
Hindu fakirs and initiated Brahmans in their magical evocations. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[\*\*](#fn_66) It has been, from time immemorial, and
still is employed by the initiates of all countries, and the Thibetan
lamas claim that it is in this tongue that appear the mysterious
characters on the leaves and bark of the sacred Koumboum.

Jacolliot, who took such pains to penetrate the mysteries of the
Brahmanical initiation in translating and commenting upon the
*Agrouchada-Parikshai,* confesses the following:

"It is pretended also, without our being able to verify the assertion,
that the magical evocations were pronounced in a particular language,
and that it was forbidden, under pain of death, to translate them into
vulgar dialects. The rare expressions that we have been able to catch
like--*L'rhom, h'hom, sh'hrum, sho'rhim,* are in fact most curious, and
do not seem to belong to any known idiom." <span
id="fr_67"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_67)

Those who have seen a fakir or a lama reciting his mantras and con-

###### <span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

jurations, know that he never pronounces the words audibly when
preparing for a phenomenon. His lips move, and none will ever hear the
terrible formula pronounced, except in the interior of the temples, and
then in a cautious whisper. This, then, was the language now
respectively baptized by every scientist, and, according to his
imaginative and philological propensities, Kasdeo-Semitic, Scythic,
Proto-Chaldean, and the like.

Scarcely two of even the most learned Sanscrit philologists are agreed
as to the true interpretation of Vedic words. Let one put forth an
essay, a lecture, a treatise, a translation, a dictionary, and
straightway all the others fall to quarrelling with each other and with
him as to his sins of omission and commission. Professor Whitney,
greatest of American Orientalists, says that Professor Muller's notes on
the *Rig Veda Sanhita* "are far from showing that sound and thoughtful
judgment, that moderation and economy which are among the most precious
qualities of an exegete." Professor Muller angrily retorts upon his
critics that "not only is the joy embittered which is the inherent
reward of all *bona fide* work, but selfishness, malignity, aye, even
*untruthfulness,* gain the upper hand, and the healthy growth of science
is stunted." He differs "in many cases from the explanations of Vedic
words given by Professor Roth" in his *Sanscrit Dictionary,* and
Professor Whitney shampooes both their heads by saying that there are,
unquestionably, words and phrases "as to which both alike will hereafter
be set right."

In volume i. of his *Chips,* Professor Muller stigmatizes all the
*Vedas* except the *Rik,* the *Atharva-Veda* included, as "theological
twaddle," while Professor Whitney regards the latter as "the most
comprehensive and valuable of the four collections, next after the
*Rik.*" To return to the case of Jacolliot. Professor Whitney brands him
as a "bungler and a humbug," and, as we remarked above, this is the very
general verdict. But when the *Bible dans l'Inde* appeared, the Societe
Academique de Saint Quentin requested M. Textor de Ravisi, a learned
Indianist, ten years Governor of Karikal, India, to report upon its
merits. He was an ardent Catholic, and bitterly opposed Jacolliot's
conclusions where they discredited the Mosaic and Catholic revelations;
but he was forced to say: "Written with good faith, in an easy,
vigorous, and passionate style, of an easy and varied argumentation, the
work of M. Jacolliot is of absorbing interest . . . a learned work on
known facts and with familiar arguments."

Enough. Let Jacolliot have the benefit of the doubt when such very
imposing authorities are doing their best to show up each other as
incompetents and literary journeymen. We quite agree with Professor
Whitney that "the truism, that \[for European critics?\] it is far
easier to pull to

###### <span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

pieces than to build up, is nowhere truer than in matters affecting the
archeology and history of India." <span id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_68)

Babylonia happened to be situated on the way of the great stream of the
earliest Hindu emigration, and the Babylonians were one of the first
peoples benefited thereby. <span id="fr_69"></span>[\*\*](#fn_69) These
Khaldi were the worshippers of the Moon-god, Deus Lunus, from which fact
we may infer that the Akkadians--if such must be their name--belonged to
the race of the Kings of the Moon, whom tradition shows as having
reigned in Pruyay--now Allahabad. With them the trinity of Deus Lunus
was manifested in the three lunar phases, completing the quaternary with
the fourth, and typifying the death of the Moon-god in its gradual
waning and final disappearance. This death was allegorized by them, and
attributed to the triumph of the genius of evil over the light-giving
deity; as the later nations allegorized the death of their Sun-gods,
Osiris and Apollo, at the hands of Typhon and the great Dragon Python,
when the sun entered the winter solstice. Babel, Arach, and Akkad are
names of the sun. The *Zoroastrian Oracles* are full and explicit upon
the subject of the Divine Triad. "A triad of Deity shines forth
throughout the whole world, of which a Monad is the head," admits the
Reverend Dr. Maurice.

"For from this Triad, in the bosoms, are all things governed," says a
Chaldean oracle. The Phos, Pur, and Phlox, of Sanchoniathon, <span
id="fr_70"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_70) are Light, Fire, and Flame, three
manifestations of the Sun who is *one.* Bel-Saturn, Jupiter-Bel, and Bel
or Baal-Chom are the Chaldean trinity; <span
id="fr_71"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_71) "The Babylonian Bel was regarded in
the Triume aspect of Belitan, Zeus-Belus (the mediator) and Baal-Chom
who is Apollo Chomaeus. This was the Triune aspect of the 'Highest God,'
who is, according to Berosus, either El (the Hebrew), Bel, Belitan,
Mithra, or Zervana, and has the name Πατερ, "the Father." <span
id="fr_72"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_72) The Brahma, Vishnu, and
Siva, <span id="fr_73"></span>[\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fn_73) corresponding to
Power, Wisdom, and Justice, which answer in their turn

###### <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to Spirit, Matter, Time, and the Past, Present, and Future, can be found
in the temple of Gharipuri; thousands of dogmatic Brahmans worship these
attributes of the Vedic Deity, while the severe monks and nuns of
Buddhistic Thibet recognize but the sacred trinity of the three cardinal
virtues: *Poverty, Chastity,* and *Obedience,* professed by the
Christians, practiced by the Buddhists and some Hindus alone.

The Persian triplicate Deity also consists of three persons, Ormazd,
Mithra, and Ahriman. "That is that principle," says Porphyry, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_74) "which the author of the *Chaldaic
Summary* saith, '*They conceive there is one principle of all things,
and declare that is one and good.*' " The Chinese idol Sanpao, consists
of three equal in all respects; <span id="fr_75"></span>[\*\*](#fn_75)
and the Peruvians "supposed their Tanga-tanga to be one in three, and
three in one," says Faben. <span id="fr_76"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_76) The
Egyptians have their Emepht, Eicton, and Phta; and the triple god seated
on the Lotos can be seen in the St. Petersburg Museum, on a medal of the
Northern Tartars.

Among the Church dogmas which have most seriously suffered of late at
the hands of the Orientalists, the last in question stands conspicuous.
The reputation of each of the three personages of the anthropomorphic
godhead as an original revelation to the Christians through Divine will,
has been badly compromised by inquiry into its predecessors and origin.
Orientalists have published more about the similarity between
Brahmanism, Buddhism, and Christianity than was strictly agreeable to
the Vatican. Draper's assertion that "Paganism was modified by
Christianity, Christianity by Paganism," <span
id="fr_77"></span>[\*\*\*\*](#fn_77) is being daily verified. "Olympus
was restored but the divinities passed under other names," he says,
treating of the Constantine period. "The more powerful provinces
insisted on the adoption of their time-honored conceptions. Views of the
trinity in accordance with the Egyptian traditions were established. Not
only was the adoration of Isis under a new name restored, but even her
image, standing on the crescent moon, reappeared. The well-known effigy
of that goddess with the infant Horus in her arms has descended to our
days, in the beautiful artistic creations of the Madonna and child."

But a still earlier origin than the Egyptian and Chaldean can be
assigned to the Virgin "Mother of God," Queen of Heaven. Though Isis

###### <span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

is also by right the Queen of Heaven, and is generally represented
carrying in her hand the Crux Ansata composed of the mundane cross, and
of the Stauros of the Gnostics, she is a great deal younger than the
celestial virgin, Neith. In one of the tombs of the Pharaohs--Rhameses,
in the valley of Biban-el-Molouk, in Thebes, Champollion, Junior,
discovered a picture, according to his opinion the most ancient ever yet
found. It represents the heavens symbolized by the figure of a woman
bedecked with stars. The birth of the Sun is figured by the form of a
little child, issuing from the bosom of its "Divine Mother."

In the *Book of Hermes,* "Pimander" is enunciated in distinct and
unequivocal sentences, the whole trinitarian dogma accepted by the
Christians. "The light is me," says Pimander, the DIVINE THOUGHT. "I am
the *nous* or intelligence, and I am thy god, and I am far older than
the human principle which escapes from the shadow. I am the germ of
thought, the resplendent WORD, the SON of **GOD**. Think that what thus
sees and hears in thee, is the *Verbum* of the Master, it is the
Thought, which is God the Father. . . . The celestial ocean, the
**Æ**THER, which flows from east to west, is the Breath of the Father,
the life-giving Principle, the HOLY GHOST!" "For they are not at all
separated and their union is LIFE."

Ancient as may be the origin of Hermes, lost in the unknown days of
Egyptian colonization, there is yet a far older prophecy, directly
relating to the Hindu Christna, according to the Brahmans. It is, to say
the least, strange that the Christians claim to base their religion upon
a prophecy of the *Bible,* which exists nowhere in that book. In what
chapter or verse does Jehovah, the "Lord God," promise Adam and Eve to
send them a Redeemer who will save humanity? "I will put enmity between
thee and the woman," says the Lord God to the serpent, "and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his
heel."

In these words there is not the slightest allusion to a Redeemer, and
the subtilest of intellects could not extract from them, as they stand
in the third chapter of *Genesis,* anything like that which the
Christians have contrived to find. On the other hand, in the traditions
and Manu, Brahma promises directly to the first couple to send them a
Saviour who will teach them the way to salvation.

"It is from the lips of a messenger of Brahma, who will be born in
Kuroukshetra, Matsya, and the land of Pantchola, also called Kanya-Cubja
(mountain of the Virgin), that all men on earth will learn their duty,"
says *Manu* (book ii., slokas 19 and 20).

The Mexicans call the Father of their Trinity Yzona, the Son Bacab, and
the Holy Ghost Echvah, "and say they received it (the doctrine)

###### <span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

from their ancestors." <span id="fr_78"></span>[\*](#fn_78) Among the
Semitic nations we can trace the trinity to the prehistorical days of
the fabled Sesostris, who is identified by more than one critic with
Nimrod, "the mighty hunter." Manetho makes the oracle rebuke the king,
when the latter asks, "Tell me, O thou strong in fire, who before me
could subjugate all things? and who shall after me?" And the oracle
saith thus: "First God, then the Word, and then 'the Spirit.' " <span
id="fr_79"></span>[\*\*](#fn_79)

In the foregoing lies the foundation of the fierce hatred of the
Christians toward the "Pagans" and the theurgists. Too much had been
*borrowed;* the ancient religions and the Neo-platonists had been laid
by them under contribution sufficiently to perplex the world for several
thousand years. Had not the ancient creeds been speedily obliterated, it
would have been found impossible to preach the Christian religion as a
New Dispensation, or the direct Revelation from God the Father, through
God the Son, and under the influence of God the Holy Ghost. As a
political exigence the Fathers had--to gratify the wishes of their rich
converts--instituted even the festivals of Pan. They went so far as to
accept the ceremonies hitherto celebrated by the Pagan world in honor of
the *God of the gardens,* in all their primitive *sincerity. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[\*\*\*](#fn_80)* It was time to sever the connection.
Either the Pagan worship and the Neo-platonic theurgy, with all
ceremonial of magic, must be crushed out forever, or the Christians
become Neo-platonists.

The fierce polemics and single-handed battles between Irenaeus and the
Gnostics are too well known to need repetition. They were carried on for
over two centuries after the unscrupulous Bishop of Lyons had uttered
his last religious paradox. Celsus, the Neo-platonist, and a disciple of
the school of Ammonius Saccas, had thrown the Christians into
perturbation, and even had arrested for a time the progress of
proselytism by successfully proving that the original and purer forms of
the most important dogmas of Christianity were to be found only in the
teachings of Plato. Celsus accused them of accepting the worst
superstitions of Paganism, and of interpolating passages from the books
of the Sybils, without rightly understanding their meaning. The
accusations were so plausible, and the facts so patent, that for a long
time no Christian writer had ventured to answer the challenge. Origen,
at the fervent request of his friend, Ambrosius, was the first to take
the defense in hand, for, having belonged to the same Platonic school of
Ammonius, he was considered the most competent man to refute the
well-founded charges. But his eloquence failed, and the only remedy that
could be found was to destroy the writings of

###### <span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Celsus themselves. <span id="fr_81"></span>[\*](#fn_81) This could be
achieved only in the fifth century, when copies had been taken from this
work, and many were those who had read and studied them. If no copy of
it has descended to our present generation of scientists, it is not
because there is none extant at present, but for the simple reason that
the monks of a certain Oriental church on Mount Athos will neither show
nor confess they have one in their possession. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[\*\*](#fn_82) Perhaps they do not even know
themselves the value of the contents of their manuscripts, on account of
their great ignorance.

The dispersion of the Eclectic school had become the fondest hope of the
Christians. It had been looked for and contemplated with intense
anxiety. It was finally achieved. The members were scattered by the

###### <span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

hand of the monsters Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, and his nephew
Cyril--the murderer of the young, the learned, and the innocent
Hypatia! <span id="fr_83"></span>[\*](#fn_83)

With the death of the martyred daughter of Theon, the mathematician,
there remained no possibility for the Neo-platonists to continue their
school at Alexandria. During the life-time of the youthful Hypatia her
friendship and influence with Orestes, the governor of the city, had
assured the philosophers security and protection against their murderous
enemies. With her death they had lost their strongest friend. How much
she was revered by all who knew her for her erudition, noble virtues,
and character, we can infer from the letters addressed to her by
Synesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, fragments of which have reached us. "My
heart yearns for the presence of your divine spirit," he wrote in 413
A.D., "which more than anything else could alleviate the bitterness of
my fortunes." At another time he says: "Oh, my mother, my sister, my
teacher, my benefactor! My soul is very sad. The recollection of my
children I have lost is killing me. . . . When I have news of you and
learn, as I hope, that you are more fortunate than myself, I am at least
only half-unhappy."

What would have been the feelings of this most noble and worthy of
Christian bishops, who had surrendered family and children and happiness
for the faith into which he had been attracted, had a prophetic vision
disclosed to him that the only friend that had been left to him, his
"mother, sister, benefactor," would soon become an unrecognizable mass
of flesh and blood, pounded to jelly under the blows of the club of
Peter the Reader--that her youthful, innocent body would be cut to
pieces, "the flesh scraped from the bones," by oyster-shells and the
rest of her cast into the fire, by order of the same Bishop Cyril he
knew so well--Cyril, the CANONIZED Saint!! <span
id="fr_84"></span>[\*\*](#fn_84)

There has never been a religion in the annals of the world with such a
bloody record as Christianity. All the rest, including the traditional
fierce fights of the "chosen people" with their next of kin, the
idolatrous tribes of Israel, pale before the murderous fanaticism of the
alleged followers of Christ! Even the rapid spread of Mahometanism
before the conquering sword of the Islam prophet, is a direct
consequence of the

###### <span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

bloody riots and fights among Christians. It was the intestine war
between the Nestorians and Cyrilians that engendered Islamism; and it is
in the convent of Bozrah that the prolific seed was first sown by
Bahira, the Nestorian monk. Freely watered by rivers of blood, the tree
of Mecca has grown till we find it in the present century overshadowing
nearly two hundred millions of people. The recent Bulgarian atrocities
are but the natural outgrowth of the triumph of Cyril and the
Mariolaters.

The cruel, crafty politician, the plotting monk, glorified by
ecclesiastical history with the aureole of a martyred saint. The
despoiled philosophers, the Neo-platonists, and the Gnostics, daily
anathematized by the Church all over the world for long and dreary
centuries. The curse of the unconcerned Deity hourly invoked on the
magian rites and theurgic practice, and the Christian clergy themselves
using *sorcery* for ages. Hypatia, the glorious maiden-philosopher, torn
to pieces by the Christian mob. And such as Catherine de Medicis,
Lucrezia Borgia, Joanna of Naples, and the Isabellas of Spain, presented
to the world as the faithful daughters of the Church--some even
decorated by the Pope with the order of the "Immaculate Rose," the
highest emblem of womanly purity and virtue, a symbol sacred to the
Virgin-mother of God! Such are the examples of human justice! How far
less blasphemous appears a total rejection of Mary as an immaculate
goddess, than an idolatrous worship of her, accompanied by such
practices.

In the next chapter we will present a few illustrations of sorcery, as
practiced under the patronage of the Roman Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:\*](#fr_0) These figures are copied from the
"Religious Statistics of the United States for the year 1871."

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1:\*\*](#fr_1) These are: The *Baptists,
Congregationalists, Episcopalians,* Northern *Methodists,* Southern
*Methodists, Methodists* various, Northern *Presbyterians,* Southern
*Presbyterians, United Presbyterians, United Brethren, Brethren in
Christ, Reformed Dutch, Reformed German, Reformed Presbyterians,
Cumberland Presbyterians*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:\*](#fr_2) H. Maudsley: "Body and Mind."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:\*\*](#fr_3) "Boston Sunday Herald," November
5, 1876.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:\*\*\*](#fr_4) See the self-glorification of
the present Pope in the work entitled, "Speeches of Pope Pius **IX**."
by Don Pascale de Franciscis; and the famous pamphlet of that name by
the Rt. Hon. W. E. Gladstone. The latter quotes from the work named the
following sentence pronounced by the Pope: "My wish is that all
governments should know that I am speaking in this strain. . . . And I
have *the right* to speak, *even more* *than Nathan the prophet* to
David the king, *and* *a great deal more than St. Ambrose had to
Theodosius*"!!

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5:\*](#fr_5) See King's "Gnostics," and other
works.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[5:\*\*](#fr_6) Des Mousseaux: "La Magie au
**XIX**me Siecle," chap. i.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[5:\*\*\*](#fr_7) Hargrave Jennings: "The
Rosicrucians," pp. 228-241.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[6:\*](#fr_8) Des Mousseaux: "Hauts Phenomenes de
la Magie."

<span id="fn_9"></span>[7:\*](#fr_9) Don Pasquale di Franciscis:
"Discorsi del Sommo Pontefice Pio **IX**.," Part i., p. 340.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[7:\*\*](#fr_10) "Speeches of Pius **IX**.," p.
14. Am. Edition.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[9:\*](#fr_11) Vide "Speeches of Pope Pius
**IX**.," by Don Pasq. di Franciscis; Gladstone's pamphlet on this book;
Draper's "Conflict between Religion and Science," and others.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[10:\*](#fr_12) The fact is given to us by an
eye-witness who has visited the church several times; a Roman Catholic,
who felt perfectly *horrified,* as he expressed it.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[10:\*\*](#fr_13) Referring to the seed planted
by Jesus and his Apostles.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[10:\*\*\*](#fr_14) "Chips," vol. i., p. 26,
Preface.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[11:\*](#fr_15) Mallet: "Northern Antiquities."

<span id="fn_16"></span>[12:\*](#fr_16) Ether is both *pure* and
*impure* fire. The composition of the latter comprises all its visible
forms, such as the "correlation of forces"--heat, flame, electricity,
etc. The former is the *Spirit* of Fire. The difference is purely
alchemical.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[12:\*\*](#fr_17) See "Inquiry into the Nature
and Place of Hell," by Rev. T. Surnden.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[12:\*\*\*](#fr_18) Revelation xvi. 8-9.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[13:\*](#fr_19) Aristotle mentions Pythagoreans
who placed the sphere of fire in the sun, and named it *Jupiter's
Prison.* See "De Coelo," lib. ii.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[13:\*\*](#fr_20) "De Civit. Dei," I, xxi., c.
17.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[13:\*\*\*](#fr_21) "Demonologia and Hell," p.
289.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[14:\*](#fr_22) "Les Hauts Phenomenes de la
Magie," p. v., Preface.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[17:\*](#fr_23) Dr. Stanley: "Lectures on the
Eastern Church," p. 407.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[17:\*\*](#fr_24) In the government of Tambov, a
gentleman, a rich landed proprietor, had a curious case happen in his
family during the Hungarian campaign of 1848. His only and much-beloved
nephew, whom, having no children, he had adopted as a son, was in the
Russian army. The elderly couple had a portrait of his--a water-color
painting--constantly, during the meals, placed on the table in front of
the young man's usual seat. One evening as the family, with some
friends, were at their early tea, the glass over the portrait, without
any one touching it, was shattered to atoms with a loud explosion. As
the aunt of the young soldier caught the picture in her hand she saw the
forehead and head besmeared with blood. The guests, in order to quiet
her, attributed the blood to her having cut her fingers with the broken
glass. But, examine as they would, they could not find the vestige of a
cut on her fingers, and no one had touched the picture but herself.
Alarmed at her state of excitement the husband, pretending to examine
the portrait more closely, cut his finger on purpose, and then tried to
assure her that it was his blood and that, in the first excitement, he
had touched the frame without any one remarking it. All was in vain, the
old lady felt sure that Dimitry was killed. She began to have masses
said for him daily at the village church, and arrayed <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> the whole household in deep mourning. Several
weeks later, an official communication was received from the colonel of
the regiment, stating that their nephew was killed by a fragment of a
shell which had carried off the upper part of his head.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[18:\*](#fr_25) Executions for witchcraft took
place, not much later than a century ago, in other of the American
provinces. Notoriously there were negroes executed in New Jersey by
burning at the stake--the penalty denounced in several States. Even in
South Carolina, in 1865, when the State government was "reconstructed,"
after the civil war, the statutes inflicting death for witchcraft were
found to be still unrepealed. It is not a hundred years since they have
been enforced to the murderous letter of their text.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[20:\*](#fr_26) *Vide* the title-page on the
English translation of Mayerhoff's "Reuchlin und Seine Zeit," Berlin,
1830. "The Life and Times of John Reuchlin, or Capnion, the Father of
the German Reformation," by F. Barham, London, 1843.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[20:\*\*](#fr_27) Lord Coke: 3 "Institutes,"
fol. 44.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[20:\*\*\*](#fr_28) Vide "The Life of St.
Gregory of Tours."

<span id="fn_29"></span>[22:\*](#fr_29) Translated from the original
document in the Archives of Orleans, France; also see "Sortes and
Sortilegium"; "Life of Peter de Blois."

<span id="fn_30"></span>[22:\*\*](#fr_30) "Miracles and Modern
Spiritualism."

<span id="fn_31"></span>[23:\*](#fr_31) There were two chairs of the
titular apostle at Rome. The clergy, frightened at the uninterrupted
evidence furnished by scientific research, at last decided to confront
the enemy, and we find the "Chronique des Arts" giving the cleverest,
and at the same time most *Jesuitical,* explanation of the fact.
According to their story, "The *increase* in the number of the faithful
decided Peter upon making Rome henceforth the centre of his action. The
cemetery of Ostrianum was too distant and would *not suffice for the
reunions of the Christians.* The motive which had induced the Apostle to
confer on *Linus and Cletus* successively the episcopal character, in
order to render them capable <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> of sharing
the solicitudes of a church whose extent was to be without limits, led
naturally to a multiplication of the places of meeting. The particular
residence of Peter was therefore fixed at Viminal; and there was
established that mysterious Chair, the symbol of power and truth. The
august seat which was venerated at the Ostrian Catacombs was not,
however, removed. Peter still visited this cradle of the Roman Church,
and often, without doubt, exercised his holy functions there. A *second*
Chair, expressing the same mystery as the first, was set up at Cornelia,
and it is this which has come down to us through the ages."

Now, so far from it being possible that there ever were two genuine
chairs of this kind, the majority of critics show that Peter never was
at Rome at all; the reasons are many and unanswerable. Perhaps we had
best begin by pointing to the works of Justin Martyr. This great
champion of Christianity, writing in the early part of the second
century *in Rome,* where he fixed his abode, eager to get hold of the
least proof in favor of the truth for which he suffered, seems
*perfectly unconscious of St. Peter's existence*!!

Neither does any other writer of any consequence mention him in
connection with the Church of Rome, earlier than the days of Irenaeus,
when the latter set himself to invent a new religion, drawn from the
depths of his imagination. We refer the reader anxious to learn more to
the able work of Mr. George Reber, entitled "The Christ of Paul." The
arguments of this author are conclusive. The above article in the
"Chronique des Arts," speaks of the *increase* of the faithful to such
an extent that Ostrianum could not contain the number of Christians.
Now, if Peter was at Rome at all--runs Mr. Reber's argument--it must
have been between the years A.D. 64 and 69; for at 64 he was at Babylon,
from whence he wrote epistles and letters to Rome, and at some time
between 64 and 68 (the reign of Nero) he either died a martyr or in his
bed, for Irenaeus makes him deliver the Church of Rome, together with
Paul (! ?) (whom he persecuted and quarrelled with all his life), into
the hands of *Linus,* who became bishop in 69 (see Reber's "Christ of
Paul," p. 122). We will treat of it more fully in chapter iii.

Now, we ask, in the name of common sense, how could the *faithful* of
Peter's Church *increase* at such a rate, when Nero trapped and killed
them like so many mice during his reign? History shows the few
Christians fleeing from Rome, wherever they could, to avoid the
persecution of the emperor, and the "Chronique des Arts" makes them
increase and multiply! "Christ," the article goes on to say, "willed
that this visible sign of the doctrinal authority of his vicar should
also have its portion of immortality; one can follow it from age to age
in the documents of the Roman Church." Tertullian formally attests its
existence in his book "De Praescriptionibus." Eager to learn everything
concerning so interesting a subject, we would like to be shown when
<span id="page_25">p. 25</span> did *Christ* WILL anything of the kind?
However: "Ornaments of ivory have been fitted to the front and back of
the chair, but only on those parts repaired with acacia-wood. Those
which cover the panel in front are divided into three superimposed rows,
each containing six plaques of ivory, on which are engraved various
subjects, among others the 'Labors of Hercules.' Several of the plaques
were wrongly placed, and seemed to have been affixed to the chair at a
time when the remains of antiquity were employed as ornaments, without
much regard to fitness." This is the point. The article was written
simply as a clever answer to several facts published during the present
century. Bower, in his "History of the Popes" (vol. ii., p. 7), narrates
that in the year 1662, while cleaning one of the chairs, "the 'Twelve
Labors of Hercules' unluckily appeared engraved upon it," after which
the chair was removed and another substituted. But in 1795, when
Bonaparte's troops occupied Rome, the chair was again examined. This
time there was found the Mahometan confession of faith, in Arabic
letters: "There is no Deity but Allah, and Mahomet is his Apostle." (See
appendix to "Ancient Symbol-Worship," by H. M. Westropp and C. Staniland
Wake.) In the appendix Prof. Alexander Wilder very justly remarks as
follows: "We presume that the Apostle of the Circumcision, as Paul, his
great rival, styles him, was never at the Imperial City, nor had a
successor there, not even in the ghetto. The 'Chair of Peter,'
therefore, is *sacred* rather than apostolical. Its sanctity proceeded,
however, from the esoteric religion of the former times of Rome. The
hierophant of the Mysteries probably occupied it on the day of
initiations, when exhibiting to the candidates the *Petroma* (stone
tablet containing the last revelation made by the hierophant to the
neophyte for initiation)."

<span id="fn_32"></span>[26:\*](#fr_32) Joshua xxiv., 15.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[26:\*\*](#fr_33) One of the most surprising
facts that have come under our observation, is that students of profound
research should not couple the frequent recurrence of these "unexpected
and almost miraculous" discoveries of important documents, at the most
opportune moments, with a premeditated design. Is it so strange that the
custodians of "Pagan" lore, seeing that the proper moment had arrived,
should cause the needed document, book, or relic to fall as if by
accident in the right man's way? Geological surveyors and explorers even
as competent as Humboldt and Tschuddi, have not discovered the hidden
mines from which the Peruvian Incas dug their treasure, although the
latter confesses that the present degenerate Indians have the secret. In
1839, Perring, the archaeologist, proposed to the sheik of an Arab
village two purses of gold, if he helped him to discover the entrance to
the hidden passage leading to the sepulchral chambers in the North
Pyramid of Doshoor. But though his men were out of employment and
half-starved, the sheik proudly refused to "sell the secret of the
dead," promising to show it *gratis,* when *the time would come for it.*
Is it, then, impossible that in some other regions of the earth are
guarded the remains of that glorious literature of the past, which was
the fruit of its majestic civilization? What is there so surprising in
the idea? Who knows but that as the Christian Church has unconsciously
begotten free thought by reaction against her own cruelty, rapacity, and
dogmatism, the public mind may be glad to follow the lead of the
Orientalists, away from Jerusalem and towards Ellora; and that then much
more will be discovered that is now hidden?

<span id="fn_34"></span>[26:\*\*\*](#fr_34) "Chips from a German
Workshop," vol. i., p. 373; Semitic Monotheism.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[27:\*](#fr_35) An after-thought has made us
fancy that we can understand what is meant by the following sentences of
*Moses of Chorene:* "The ancient Asiatics," says he, "five centuries
before our era--and especially the Hindus, the Persians, and the
Chaldeans, had in their possession a quantity of historical and
scientific books. These works were partially borrowed, partially
translated in the Greek language, mostly since the Ptolemies had
established the Alexandrian library and encouraged the writers by their
liberalities, so that the Greek language became the deposit of all the
sciences" ("History of Armenia"). Therefore, the greater part of the
literature included in the 700,000 volumes of the Alexandrian Library
was due to India, and her next neighbors.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[29:\*](#fr_36) Bonamy says in "La Bibliotheque
d'Alexandrie," quoting, we suppose, the Presbyter Orosius, who was an
eye-witness, "*thirty* years later."

<span id="fn_37"></span>[29:\*\*](#fr_37) Since the above was written,
the spirit here described has been beautifully exemplified at Barcelona,
Spain, where the Bishop Fray Joachim invited the local spiritualists to
witness a formal burning of spiritual books. We find the account in a
paper called "The Revelation," published at Alicante, which sensibly
adds that the performance was "a caricature of the memorable epoch of
the Inquisition."

<span id="fn_38"></span>[30:\*](#fr_38) E. Pococke gives the variations
of the name Buddha as: Bud'ha, Buddha, Booddha, Butta, Pout, Pote, Pto,
Pte, Phte, Phtha, Phut, etc., etc. See "India in Greece," Note,
Appendix, 397.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[30:\*\*](#fr_39) The tiara of the Pope is also
a perfect copy of that of the Dalai-Lama of Thibet.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[31:\*](#fr_40) It is the traditional policy of
the College of Cardinals to elect, whenever practicable, the new Pope
among the oldest valetudinarians. The hierophant of the Eleusinia was
likewise always an old man, and unmarried.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[31:\*\*](#fr_41) This is not correct.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[31:\*\*\*](#fr_42) "Le Spiritisme dans le
Monde," p. 28.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[32:\*](#fr_43) Translated by Prof. Draper for
"Conflict between Religion and Science"; book xii.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[33:\*](#fr_44) "Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire."

<span id="fn_45"></span>[33:\*\*](#fr_45) "Sohar Comment.," Gen. A. 10;
"Kabbal. Denud.," i., 528.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[34:\*](#fr_46) "The beings which the
philosophers of other peoples distinguish by the name 'Daemons,' Moses
names 'Angels,' " says Philo Judaeus.--"De Gigant," i. 253.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[34:\*\*](#fr_47) Deuteronomy xxxiii. 2., <span
id="img_iu2-34"></span> ![](img/iu2-34.jpg) WIDTH=359 HEIGHT=120&gt;is
translated "fiery law" in the English Bible.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[35:\*](#fr_48) See Rees's "Encyclopaedia," art.
Kabala.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[35:\*\*](#fr_49) "Histor. Manich.," Liv. vi.,
ch. i., p. 291.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[37:\*](#fr_50) "The altogether mystical
coloring of Christianity harmonized with the Essene rules of life and
opinions, and it is not improbable that Jesus and John the Baptist were
initiated into the Essene Mysteries, to which Christianity may be
indebted for many a form of expression; as indeed the community of
Therapeutae, an offspring of the Essene order, soon belonged wholly to
Christianity" ("Yost," i., 411--quoted by the author of "Sod, the Son of
the Man").

<span id="fn_51"></span>[38:\*](#fr_51) A. Franck: "Die Kabbala."

<span id="fn_52"></span>[38:\*\*](#fr_52) "Le Spiritisme dans le Monde."

<span id="fn_53"></span>[39:\*](#fr_53) "Asiat. Trans.," i., p. 579.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[39:\*\*](#fr_54) Louis Jacolliot: "The
Initiates of the Ancient Temples."

<span id="fn_55"></span>[40:\*](#fr_55) Franck: "Die Kabbala."

<span id="fn_56"></span>[41:\*](#fr_56) See "Conflict between Religion
and Science," p. 224.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[42:\*](#fr_57) See "Sohar"; "Kab. Den."; "The
Book of Mystery," the oldest book of the kabalists; and Milman: "History
of Christianity," pp. 212, 213-215.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[42:\*\*](#fr_58) Milman: "History of
Christianity," p. 280. The *Kurios* and *Kora* are mentioned repeatedly
in "Justin Martyr." See p. 97.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[42:\*\*\*](#fr_59) See Olshausen: "Biblischer
Commentar uber sammtliche Schriften des Neuen Testaments," ii.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[42:\*\*\*\*](#fr_60) There is a wide-spread
*superstition* (?), especially among the Slavonians and Russians, that
the *magician* or wizard cannot die before he has passed the "word" to a
successor. So deeply is it rooted among the popular beliefs, that we do
not imagine there is a person in Russia who has not heard of it. It is
but too easy to trace the origin of this superstition to the old
Mysteries which had been for ages spread all over <span id="page_43">p.
43</span> the globe. The ancient *Variago-Rouss* had his Mysteries in
the North as well as in the South of Russia; and there are many relics
of the by-gone faith scattered in the lands watered by the sacred
Dnieper, the baptismal Jordan of all Russia. No *Znachar* (the knowing
one) or *Koldoun* (sorcerer), male or female, can die in fact before he
has passed the mysterious word to some one. The popular belief is that
unless he does that he will linger and suffer for weeks and months, and
were he even finally to get liberated, it would be only to wander on
earth, unable to quit its region unless he finds a successor even after
death. How far the belief may be verified by others, we do not know, but
we have seen a case which, for its tragical and mysterious *denoument*,
deserves to be given here as an illustration of the subject in hand. An
old man, of over one hundred years of age, a peasant-serf in the
government of S----, having a wide reputation as a sorcerer and healer,
was said to be dying for several days, and still unable to die. The
report spread like lightning, and the poor old fellow was shunned by
even the members of his own family, as the latter were afraid of
receiving the unwelcome inheritance. At last the public rumor in the
village was that he had sent a message to a colleague less versed than
himself in the art, and who, although he lived in a distant district,
was nevertheless coming at the call, and would be on hand early on the
following morning. There was at that time on a visit to the proprietor
of the village a young physician who, belonging to the famous school of
*Nihilism* of that day, laughed outrageously at the idea. The master of
the house, being a very pious man, and but half inclined to make so
cheap of the "superstition," smiled--as the saying goes--but with one
corner of his mouth. Meanwhile the young skeptic, to gratify his
curiosity, had made a visit to the dying man, had found that he could
not live twenty-four hours longer, and, determined to prove the
absurdity of the "superstition," had taken means to detain the coming
"successor" at a neighboring village.

Early in the morning a company of four persons, comprising the
physician, the master of the place, his daughter, and the writer of the
present lines, went to the hut in which was to be achieved the triumph
of skepticism. The dying man was expecting his liberator every moment,
and his agony at the delay became extreme. We tried to persuade the
physician to humor the patient, were it for humanity's sake. He only
laughed. Getting hold with one hand of the old wizard's pulse, he took
out his watch with the other, and remarking in French that all would be
over in a few moments, remained absorbed in his professional experiment.
The scene was solemn and appalling. Suddenly the door opened, and a
young boy entered with the intelligence, addressed to the doctor, that
the *koum* was lying dead drunk at a neighboring village, and, according
to *his orders,* could not be with "grandfather" till the next day. The
young doctor felt confused, and was just going to address the old man,
when, as quick as lightning, the Znachar snatched his hand from his
grasp and raised himself in bed. His deep-sunken eyes flashed; his
yellow-white beard and hair streaming round his livid face made him a
dreadful sight. One instant more, and his long, sinewy arms were clasped
round the physician's neck, as with a supernatural force he drew the
doctor's head closer and closer to his own face, where he held him as in
a vise, while *whispering* words inaudible to us in his ear. The skeptic
struggled to free himself, but before he had time to make one effective
motion the work had evidently been done; the hands relaxed their grasp,
and the old sorcerer fell on his back--a corpse! A strange and ghostly
smile had settled on the stony lips--a smile of fiendish triumph and
satisfied revenge; but the doctor looked paler and more ghastly than the
dead man himself. He stared round with an expression of terror difficult
to describe, and without answering our inquiries rushed out wildly from
the hut, in the direction of the woods. Messengers were sent after him,
but he was nowhere to be found. About sunset a report was heard in the
forest. An hour later his body was brought home, with a bullet through
his head, for the skeptic had blown out his brains!

What made him commit suicide? What magic spell of sorcery had the "word"
of the dying wizard left on his mind? Who can tell?

<span id="fn_61"></span>[44:\*](#fr_61) "Anacalypsis"; also Tertullian.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[44:\*\*](#fr_62) "Anthon," art. Eleusinia.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[44:\*\*\*](#fr_63) Dunlap: "Musah, His
Mysteries," p. 71.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[44:\*\*\*\*](#fr_64) Kings, viii. 2.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[46:\*](#fr_65) Let us remember in this
connection that Col. Vans Kennedy has long ago declared his opinion that
Babylonia was once the seat of the Sanscrit language and of Brahmanical
influence.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[46:\*\*](#fr_66) " 'The Agrouchada-Parikshai,'
which discloses, to a certain extent, the order of initiation, does not
give the formula of evocation," says Jacolliot, and he adds that,
according to some Brahmans, "these formulae were never written, they
were and still are imparted in a whisper in the ear of the adepts"
("*mouth to ear, and the word at low breath,*" say the Masons).--"Le
Spiritisme dans le Monde," p. 108.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[46:\*\*\*](#fr_67) "Le Spiritisme dans le
Monde," p. 108.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[48:\*](#fr_68) W. D. Whitney: "Oriental and
Linguistic Studies, The Veda, etc."

<span id="fn_69"></span>[48:\*\*](#fr_69) Jacolliot seems to have very
logically demonstrated the absurd contradictions of some philologists,
anthropologists, and Orientalists, in regard to their *Akkado and
Semito* mania. "There is not, perhaps, much of good faith in their
negations," he writes. "The scientists who invent Turanian peoples know
very well that in *Manu* alone, there is more of veritable science and
philosophy than in all that this pretended Semitism has hitherto
furnished us with; but they are the slaves of a path which some of them
are following the last fifteen, twenty, or even thirty years. . . . We
expect, therefore, nothing of the present. India will owe its
reconstitution to the scientists of the next generation" ("La Genese de
l'Humanite," pp. 60-61).

<span id="fn_70"></span>[48:\*\*\*](#fr_70) Cory: "Anc. Frag."

<span id="fn_71"></span>[48:\*\*\*\*](#fr_71) Movers: "Phoinizer," 263.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[48:\*\*\*\*\*](#fr_72) Dunlap: "Sp. Hist. of
Man," p. 281.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[48:\*\*\*\*\*\*](#fr_73) Siva is not a god of
the *Vedas,* strictly speaking. When the *Vedas* were written, he held
the rank of Maha-Deva or Bel among the gods of aboriginal India.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[49:\*](#fr_74) "De Antro Nympharum."

<span id="fn_75"></span>[49:\*\*](#fr_75) "Navarette," book ii., c. x.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[49:\*\*\*](#fr_76) "On the Origin of Heathen
Idolatry."

<span id="fn_77"></span>[49:\*\*\*\*](#fr_77) Isis and Osiris are said,
in the Egyptian sacred books, to have appeared (*i.e*., been
worshipped), on earth, later than Thot, the *first* Hermes, called
Trismegistus, who wrote all their sacred books according to the command
of God or by "divine revelation." The companion and instructor of Isis
and Osiris was Thot, or Hermes **II**., who was an incarnation of the
celestial Hermes.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[51:\*](#fr_78) Lord Kingsborough: "Ant. Mex.,"
p. 165.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[51:\*\*](#fr_79) "Ap. Malal.," lib. i., cap.
iv.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[51:\*\*\*](#fr_80) Payne Knight: "Phallic
Worship."

<span id="fn_81"></span>[52:\*](#fr_81) The Celsus above mentioned, who
lived between the second and third centuries, is not Celsus the
Epicurean. The latter wrote several works against Magic, and lived
earlier, during the reign of Hadrian.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[52:\*\*](#fr_82) We have the facts from a
trustworthy witness, having no interest to invent such a story. Having
injured his leg in a fall from the steamer into the boat in which he was
to land at the Mount, he was taken care of by these monks, and during
his convalescence, through gifts of money and presents, became their
greatest friend, and finally won their entire confidence. Having asked
for the loan of some books, he was taken by the Superior to a large
cellar in which they keep their sacred vessels and other property.
Opening a great trunk, full of old musty manuscripts and rolls, he was
invited by the Superior to "*amuse* himself." The gentleman was a
scholar, and well versed in Greek and Latin text. "I was amazed," he
says, in a private letter, "and had my breath taken away, on finding
among these old parchments, so unceremoniously treated, some of the most
valuable relics of the first centuries, hitherto believed to have been
lost." Among others he found a half-destroyed manuscript, which he is
perfectly sure must be a copy of the "True Doctrine," the Αογος αλε τηες
of Celsus, out of which Origen quoted whole pages. The traveller took as
many notes as he could on that day, but when he came to offer to the
Superior to purchase some of these writings he found, to his great
surprise, that no amount of money would tempt the monks. They did not
know what the manuscripts contained, nor "did they care," they said. But
the "heap of writing," they added, was transmitted to them from one
generation to another, and there was a tradition among them that these
papers would one day become the means of crushing the "Great Beast of
the Apocalypse," their hereditary enemy, the Church of Rome. They were
constantly quarrelling and fighting with the Catholic monks, and among
the whole "heap" they *knew* that there was a "holy" relic which
protected them. They did not know which, and so in their doubt
abstained. It appears that the Superior, a shrewd Greek, understood his
*bevue* and repented of his kindness, for first of all he made the
traveller give him his most sacred word of honor, strengthened by an
oath he made him take on the image of the Holy Patroness of the Island,
never to betray their secret, and never mention, at least, the name of
their convent. And finally, when the anxious student who had passed a
fortnight in reading all sorts of antiquated trash before he happened to
stumble over some precious manuscript, expressed the desire to have the
key, to "amuse himself" with the writings once more, he was very
*naively* informed that the "key had been lost," and that they did not
know where to look for it. And thus he was left to the few notes he had
taken.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[53:\*](#fr_83) See the historical romance of
Canon Kingsley, "Hypatia," for a highly picturesque account of the
tragical fate of this young martyr.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[53:\*\*](#fr_84) We beg the reader to bear in
mind that it is the same Cyril who was accused and proved guilty of
having sold the gold and silver ornaments of his church, and spent the
money. He pleaded guilty, but tried to excuse himself on the ground that
he had used the money for the poor, but could not give evidence of it.
His duplicity with Arius and his party is well known. Thus one of the
first Christian saints, and the founder of the Trinity, appears on the
pages of history as a murderer and a thief!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](iu101)
