[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou03)  [Next](cou05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_v"></span>

<span id="an_v-p1"></span><span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_45"></span>

### <span id="an_v-p1.1"></span>Here Beginneth the Prologue

<span id="an_v-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_v-p3"></span>IN the name of the Father and of the Son and
of the Holy Ghost! I charge thee and I beseech thee, with as much power
and virtue as the bond of charity is sufficient to suffer, whatsoever
thou be that this book shalt have in possession, either by property,
either by keeping, by bearing as messenger, or else by borrowing, that
in as much as in thee is by will and advisement, neither thou read it,
nor write it, nor speak it, nor yet suffer it be read, written, or
spoken, of any or to any but if it be of such one, or to such one, that
hath by thy supposing in a true will and by an whole intent purposed him
to be a perfect follower of Christ not only in active living, but in the
<span id="an_v-p3.1"></span><span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_46"></span> sovereignest point of contemplative living the
which is possible by grace for to be come to in this present life of a
perfect soul yet abiding in this deadly body; and thereto that doth that
in him is, and by thy supposing hath done long time before, for to able
him to contemplative living by the virtuous means of active living. For
else it accordeth nothing to him. And over this I charge thee and I
beseech thee by the authority of charity, that if any such shall read
it, write it, or speak it, or else hear it be read or spoken, that thou
charge him as I do thee, for to take him time to read it, speak it,
write it, or hear it, all over. For peradventure there is some matter
therein in the beginning or in the middle, the which is hanging, and not
fully declared where it standeth: and if it be not there, it is soon
after, or else in the end. Wherefore if a man saw one matter and not
another, peradventure he might lightly be led into error; and therefore
in eschewing of <span id="an_v-p3.2"></span><span id="page_47">p.
47</span> <span id="an_v-Page_47"></span> this error, both in thyself
and in all other, I pray thee for charity do as I say thee.

<span id="an_v-p4"></span>Fleshly janglers, open praisers and blamers of
themselves or of any other, tellers of trifles, ronners and tattlers of
tales, and all manner of pinchers, cared I never that they saw this
book. For mine intent was never to write such thing unto them, and
therefore I would that they meddle not therewith; neither they, nor any
of these curious, lettered, or unlearned men. Yea, although that they be
full good men of active living, yet this matter accordeth nothing to
them. But if it be to those men, the which although they stand in
activity by outward form of living, nevertheless yet by inward stirring
after the privy spirit of God, whose dooms be hid, they be full
graciously disposed, not continually as it is proper to very
contemplatives, but now and then to be perceivers in the highest point
of this contemplative act; if such men might see it, they <span
id="an_v-p4.1"></span><span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_48"></span> should by the grace of God be greatly
comforted thereby.

<span id="an_v-p5"></span>This book is distinguished in seventy chapters
and five. Of the which chapters, the last chapter of all teacheth some
certain tokens by the which a soul may verily prove whether he be called
of God to be a worker in this work or none.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of the Chapters](cou05)
