[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou12)  [Next](cou14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_xiv"></span>

<span id="an_xiv-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_xiv-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHTH CHAPTER

<span id="an_xiv-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_xiv-p3"></span>A good declaring of certain doubts that may
fall in this word treated by question, in destroying of a man’s own
curiosity, of cunning, and of natural wit, and in distinguishing of the
degrees and the parts of active living and contemplative.

<span id="an_xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="an_xiv-p5"></span>BUT now thou askest me, “What is he, this
that thus presseth upon me in this work; and whether it is a good thing
or an evil? And if it be an evil thing, then have I marvel,” thou
sayest, “why that he will increase a man’s devotion so much. For
sometimes me think that it is a passing comfort to listen after his
tales. For he will sometime, me think, make me weep full heartily for
pity of the Passion of Christ, sometime for my wretchedness, and for
many other reasons, that me <span id="an_xiv-p5.1"></span><span
id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="an_xiv-Page_96"></span> thinketh be
full holy, and that done me much good. And therefore me thinketh that he
should on nowise be evil; and if he be good, and with his sweet tales
doth me so much good withal, then I have great marvel why that thou
biddest me put him down and away so far under the cloud of forgetting?”

<span id="an_xiv-p6"></span>Now surely me thinketh that this is a well
moved question, and therefore I think to answer thereto so feebly as I
can. First when thou askest me what is he, this that presseth so fast
upon thee in this work, proffering to help thee in this work; I say that
it is a sharp and a clear beholding of thy natural wit, printed in thy
reason within in thy soul. And where thou askest me thereof whether it
be good or evil, I say that it behoveth always be good in its nature.
For why, it is a beam of the likeness of God. But the use thereof may be
both good and evil. Good, when it is opened by grace for to see thy
wretchedness, the passion, <span id="an_xiv-p6.1"></span><span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="an_xiv-Page_97"></span> the
kindness, and the wonderful works of God in His creatures bodily and
ghostly. And then it is no wonder though it increase thy devotion full
much, as thou sayest. But then is the use evil, when it is swollen with
pride and with curiosity of much clergy and letterly cunning as in
clerks; and maketh them press for to be holden not meek scholars and
masters of divinity or of devotion, but proud scholars of the devil and
masters of vanity and of falsehood. And in other men or women whatso
they be, religious or seculars, the use and the working of this natural
wit is then evil, when it is swollen with proud and curious skills of
worldly things, and fleshly conceits in coveting of worldly worships and
having of riches and vain plesaunce and flatterings of others.

<span id="an_xiv-p7"></span>And where that thou askest me, why that thou
shalt put it down under the cloud of forgetting, since it is so, that it
is good in its nature, and thereto <span id="an_xiv-p7.1"></span><span
id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="an_xiv-Page_98"></span> when it is
well used it doth thee so much good and increaseth thy devotion so much.
To this I answer and say—That thou shalt well understand that there be
two manner of lives in Holy Church. The one is active life, and the
other is contemplative life. Active is the lower, and contemplative is
the higher. Active life hath two degrees, a higher and a lower: and also
contemplative life hath two degrees, a lower and a higher. Also, these
two lives be so coupled together that although they be divers in some
part, yet neither of them may be had fully without some part of the
other. For why? That part that is the higher part of active life, that
same part is the lower part of contemplative life. So that a man may not
be fully active, but if he be in part contemplative; nor yet fully
contemplative, as it may be here, but if he be in part active. The
condition of active life is such, that it is both begun and ended in
this life; but not so of contemplative <span
id="an_xiv-p7.2"></span><span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="an_xiv-Page_99"></span> life. For it is begun in this life, and
shall last without end. For why? That part that Mary chose shall never
be taken away. Active life is troubled and travailed about many things;
but contemplative sitteth in peace with one thing.

<span id="an_xiv-p8"></span>The lower part of active life standeth in
good and honest bodily works of mercy and of charity. The higher part of
active life and the lower part of contemplative life lieth in goodly
ghostly meditations, and busy beholding unto a man’s own wretchedness
with sorrow and contrition, unto the Passion of Christ and of His
servants with pity and compassion, and unto the wonderful gifts,
kindness, and works of God in all His creatures bodily and ghostly with
thanking and praising. But the higher part of contemplation, as it may
be had here, hangeth all wholly in this darkness and in this cloud of
unknowing; with a loving stirring and a blind beholding unto the naked
being of God Himself only. <span id="an_xiv-p8.1"></span><span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="an_xiv-Page_100"></span>

<span id="an_xiv-p9"></span>In the lower part of active life a man is
without himself and beneath himself. In the higher part of active life
and the lower part of contemplative life, a man is within himself and
even with himself. But in the higher part of contemplative life, a man
is above himself and under his God. Above himself he is: for why, he
purposeth him to win thither by grace, whither he may not come by
nature. That is to say, to be knit to God in spirit, and in onehead of
love and accordance of will. And right as it is impossible, to man’s
understanding, for a man to come to the higher part of active life, but
if he cease for a time of the lower part; so it is that a man shall not
come to the higher part of contemplative life, but if he cease for a
time of the lower part. And as unlawful a thing as it is, and as much as
it would let a man that sat in his meditations, to have regard then to
his outward bodily works, the which he had done, or else should do,
although they <span id="an_xiv-p9.1"></span><span id="page_101">p.
101</span> <span id="an_xiv-Page_101"></span> were never so holy works
in themselves: surely as unlikely a thing it is, and as much would it
let a man that should work in this darkness and in this cloud of
unknowing with an affectuous stirring of love to God for Himself, for to
let any thought or any meditation of God’s wonderful gifts, kindness,
and works in any of His creatures bodily or ghostly, rise upon him to
press betwixt him and his God; although they be never so holy thoughts,
nor so profound, nor so comfortable.

<span id="an_xiv-p10"></span>And for this reason it is that I bid thee
put down such a sharp subtle thought, and cover him with a thick cloud
of forgetting, be he never so holy nor promise he thee never so well for
to help thee in thy purpose. For why, love may reach to God in this
life, but not knowing. And all the whiles that the soul dwelleth in this
deadly body, evermore is the sharpness of our understanding in beholding
of all ghostly things, but most <span id="an_xiv-p10.1"></span><span
id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="an_xiv-Page_102"></span> specially
of God, mingled with some manner of fantasy; for the which our work
should be unclean. And unless more wonder were, it should lead us into
much error. <span id="an_xiv-p10.2"></span><span id="page_103">p.
103</span> <span id="an_xiv-Page_103"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9: That in the time of this work the rememberance of the
holiest creature that ever God made letteth more than it
profiteth](cou14)
