[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou48)  [Next](cou50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_l"></span>

<span id="an_l-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_l-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND FORTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_l-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_l-p3"></span>How a soul shall dispose it on its own part,
for to destroy all witting and feeling of its own being.

<span id="an_l-p4"></span>* *

<span id="an_l-p5"></span>BUT now thou askest me, how thou mayest
destroy this naked witting and feeling of thine own being. For
peradventure thou thinkest that an it were destroyed, all other lettings
were destroyed: and if thou thinkest thus, thou thinkest right truly.
But to this I answer thee and I say, that without a full special grace
full freely given of God, and thereto a full according ableness to
receive this grace on thy part, this naked witting and feeling of thy
being may on nowise be destroyed. And this ableness is <span
id="an_l-p5.1"></span><span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="an_l-Page_211"></span> nought else but a strong and a deep ghostly
sorrow.

<span id="an_l-p6"></span>But in this sorrow needeth thee to have
discretion, on this manner: thou shalt be wary in the time of this
sorrow, that thou neither too rudely strain thy body nor thy spirit, but
sit full still, as it were in a sleeping device, all forsobbed and
forsunken in sorrow. This is true sorrow; this is perfect sorrow; and
well were him that might win to this sorrow. All men have matter of
sorrow: but most specially he feeleth matter of sorrow, that wotteth and
feeleth that he is. All other sorrows be unto this in comparison but as
it were game to earnest. For he may make sorrow earnestly, that wotteth
and feeleth not only what he is, but that he is. And whoso felt never
this sorrow, he may make sorrow: for why, he felt yet never perfect
sorrow. This sorrow, when it is had, cleanseth the soul, not only of
sin, but also of pain that it hath deserved for sin; and thereto it
<span id="an_l-p6.1"></span><span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="an_l-Page_212"></span> maketh a soul able to receive that joy, the
which reeveth from a man all witting and feeling of his being.

<span id="an_l-p7"></span>This sorrow, if it be truly conceived, is full
of holy desire: and else might never man in this life abide it nor bear
it. For were it not that a soul were somewhat fed with a manner of
comfort of his right working, else should he not be able to bear the
pain that he hath of the witting and feeling of his being. For as oft as
he would have a true witting and a feeling of his God in purity of
spirit, as it may be here, and sithen feeleth that he may not—for he
findeth evermore his witting and his feeling as it were occupied and
filled with a foul stinking lump of himself, the which behoveth always
be hated and be despised and forsaken, if he shall be God’s perfect
disciple learned of Himself in the mount of perfection—so oft, he goeth
nigh mad for sorrow. Insomuch, that he weepeth and waileth, striveth,
curseth, and banneth; and shortly to <span id="an_l-p7.1"></span><span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span id="an_l-Page_213"></span> say, him
thinketh that he beareth so heavy a burthen of himself that he careth
never what betides him, so that God were pleased. And yet in all this
sorrow he desireth not to unbe: for that were devil’s madness and
despite unto God. But him listeth right well to be; and he intendeth
full heartily thanking to God, for the worthiness and the gift of his
being, for all that he desire unceasingly for to lack the witting and
the feeling of his being.

<span id="an_l-p8"></span>This sorrow and this desire behoveth every
soul have and feel in itself, either in this manner or in another; as
God vouchsafeth for to learn to His ghostly disciples after His well
willing and their according ableness in body and in soul, in degree and
disposition, ere the time be that they may perfectly be oned unto God in
perfect charity—such as may be had here—if God vouchsafeth. <span
id="an_l-p8.1"></span><span id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span
id="an_l-Page_214"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45: A good declaring of some certain deceits that may
befall in this work](cou50)
