[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cou79)  [Next](cou81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S2X6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Cloud of Unknowing*, ed. by Evelyn Underhill, \[1922\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_lxxxi"></span>

<span id="an_lxxxi-p1"></span> 

### <span id="an_lxxxi-p1.1"></span>HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER

<span id="an_lxxxi-p2"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxxi-p3"></span>Of some certain tokens by the which a man
may prove whether he be called of God to work in this work

<span id="an_lxxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxxi-p5"></span>ALL those that read or hear the matter of
this book be read or spoken, and in this reading or hearing think it a
good and liking thing, be never the rather called of God to work in this
work, only for this liking stirring that they feel in the time of this
reading. For peradventure this stirring cometh more of a natural
curiosity of wit, than of any calling of grace.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p6"></span>But, if they will prove whence this
stirring cometh, they may prove thus, if them liketh. First let them
look if they have done that in them is before, abling them thereto in
cleansing of <span id="an_lxxxi-p6.1"></span><span id="page_312">p.
312</span> <span id="an_lxxxi-Page_312"></span> their conscience at the
doom of Holy Church, their counsel according. If it be thus, it is well
inasmuch: but if they will wit more near, let them look if it be
evermore pressing in their remembrance more customably than is any other
of ghostly exercise. And if them think that there is no manner of thing
that they do, bodily or ghostly, that is sufficiently done with witness
of their conscience, unless this privy little love pressed be in manner
ghostly the chief of all their work: and if they thus feel, then it is a
token that they be called of God to this work, and surely else not.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p7"></span>I say not that it shall ever last and
dwell in all their minds continually, that be called to work in this
work. Nay, so is it not. For from a young ghostly prentice in this work,
the actual feeling thereof is ofttimes withdrawn for divers reasons.
Sometime, for he shall not take over presumptuously thereupon, and ween
that it be in great part in his own power <span
id="an_lxxxi-p7.1"></span><span id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span
id="an_lxxxi-Page_313"></span> to have it when him list, and as him
list. And such a weening were pride. And evermore when the feeling of
grace is withdrawn, pride is the cause: not ever pride that is, but
pride that should be, were it not that this feeling of grace were
withdrawn. And thus ween ofttimes some young fools, that God is their
enemy; when He is their full friend.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p8"></span>Sometimes it is withdrawn for their
carelessness; and when it is thus, they feel soon after a full bitter
pain that beateth them full sore. Sometimes our Lord will delay it by an
artful device, for He will by such a delaying make it grow, and be had
more in dainty when it is new found and felt again that long had been
lost. And this is one of the readiest and sovereignest tokens that a
soul may have to wit by, whether he be called or not to work in this
work, if he feel after such a delaying and a long lacking of this work,
that when it cometh suddenly as it doth, unpurchased with <span
id="an_lxxxi-p8.1"></span><span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="an_lxxxi-Page_314"></span> any means, that he hath then a greater
fervour of desire and greater love longing to work in this work, than
ever he had any before. Insomuch, that ofttimes I trow, he hath more joy
of the finding thereof than ever he had sorrow of the losing.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p9"></span>And if it be thus, surely it is a very
token without error, that he is called of God to work in this work,
whatsoever that he be or hath been.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p10"></span>For not what thou art, nor what thou hast
been, beholdeth God with His merciful eyes; but that thou wouldest be.
And Saint Gregory to witness, that all holy desires grow by delays: and
if they wane by delays, then were they never holy desires. For he that
feeleth ever less joy and less, in new findings and sudden presentations
of his old purposed desires, although they may be called natural desires
to the good, nevertheless holy desires were they never. Of this holy
desire speaketh Saint Austin and saith, that all the life of a good
<span id="an_lxxxi-p10.1"></span><span id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="an_lxxxi-Page_315"></span> Christian man is nought else but holy
desire.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p11"></span>Farewell, ghostly friend, in God’s
blessing and mine! And I beseech Almighty God, that true peace, holy
counsel, and ghostly comfort in God with abundance of grace, evermore be
with thee and all God’s lovers in earth. Amen.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p12"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxxi-p13"></span>HERE ENDETH THE CLOUD OF UNKNOWING.

<span id="an_lxxxi-p14"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxxi-p15"></span> 

<span id="an_lxxxii"></span>

<span id="an_lxxxii-p0.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Pages of the Print Edition](cou81)
