[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc20)  [Next](fotc22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Conflict of Alltan-Beath</span>.

Donald Mackay of Strathnaver, having succeeded his brother, John, taketh
the occasion upon the death of Adam, Earl of Sutherland (who left his
grandchild, John, young to succeed him) to molest and invade the
inhabitants

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

of Sutherland. He came, the year of God 1542, with a company of men to
the village of Knockartoll, burnt the same, and took a great prey of
goods out of Strathbrora. Sir Hugh Kennedy of Griffen Mains dwelt then
in Sutherland, having married John, Earl of Sutherland's mother, after
the death of his father, Alexander, Master of Sutherland. Sir Hugh
Kennedy being advertised of Mackay's coming into Sutherland, he advises
with Hutcheon Murray of Abirscors, and with Gilbert Gordon of Garty,
what was best to be done. They resolve to fight the enemy; and so having
gathered a company of men, they overtook Mackay, unawares, beside a
place called Alltan-Beath, where they invaded him suddenly; having
passed his spies unseen. After a little skirmish the Strathnaver men
fled, the booty was rescued, and John MacIan-MacAngus, one of their
chieftains, was slain, with divers of the Strathnaver men. Donald
Mackay, nevertheless, played the part of a good soldier; for in his
flight he killed, with his own hand, one William Sutherland, who most
eagerly pursued him in the chase. The inhabitants of Sutherland

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

and Strathnaver (in regard of Earl John's minority) did thus continually
vex one another, until this Donald Mackay was apprehended and imprisoned
in the Castle of Fowlis, in Ross, by commandment of the Queen Regent and
the Governor, where he continued a good while in captivity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conflict of Garbharry](fotc22)
