[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc07)  [Next](fotc09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Conflict of Clachnaharry</span>.

About the year of God 1341, John Munro, tutor of Fowlis, travelling
homeward on his journey from the south of Scotland, towards Ross, did
repose himself by the way, in Strathardale, betwixt Saint Johnstone and
Athole, where he fell at variance with the inhabitants of that country,
who had abused him, which he determined to revenge afterward. Being come
to Ross, he gathered together his whole kinsmen, neighbours, and
followers, and declared unto them how he had been used, and craves their
aid to revenge himself, whereunto they yield. Thereupon he singled out
350 of the strongest and ablest men among them, and so went to
Strathardale, which he wasted and spoiled, killed some of the people,
and carried away

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

their cattle. In his return home (as he was passing by the Isle of Moy
with his prey), Mackintosh, chieftain of the Clan Chattan, sent to him
to crave a part of the spoil, challenging the same as due to him by
custom. John Munro offered Mackintosh a reasonable portion, which he
refused to accept, and would have no less than the half of the whole
spoil, whereunto John would not yield. So Mackintosh, convening his
forces with all diligence, followed John Munro, and overtook him at
Clachnaharry, beside Kessock, within one mile of Inverness. John,
perceiving them coming, sent fifty of his men to Ferrindonnell with the
spoil, and encouraged the rest of his men to fight. So there ensued a
cruel conflict, where Mackintosh was slain with the most part of his
company. Divers of the Munroes were also killed, and John Munro left as
dead on the field; but after all was appeased, he was taken up by some
of the people thereabout, who carried him to their houses, where he
recovered of his wounds, and was afterwards called John Back-lawighe,
because he was mutilated of an hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Conflict of Clan Chattan and Clan Kay](fotc09)
