[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fotc17)  [Next](fotc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Feuds of the Clans*, by Alexander MacGregor, \[1907\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Conflict of Aldicharrish</span>.

The year of God 1487, this conflict was fought; upon this occasion Angus
Mackay being slain at Tarbat by the surname of Ross, as I have shown
already, John Riabhach Mackay (the son of this Angus), came to the Earl
of Sutherland, upon whom he then depended, and desired his aid to
revenge his father's death, whereunto the Earl of Sutherland yields, and
sent his uncle, Robert

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sutherland, with a
company of men, to assist him. Thereupon, Robert Sutherland and John
Riabhach Mackay did invade Strathoyckel and Strathcarron with fire and
sword; burnt, spoiled, and laid waste divers lands appertaining to the
Rosses. The laird of Balnagown (then chief of the Rosses in that shire)
learning of his invasion, gathered all the forces of Ross and met Robert
Sutherland and John Riabhach at a place called Aldicharrish. There
ensued a cruel and furious combat, which continued a long time, with
incredible obstinacy; much blood was shed on either side. In the end,
the inhabitants of Ross, being unable to endure or resist the enemies’
forces, were utterly disbanded and put to flight. Alexander Ross, Laird
of Balnagown, was slain with seventeen other landed gentlemen of the
province of Ross, besides a great number of common soldiers. The
manuscript of Fearn (by and attour Balnagown) names these following
among those that were slain. Mr. William Ross, Angus Macculloch of
Terrell, John Waus, William Waus, John Mitchell, Thomas Waus, Houcheon
Waus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Skirmish of Dail-Riabhach](fotc19)
