[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](how03)  [Next](how05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0762420189/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Harmonies of the World*, by Johannes Kepler, tr. Charles Glenn Wallis
\[1939\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. A SUMMARY OF ASTRONOMICAL DOCTRINE NECESSARY FOR SPECULATION INTO THE CELESTIAL HARMONIES

First of all, my readers should know that the ancient astronomical
hypotheses of Ptolemy, in the fashion in which they have been unfolded
in the *Theoricae* of Peurbach and by the other writers of epitomes, are
to be completely removed

<span id="page_1015">p. 1015</span>

from this discussion and cast out of \[275\] the mind. For they do not
convey the true lay out of the bodies of the world and the polity of the
movements.

Although I cannot do otherwise than to put solely Copernicus’ opinion
concerning the world in the place of those hypotheses and, if that were
possible, to persuade everyone of it; but because the thing is still new
among the mass of the intelligentsia \[*apud vulgus studiosorum*\], and
the doctrine that the Earth is one of the planets and moves among the
stars around a motionless sun sounds very absurd to the ears of most of
them: therefore those who are shocked by the unfamiliarity of this
opinion should know that these harmonical speculations are possible even
with the hypotheses of Tycho Brahe—because that author holds, in common
with Copernicus, everything else which pertains to the lay out of the
bodies and the tempering of the movements, and transfers solely the
Copernican annual movement of the Earth to the whole system of planetary
spheres and to the sun, which occupies the centre of that system, in the
opinion of both authors. For after this transference of movement it is
nevertheless true that in Brahe the Earth occupies at any time the same
place that Copernicus gives it, if not in the very vast and measureless
region of the fixed stars, at least in the system of the planetary
world. And accordingly, just as he who draws a circle on paper makes the
writing-foot of the compass revolve, while he who fastens the paper or
tablet to a turning lathe draws the same circle on the revolving tablet
with the foot of the compass or stylus motionless; so too, in the case
of Copernicus the Earth, by the real movement of its body, measures out
a circle revolving midway between the circle of Mars on the outside and
that of Venus on the inside; but in the case of Tycho Brahe the whole
planetary system (wherein among the rest the circles of Mars and Venus
are found) revolves like a tablet on a lathe and applies to the
motionless Earth, or to the stylus on the lathe, the midspace between
the circles of Mars and Venus; and it comes about from this movement of
the system that the Earth within it, although remaining motionless,
marks out the same circle around the sun and midway between Mars and
Venus, which in Copernicus it marks out by the real movement of its body
while the system is at rest. Therefore, since harmonic speculation
considers the eccentric movements of the planets, as if seen from the
sun, you may easily understand that if any observer were stationed on a
sun as much in motion as you please, nevertheless for him the Earth,
although at rest (as a concession to Brahe), would seem to describe the
annual circle midway between the planets and in an intermediate length
of time. Wherefore, if there is any man of such feeble wit that he
cannot grasp the movement of the earth among the stars, nevertheless he
can take pleasure in the most excellent spectacle of this most divine
construction, if he applies to their image in the sun whatever he hears
concerning the daily movements of the Earth in its eccentric—such an
image as Tycho Brahe exhibits, with the Earth at rest.

And nevertheless the followers of the true Samian philosophy have no
just cause to be jealous of sharing this delightful speculation with
such persons, because their joy will be in many ways more perfect, as
due to the consummate perfection of speculation, if they have accepted
the immobility of the sun and the movement of the earth.

Firstly \[I\], therefore, let my readers grasp that today it is
absolutely certain among all astronomers that all the planets revolve
around the sun, with the exception of the moon, which alone has the
Earth as its centre: the magnitude

<span id="page_1016">p. 1016</span>

of the moon's sphere or orbit is not great enough for it to be
delineated in this diagram in a just ratio to the rest. Therefore, to
the other five planets, a sixth, the Earth, is added, which traces a
sixth circle around the sun, whether by its own proper movement with the
sun at rest, or motionless itself and with the whole planetary system
revolving.

Secondly \[II\]: It is also certain that all the planets are eccentric,
*i.e.*, they change their distances from the <span
id="img_101600"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/101600.jpg"><img src="tn/101600.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

sun, in such fashion that in one part of their circle they become
farthest away from the sun, \[276\] and in the opposite part they come
nearest to the sun. In the accompanying diagram three circles apiece
have been drawn for the single planets: none of them indicate the
eccentric route of the planet itself; but the mean circle, such as *BE*
in the case of Mars, is equal to the eccentric orbit, with respect to
its longer diameter. But the orbit itself, such as *AD*, touches *AF*,
the upper of the three, in one place A, and the lower circle *CD*, in
the opposite place *D*. The circle *GH* made with dots and described
through the centre of the sun indicates the route of the sun according
to Tycho Brahe. And if the sun moves on this route, then absolutely all
the points in this whole planetary system here depicted advance upon an
equal route, each upon his own. And with one point of it (namely, the
centre of the sun) stationed at one point of its circle, as here at the
lowest, absolutely each and every point of the system will be stationed
at the lowest part of its circle. However, on account of the smallness
of the space the three circles of Venus unite in one, contrary to my
intention.

Thirdly \[III\]: Let the reader recall from my *Mysterium
Cosmographicum*, which I published twenty-two years ago, that the number
of the planets or circular routes around the sun was taken by the very
wise Founder from the five regular solids, concerning which Euclid, so
many ages ago, wrote his book which is called the Elements in that it is
built up out of a series of propositions. But it has been made clear in
the second book of this work that there cannot be more

<span id="page_1017">p. 1017</span>

regular bodies, *i.e.*, that regular plane figures cannot fit together
in a solid more than five times.

Fourthly \[IV\]: As regards the ratio of the planetary orbits, the ratio
between two neighbouring planetary orbits is always of such a magnitude
that it is easily apparent that each and every one of them approaches
the single ratio of the spheres of one of the five regular solids,
namely, that of the sphere circumscribing to the sphere inscribed in the
figure. Nevertheless it is not wholly equal, as I once dared to promise
concerning the final perfection of astronomy. For, after completing the
demonstration of the intervals from Brahe's observations, I discovered
the following: if the angles of the cube \[277\] are applied to the
inmost circle of Saturn, the centres of the planes are approximately
tangent to the middle circle of Jupiter; and if the angles of the
tetrahedron are placed against the inmost circle of Jupiter, the centres
of the planes of the tetrahedron are approximately tangent to the
outmost circle of Mars; thus if the angles of the octahedron are placed
against any circle of Venus (for the total interval between the three
has been very much reduced), the centres of the planes of the octahedron
penetrate and descend deeply within the outmost circle of Mercury, but
nonetheless do not reach as far as the middle circle of Mercury; and
finally, closest of all to the ratios of the dodecahedral and
icosahedral spheres—which ratios are equal to one another—are the ratios
or intervals between the circles of Mars and the Earth, and the Earth
and Venus; and those intervals are similarly equal, if we compute from
the inmost circle of Mars to the middle circle of the Earth, but from
the middle circle of the Earth to the middle circle of Venus. For the
middle distance of the Earth is a mean proportional between the least
distance of Mars and the middle distance of Venus. However, these two
ratios between the planetary circles are still greater than the ratios
of those two pairs of spheres in the figures, in such fashion that the
centres of the dodecahedral planes are not tangent to the outmost circle
of the Earth, and the centres of the icosahedral planes are not tangent
to the outmost circle of Venus; nor, however, can this gap be filled by
the semidiameter of the lunar sphere, by adding it, on the upper side,
to the greatest distance of the Earth and subtracting it, on the lower,
from the least distance of the same. But I find a certain other ratio of
figures—namely, if I take the augmented dodecahedron, to which I have
given the name of echinus, (as being fashioned from twelve quinquangular
stars and thereby very close to the five regular solids), if I take it,
I say, and place its twelve points in the inmost circle of Mars, then
the sides of the pentagons, which are the bases of the single rays or
points, touch the middle circle of Venus. In short: the cube and the
octahedron, which are consorts, do not penetrate their planetary spheres
at all; the dodecahedron and the icosahedron, which are consorts, do not
wholly reach to theirs, the tetrahedron exactly touches both: in the
first case there is falling short; in the second, excess; and in the
third, equality, with respect to the planetary intervals.

Wherefore it is clear that the very ratios of the planetary intervals
from the sun have not been taken from the regular solids alone. For the
Creator, who is the very source of geometry and, as Plato wrote,
"practices eternal geometry," does not stray from his own archetype. And
indeed that very thing could be inferred from the fact that all the
planets change their intervals throughout fixed periods of time, in such
fashion that each has two marked intervals from the sun, a greatest and
a least; and a fourfold comparison of the intervals from the

<span id="page_1018">p. 1018</span>

sun is possible between two planets: the comparison can be made between
either the greatest, or the least, or the contrary intervals most remote
from one another, or the contrary intervals nearest together. In this
way the comparisons made two by two between neighbouring planets are
twenty in number, although on the contrary there are only five regular
solids. But it is consonant that if the Creator had any concern for the
ratio of the spheres in general, He would also have had concern for the
ratio which exists between the varying intervals of the single planets
specifically and that the concern is the same in both cases and the one
is bound up with the other. If we ponder that, we will comprehend that
for setting up the diameters and eccentricities conjointly, there is
need of more principles, outside of the five regular solids.

Fifthly \[V\]: To arrive at the movements between which the consonances
have been set up, once more I impress upon the reader that in the
*Commentaries on Mars* I have demonstrated from the sure observations of
Brahe that daily arcs, which are equal in one and the same eccentric
circle, are not traversed with equal speed; but that these differing
*delays in equal parts of the eccentric observe the ratio of their
distances from the sun*, the source of movement; and conversely, that if
equal times are assumed, namely, one natural day in both cases, the
corresponding *true diurnal arcs* \[278\] *of one eccentric orbit have
to one another the ratio which is the inverse of the ratio of the two
distances from the sun*. Moreover, I demonstrated at the same time that
*the planetary orbit is elliptical and the sun, the source of movement,
is at one of the foci of this ellipse; and so, when the planet has
completed a quarter of its total circuit from its aphelion, then it is
exactly at its mean distance from the sun, midway between its greatest
distance at the aphelion and its least at the perihelion*. But from
these two axioms it results *that the diurnal mean movement of the
planet in its eccentric is the same as the true diurnal arc of its
eccentric at those moments wherein the planet is at the end of the
quadrant of the eccentric measured from the aphelion, although that true
quadrant appears still smaller than the just quadrant*. Furthermore, it
follows *that the sum of any two true diurnal eccentric arcs, one of
which is at the same [distance](errata.htm#1) from the aphelion that the
other is from the perihelion, is equal to the sum of the two mean
diurnal arcs*. And as a consequence, *since the ratio of circles is the
same as that of the diameters, the ratio of one mean diurnal arc to the
sum of all the mean and equal arcs in the total circuit is the same as
the ratio of the mean diurnal arc to the sum of all the true eccentric
arcs, which are the same in number but unequal to one another*. And
those things should first be known concerning the true diurnal arcs of
the eccentric and the true movements, so that by means of them we may
understand the movements which would be apparent if we were to suppose
an eye at the sun.

Sixthly \[VI\]: But as regards the arcs which are apparent, as it were,
from the sun, it is known even from the ancient astronomy that, among
true movements which are equal to one another, that movement which is
farther distant from the centre of the world (as being at the aphelion)
will appear smaller to a beholder at that centre, but the movement which
is nearer (as being at the perihelion) will similarly appear greater.
Therefore, since moreover the true diurnal arcs at the near distance are
still greater, on account of the faster movement, and still smaller at
the distant aphelion, on account of the slowness of the movement, I
demonstrated in the *Commentaries on Mars* that *the ratio of the
apparent diurnal arcs of one eccentric circle is fairly exactly the
inverse ratio of the squares of their distances from the sun*. For
example, if the planet one day when it is at

<span id="page_1019">p. 1019</span>

a distance from the sun of 10 parts, in any measure whatsoever, but on
the opposite day, when it is at the perihelion, of 9 similar parts: it
is certain that from the sun its apparent progress at the aphelion will
be to its apparent progress at the perihelion, as 81 : 100.

But that is true with these provisos: First, that the eccentric arcs
should not be great, lest they partake of distinct distances which are
very different—*i.e.*, lest the distances of their termini from the
apsides cause a perceptible variation; second, that the eccentricity
should not be very great, for the greater its eccentricity (*viz*., the
greater the arc becomes) the more the angle of its apparent movement
increases beyond the measure of its approach to the sun, by Theorem 8 of
Euclid's *Optics*; none the less in small arcs even a great distance is
of no moment, as I have remarked in my *Optics*, Chapter 11. But there
is another reason why I make that admonition. For the eccentric arcs
around the mean anomalies are viewed obliquely from the centre of the
sun. This obliquity subtracts from the magnitude of the apparent
movement, since conversely the arcs around the apsides are presented
directly to an eye stationed as it were at the sun. Therefore, when the
eccentricity is very great, then the eccentricity takes away perceptibly
from the ratio of the movements; if without any diminution we apply the
mean diurnal movement to the mean distance, as if at the mean distance,
it would appear to have the same magnitude which it does have—as will be
apparent below in the case of Mercury. All these things are treated at
greater length in Book V of the *Epitome of Copernican Astronomy*; but
they have been mentioned here too because they have to do with the very
terms of the celestial consonances, considered in themselves singly and
separately.

Seventhly \[VII\]: If by chance anyone runs into those diurnal movements
which are apparent \[279\] to those gazing not as it were from the sun
but from the Earth, with which movements Book VI of the *Epitome of
Copernican Astronomy* deals, he should know that their rationale is
plainly not considered in this business. Nor should it be, since the
Earth is not the source of the planetary movements, nor can it be, since
with respect to deception of sight they degenerate not only into mere
quiet or apparent stations but even into retrogradation, in which way a
whole infinity of ratios is assigned to all the planets, simultaneously
and equally. Therefore, in order that we may hold for certain what sort
of ratios of their own are constituted by the single real eccentric
orbits (although these too are still apparent, as it were to one looking
from the sun, the source of movement), first we must remove from those
movements of their own this image of the adventitious annual movement
common to all five, whether it arises from the movement of the Earth
itself, according to Copernicus, or from the annual movement of the
total system, according to Tycho Brahe, and the winnowed movements
proper to each planet are to be presented to sight.

Eighthly \[viii\]: So far we have dealt with the different delays or
arcs of one and the same planet. Now we must also deal with the
comparison of the movements of two planets. Here take note of the
definitions of the terms which will be necessary for us. We give the
name of *nearest apsides* of two planets to the perihelion of the upper
and the aphelion of the lower, notwithstanding that they tend not
towards the same region of the world but towards distinct and perhaps
contrary regions. By *extreme movements* understand the slowest and the
fastest of the whole planetary circuit; by *converging or converse
extreme movements*, those which are at the nearest apsides of two
planets—namely, at the

<span id="page_1020">p. 1020</span>

perihelion of the upper planet and the aphelion of the lower; by
*diverging or diverse*, those at the opposite apsides—namely, the
aphelion of the upper and the perihelion of the lower. Therefore again,
a certain part of my *Mysterium Cosmographicum*, which was suspended
twenty-two years ago, because it was not yet clear, is to be completed
and herein inserted. For after finding the true intervals of the spheres
by the observations of Tycho Brahe and continuous labour and much time,
at last, at last the right ratio of the periodic times to the spheres

*though it was late, looked to the unskilled man,  
yet looked to him, and, after much time, came*,

and, if you want the exact time, was conceived mentally on the 8th of
March in this year One Thousand Six Hundred and Eighteen but
unfelicitously submitted to calculation and rejected as false, finally,
summoned back on the 15th of May, with a fresh assault undertaken,
outfought the darkness of my mind by the great proof afforded by my
labor of seventeen years on Brahe's observations and meditation upon it
uniting in one concord, in such fashion that I first believed I was
dreaming and was presupposing the object of my search among the
principles. But it is absolutely certain and exact that *the ratio which
exists between the periodic times of any two planets is precisely the
ratio of the 3/2th power of the mean distances*, *i.e.*, *of the spheres
themselves*; provided, however, that the arithmetic mean between both
diameters of the elliptic orbit be slightly less than the longer
diameter. And so if any one take the period, say, of the Earth, which is
one year, and the period of Saturn, which is thirty years, and extract
the cube roots of this ratio and then square the ensuing ratio by
squaring the cube roots, he will have as his numerical products the most
just ratio of the distances of the Earth and Saturn from the sun. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) For the cube root of 1 is 1, and the square
of it is 1; and the cube root of 30 is greater than 3, and therefore the
square of it is greater than 9. And Saturn, at its mean distance from
the sun, is slightly higher \[280\] than nine times the mean distance of
the Earth from the sun. Further on, in Chapter 9, the use of this
theorem will be necessary for the demonstration of the eccentricities.

Ninthly \[IX\]: If now you wish to measure with the same yardstick, so
to speak, the true daily journeys of each planet through the ether, two
ratios are to be compounded—the ratio of the true (not the apparent)
diurnal arcs of the eccentric, and the ratio of the mean intervals of
each planet from the sun (because that is the same as the ratio of the
amplitude of the spheres), *i.e.*, *the true diurnal arc of each planet
is to be multiplied by the semidiameter of its sphere*: the products
will be numbers fitted for investigating whether or not those journeys
are in harmonic ratios.

Tenthly \[X\]: In order that you may truly know how great any one of
these diurnal journeys appears to be to an eye stationed as it were at
the sun, although this same thing can be got immediately from the
astronomy, nevertheless it will also be manifest if you multiply the
ratio of the journeys by the inverse ratio not of the mean, but of the
true intervals which exist at any position on

<span id="page_1021">p. 1021</span>

the eccentrics: *multiply the journey of the upper by the interval of
the lower planet from the sun, and conversely multiply the journey of
the lower by the interval of the upper from the sun*.

Eleventhly \[XI\]: And in the same way, if the apparent movements are
given, at the aphelion of the one and at the perihelion of the other, or
conversely or alternately, the ratios of the distances of the aphelion
of the one to the perihelion of the other may be elicited. But where the
mean movements must be known first, *viz*., the inverse ratio of the
periodic times, wherefrom the ratio of the spheres is elicited by
Article VIII above: then *if the mean proportional between the apparent
movement of either one of its mean movement be taken, this mean
proportional is to the semidiameter of its sphere* (which is already
known) *as the mean movement is to the distance or interval sought*. Let
the periodic times of two planets be 27 and 8. Therefore the ratio of
the mean diurnal movement of the one to the other is 8 : 27. Therefore
the semidiameters of their spheres will be as 9 to 4. For the cube root
of 27 is 3, that of 8 is 2, and the squares of these roots, 3 and 2, are
9 and 4. Now let the apparent aphelial movement of the one be 2 and the
perihelial movement of the other 33⅓. The mean proportionals between the
mean movements 8 and 27 and these apparent ones will be 4 and 30.
Therefore if the mean proportional 4 gives the mean distance of 9 to the
planet, then the mean movement of 8 gives an aphelial distance 18, which
corresponds to the apparent movement 2; and if the other mean
proportional 30 gives the other planet a mean distance of 4, then its
mean movement of 27 will give it a perihelial interval of 3 3/5. I say,
therefore, that the aphelial distance of the former is to the perihelial
distance of the latter as 18 to 3 3/5. Hence it is clear that if the
consonances between the extreme movements of two planets are found and
the periodic times are established for both, the extreme and the mean
distances are necessarily given, wherefore also the eccentricities.

Twelfthly \[XII\]: It is also possible, from the different extreme
movements of one and the same planet, to find the *mean movement*. The
mean movement is not exactly the arithmetic mean between the extreme
movements, nor exactly the geometric mean, but it is as much less than
the geometric mean as the geometric mean is less than the \[arithmetic\]
mean between both means. Let the two extreme movements be 8 and 10: the
mean movement will be less than 9, and also less than the square root of
80 by half the difference between 9 and the square root of 80. In this
way, if the aphelial movement is 20 and the perihelial 24, the mean
movement will be less than 22, even less than the square root of 480 by
half the difference between that root and 22. There is use for this
theorem in what follows.

\[281\] Thirteenthly \[XIII\]: From the foregoing the following
proposition is demonstrated, which is going to be very necessary for us:
Just as the ratio of the mean movements of two planets is the inverse
ratio of the 3/2th powers of the spheres, so the ratio of two apparent
converging extreme movements always falls short of the ratio of the
3/2th powers of the intervals corresponding to those extreme movements;
and in what ratio the product of the two ratios of the corresponding
intervals to the two mean intervals or to the semidiameters of the two
spheres falls short of the ratio of the square roots of the spheres, in
that ratio does the ratio of the two extreme converging movements exceed
the ratio of the corresponding intervals; but if that compound ratio
were to exceed the

<span id="page_1022">p. 1022</span>

ratio of the square roots of the spheres, then the ratio of the
converging movements would be less than the ratio of their
intervals. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

Let the ratio of the spheres be *DH* : *AE*; let the ratio of the mean
movements be *HI* : *EM*, the 3/2th power of the inverse of the former.
<span id="img_102200"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/102200.jpg"><img src="tn/102200.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Let the least interval of the sphere of the first be *CG*; and the
greatest interval of the sphere of the second be *BF*; and first let
*DH* : *CG* comp. *BF* : *AE* be smaller than the ½th power of *DH* :
*AE*. And let *GH* be the apparent perihelial movement of the upper
planet, and *FL* the aphelial of the lower, so that they are converging
extreme movements.

I say that

*GK* : *FL* = *BF* : *CG*  
            *BF*<sup>3/2</sup> : *CG*<sup>3/2</sup>.

For

*HI* : *GK* =*CG*<sup>2</sup> : *DH*<sup>2</sup>;

and

*FL* : *EM* =*AE*<sup>2</sup> : *BF*<sup>2</sup>.

Hence

*HI* : *GK* comp. *FL* : *EM* = *CG*<sup>2</sup> : *DH*<sup>2</sup>
comp. *AE*<sup>2</sup> : *BF*2.

But

*CG* : *DH* comp. *AE* : *BF* &lt; *AE*<sup>½</sup> : *DH*<sup>½</sup>

by a fixed ratio of defect, as was assumed. Therefore too

*HI* : *GK* comp. *FL* : *EM*   *AE*<sup>2/2</sup> :
*DH*<sup>2/2</sup>  
                             *AE* : *DH*

by a ratio of defect which is the square of the former. But by number
VIII

*HI* : *EM* = *AE*<sup>3/2</sup> : *DH*<sup>3/2</sup>.

Therefore let the ratio which is smaller by the total square of the
ratio of defect be divided into the ratio of the 3/2th powers; that is,

*HI* : *EM* comp. *GK* : *HI* comp. *EM* : *FL* *AE*<sup>½</sup> :
*DH*<sup>½</sup>

by the excess squared. But

*HI* : *EM* comp. *GK* : *HI* comp. *EM* : *FL* = *GK* : *FL*.

Therefore

*GK* : *FL*   *AE*<sup>½</sup> : *DH*<sup>½</sup>

by the excess squared. But

*AE* : *DH* = *AE* : *BF* comp. *BF* :*CG* comp. *CG* :*DM*;

And

*CG* : *DH* comp. *AE* : *BF*    *AE*<sup>½</sup> : *DH*<sup>½</sup>

by the simple defect. Therefore

*BF* : *CG*    *AE*<sup>½</sup> : *DH*<sup>½</sup>

by the simple excess. But

*GK* : *FL*    *AE*<sup>½</sup> : *DT*<sup>½</sup>

but by the excess squared. But the excess squared is greater than the
simple excess. Therefore the ratio of the movements *GK* to *FL* is
greater than the ratio of the corresponding intervals *BF* to *CG*.

<span id="page_1023">p. 1023</span>

In fully the same way, it is demonstrated even contrariwise that if the
planets approach one another in G and F beyond the mean distances in *H*
and *E*, in such fashion that the ratio of the mean distances *DH* :
*AE* becomes less than *DH*<sup>½</sup> : *AE*<sup>½</sup>, then the
ratio of the movements *GK* : *FL* becomes less than the ratio of the
corresponding intervals *BF*: *CG*. For you need to do nothing more than
to change the words *greater* to *less*, &gt; to &lt;, *excess* to
*defect*, and conversely.

In suitable numbers, because the square root of 4/9 is 2/3; and 5/8 is
even greater than 2/3 by the ratio of excess 15/16; and the square of
the ratio 8 : 9 \[282\] is the ratio 1600 : 2025, *i.e.*, 64 : 81; and
the square of the ratio 4 : 5 is the ratio 3456 : 5400, *i.e.*, 16 : 25;
and finally the 3/2th power of the ratio 4 : 9 is the ratio 1600 : 5400,
*i.e.*, 8 : 27: therefore too the ratio 2025 : 3456, *i.e.*, 75 : 128,
is even greater than 5 : 8, *i.e.*, 75 : 120, by the same ratio of
excess (*i.e.*, 120 : 128), 15 : 16; whence 2025 : 3456, the ratio of
the converging movements, exceeds 5 : 8, the inverse ratio of the
corresponding intervals, by as much as 5 : 8 exceeds 2 : 3, the square
root of the ratio of the spheres. Or, what amounts to the same thing,
the ratio of the two converging intervals is a mean between the ratio of
the square roots of the spheres and the inverse ratio of the
corresponding movements.

Moreover, from this you may understand that the ratio of the diverging
movements is much greater than the ratio of the 3/2th powers of the
spheres, since the ratio of the 3/2th powers is compounded with the
squares of the ratio of the aphelial interval to the mean interval, and
that of the mean to the perihelial.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1020:1](how04.htm#fr_0) For in the *Commentaries
on Mars*, chapter 48, page 232, I have proved that this Arithmetic mean
is either the diameter of the circle which is equal in length to the
elliptic orbit, or else is very slightly less.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1022:1](how04.htm#fr_1) Kepler always measures
the magnitude of a ratio from the greater term to the smaller, rather
than from the antecedent to the consequent, as we do today. For example,
as Kepler speaks, 2 : 3 is the same as 3 : 2, and 3 : 4 is greater than
7 : 8.—C. G. Wallis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. In What Things Having To Do With the Planetary Movements Have
the Harmonic Consonances Been Expressed By the Creator, and In What
Way?](how05)
