[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](how00)  [Next](how02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0762420189/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Harmonies of the World*, by Johannes Kepler, tr. Charles Glenn Wallis
\[1939\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1009">p. 1009</span>

### THE HARMONIES OF THE WORLD

### by Johannes Kepler

*Concerning the very perfect harmony of the celestial movements, and the
genesis of eccentricities and the semidiameters, and the periodic times
from the same*.

After the model of the most correct astronomical doctrine of today, and
the hypothesis not only of Copernicus but also of Tycho Brahe, whereof
either hypotheses are today publicly accepted as most true, and the
Ptolemaic as outmoded.

*I commence a sacred discourse, a most true hymn to God the Founder, and
I judge it to be piety, not to sacrifice many hecatombs of bulls to Him
and to burn incense of innumerable perfumes and cassia, but first to
learn myself, and afterwards to teach others too, how great He is in
wisdom, how great in power, and of what sort in goodness. For to wish to
adorn in every way possible the things that should receive adornment and
to envy no thing its goods—this I put down as the sign of the greatest
goodness, and in this respect I praise Him as good that in the heights
of His wisdom He finds everything whereby each thing may be adorned to
the utmost and that He can do by his unconquerable power all that he has
decreed*.

GALEN, *on the Use of Parts*. Book III

### PROEM

\[268\] As regards that which I prophesied two and twenty years ago
(especially that the five regular solids are found between the celestial
spheres), as regards that of which I was firmly persuaded in my own mind
before I had seen Ptolemy's *Harmonies*, as regards that which I
promised my friends in the title of this fifth book before I was sure of
the thing itself, that which, sixteen years ago, in a published
statement, I insisted must be investigated, for the sake of which I
spent the best part of my life in astronomical speculations, visited
Tycho Brahe, \[269\] and took up residence at Prague: finally, as God
the Best and Greatest, Who had inspired my mind and aroused my great
desire, prolonged my life and strength of mind and furnished the other
means through the liberality of the two Emperors and the nobles of this
province of Austria-on-the-Anisana: after I had discharged my
astronomical duties as much as sufficed, finally, I say, I brought it to
light and found it to be truer than I had even hoped, and I discovered
among the celestial movements the full nature of harmony, in its due
measure, together with all its parts unfolded in Book III—not in that
mode wherein I had conceived it in my mind (this is not last in my joy)
but in a very different mode which is also very excellent and very
perfect. There took place in this intervening time, wherein the very
laborious reconstruction of the movements held me in suspense, an
extraordinary augmentation of my desire and incentive for the job, a
reading of the *Harmonies* of Ptolemy, which had

<span id="page_1010">p. 1010</span>

been sent to me in manuscript by John George Herward, Chancellor of
Bavaria, a very distinguished man and of a nature to advance philosophy
and every type of learning. There, beyond my expectations and with the
greatest wonder, I found approximately the whole third book given over
to the same consideration of celestial harmony, fifteen hundred years
ago. But indeed astronomy was far from being of age as yet; and Ptolemy,
in an unfortunate attempt, could make others subject to despair, as
being one who, like Scipio in Cicero, seemed to have recited a pleasant
Pythagorean dream rather than to have aided philosophy. But both the
crudeness of the ancient philosophy and this exact agreement in our
meditations, down to the last hair, over an interval of fifteen
centuries, greatly strengthened me in getting on with the job. For what
need is there of many men? The very nature of things, in order to reveal
herself to mankind, was at work in the different interpreters of
different ages, and was the finger of God—to use the Hebrew expression;
and here, in the minds of two men, who had wholly given themselves up to
the contemplation of nature, there was the same conception as to the
configuration of the world, although neither had been the other's guide
in taking this route. But now since the first light eight months ago,
since broad day three months ago, and since the sun of my wonderful
speculation has shone fully a very few days ago: nothing holds me back.
I am free to give myself up to the sacred madness, I am free to taunt
mortals with the frank confession that I am stealing the golden vessels
of the Egyptians, in order to build of them a temple for my God, far
from the territory of Egypt. If you pardon me, I shall rejoice; if you
are enraged, I shall bear up. The die is cast, and I am writing the
book—whether to be read by my contemporaries or by posterity matters
not. Let it await its reader for a hundred years, if God Himself has
been ready for His contemplator for six thousand years.

The chapters of this book are as follows:

1\. Concerning the five regular solid figures.

2\. On the kinship between them and the harmonic ratios.

3\. Summary of astronomical doctrine necessary for speculation into the
celestial harmonies.

4\. In what things pertaining to the planetary movements the simple
consonances have been expressed and that all those consonances which are
present in song are found in the heavens.

5\. That the clefs of the musical scale, or pitches of the system, and
the genera of consonances, the major and the minor, are expressed in
certain movements.

6\. That the single musical Tones or Modes are somehow expressed by the
single planets.

7\. That the counterpoints or universal harmonies of all the planets can
exist and be different from one another.

8\. That four kinds of voice are expressed in the planets: soprano,
contralto, tenor, and bass.

\[270\] 9. Demonstration that in order to secure this harmonic
arrangement, those very planetary eccentricities which any planet has as
its own, and no others, had to be set up.

10\. Epilogue concerning the sun, by way of very fertile conjectures.

<span id="page_1011">p. 1011</span>

Before taking up these questions, it is my wish to impress upon my
readers the very exhortation of Timaeus, a pagan philosopher, who was
going to speak on the same things: it should be learned by Christians
with the greatest admiration, and shame too, if they do not imitate him:
Ἀλλ᾽ ὦ Σὼκρατες, τοῦτο γε δὴ πντες ὅσοι καὶ κατὰ βραχὺ σωφροσύνης
μετέχουσιν, ἐπὶ πασῇ ὁρμῇ καὶ σμίκροῦ καὶ μεγάλου πράγματος θεὸν ἀει που
καοῦσιν. ἡμᾶς δὲ τοὺς περὶ τοῦ πὰντος λόγους ποιεῖσθαι πῃ μέλλοντας. . .
, εἰ μὴ πανταπασι παραλλάττομεν, ἀνάγκη θεοὺς τε καὶ θεὰς ἐπικαλουμενους
εὔχεσθαι πάντα, κατὰ νοῦν ἐκεῖνοις μἑν μάλιστα, ἑπομένως δέ ἠμῖν εἰπεῖν.
*For truly, Socrates, since all who have the least particle of
intelligence always invoke God whenever they enter upon any business,
whether light or arduous; so too, unless we have clearly strayed away
from all sound reason, we who intend to have a discussion concerning the
universe must of necessity make our sacred wishes and pray to the Gods
and Goddesses with one mind that we may say such things as will please
and be acceptable to them in especial and, secondly, to you too*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Concerning the Five Regular Solid Figures](how02)
