[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010634)  [Next](0010636) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xxv"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Plato’s knowledge of God’s eternity.

<span id="viii.vi.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xxv-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.vi.xxv-p1.2"></span>How,
then, does Plato blame Homer for saying that the gods are not
inflexible, although, as is obvious from the expressions used, Homer
said this for a useful purpose? For it is the property of those who
expect to obtain mercy by prayer and sacrifices, to cease from and
repent of their sins. For those who think that the Deity is inflexible,
are by no means moved to abandon their sins, since they suppose that
they will derive no benefit from repentance. How, then, does Plato the
philosopher condemn the poet Homer for saying, “Even the gods themselves
are not inflexible,” and yet himself represent the maker of the gods as
so easily turned, that he sometimes declares the gods to be mortal, and
at other times declares the same to be immortal? And not only concerning
them, but also concerning matter, from which, as he says, it is
necessary that the created gods have been produced, he sometimes says
that it is uncreated, and at other times that it is created; and yet he
does not see that he himself, when he says that the maker of the gods is
so easily turned, is convicted of having fallen into the very errors for
which he blames Homer, though Homer said the very opposite concerning
the maker of the gods. For he said that he spoke thus of himself:—

> <span id="viii.vi.xxv-p1.3"></span>“For ne’er my promise shall
> deceive, or fail,  
> Or be recall’d, if with a nod confirm’d.” <span
> id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558)  

<span id="viii.vi.xxv-p3"></span>But Plato, as it seems, unwillingly
entered not these strange dissertations concerning the gods, for he
feared those who were attached to polytheism. <span
id="viii.vi.xxv-p3.1"></span>And whatever he thinks fit to tell of all
that he had learned from Moses and the prophets concerning one God, he
preferred delivering in a mystical style, so that those who desired to
be worshippers of God might have an inkling of his own opinion. For
being charmed with that saying of God to Moses, “I am the really
existing,” and accepting with a great deal of thought the brief
participial expression, he understood that God desired to signify to
Moses His eternity, and therefore said, “I am the really existing;” for
this word “existing” expresses not one time only, but the three—the
past, the present, and the future. For when Plato says, “and which never
really is,” he uses the verb “is” of time indefinite. For the word
“never” is not spoken, as some suppose, of the past, but of the future
time. And this has been accurately understood even by profane writers.
And therefore, when Plato wished, as it were, to interpret to the
uninitiated what had been mystically expressed by the participle
concerning the eternity of God, he employed the following language: “God
indeed, as the old tradition runs, includes the beginning, and end, and
middle of all things.” In this sentence he plainly and obviously names
the law of Moses “the old tradition,” fearing, through dread of the
hemlock-cup, to mention the name of Moses; for he understood that the
teaching of the man was hateful to the Greeks; and he clearly enough
indicates Moses by the antiquity of the tradition. And we have
sufficiently proved from Diodorus and the rest of the historians, in the
foregoing chapters, that the law of Moses is not only old, but even the
first. For Diodorus says that he was the first of all lawgivers; the
letters which belong to the Greeks, and which they employed in the
writing of their histories, having not yet been discovered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[283:2559](0010635.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="viii.vi.xxv-p1.6"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxv-p2"></span> *Iliad*, i. 526.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI.—Plato indebted to the...](0010636)
