[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010415)  [Next](0010417) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.xliii"></span>

### <span id="viii.ii.xliii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.—Responsibility asserted.

<span id="viii.ii.xliii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xliii-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.ii.xliii-p1.2"></span>But
lest some suppose, from what has been said by us, that we say that
whatever happens, happens by a fatal necessity, because it is foretold
as known beforehand, this too we explain. We have learned from the
prophets, and we hold it to be true, that punishments, and
chastisements, and good rewards, are rendered according to the merit of
each man’s actions. Since if it be not so, but all things happen by
fate, neither is anything at all in our own power. For if it be fated
that this man, e.g., be good, and this other evil, neither is the former
meritorious nor the latter to be blamed. And again, unless the human
race have the power of avoiding evil and choosing good by free choice,
they are not accountable for their actions, of whatever kind they be.
But that it is by free choice they both walk uprightly and stumble, we
thus demonstrate. We see the same man making a transition to opposite
things. Now, if it had been fated that he were to be either good or bad,
he could never have been capable of both the opposites, nor of so many
transitions. But not even would some be good and others bad, since we
thus make fate the cause of evil, and exhibit her as acting in
opposition to herself; or that which has been already stated would seem
to be true, that neither virtue nor vice is anything, but that things
are only reckoned good or evil by opinion; which, as the true word
shows, is the greatest impiety and wickedness. But this we assert is
inevitable fate, that they who choose the good have worthy rewards, and
they who choose the opposite have their merited awards. For not like
other things, as trees and quadrupeds, which cannot act by choice, did
God make man: for neither would he be worthy of reward or praise did he
not of himself choose the good, but were created for this end; <span
id="fr_1854"></span>[1855](#fn_1854) nor, if he were evil, would he be
worthy of punishment, not being evil of himself, but being able to be
nothing else than what he was made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[177:1855](0010416.htm#fr_1854) <span
id="viii.ii.xliii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.xliii-p2"></span> Or, “but were made so.” The words
are, <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.xliii-p2.1"></span>ἀλλὰ τοῦτο
γενόμενος</span> and the meaning of Justin is sufficiently clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV.—Not nullified by...](0010417)
