[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010696)  [Next](0010698) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.i"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.i-p0.1"></span>Preface.

<span id="ix.ii.i-p1"></span>1. <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Inasmuch</span> <span
id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654) as certain men have set the truth
aside, and bring in lying words and vain genealogies, which, as the
apostle says, <span id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) “minister
questions rather than godly edifying which is in faith,” and by means of
their craftily-constructed plausibilities draw away the minds of the
inexperienced and take them captive, \[I have felt constrained, my dear
friend, to compose the following treatise in order to expose and
counteract their machinations.\] These men falsify the oracles of God,
and prove themselves evil interpreters of the good word of revelation.
They also overthrow the faith of many, by drawing them away, under a
pretence of \[superior\] knowledge, from Him who rounded and adorned the
universe; as if, forsooth, they had something more excellent and sublime
to reveal, than that God who created the heaven and the earth, and all
things that are therein. By means of specious and plausible words, they
cunningly allure the simple-minded to inquire into their system; but
they nevertheless clumsily destroy them, while they initiate them into
their blasphemous and impious opinions respecting the Demiurge; <span
id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656) and these simple ones are unable,
even in such a matter, to distinguish falsehood from truth.

<span id="ix.ii.i-p5"></span>2. <span id="ix.ii.i-p5.1"></span>Error,
indeed, is never set forth in its naked deformity, lest, being thus
exposed, it should at once be detected. But it is craftily decked out in
an attractive dress, so as, by its outward form, to make it appear to
the inexperienced (ridiculous as the expression may seem) more true than
the truth itself. One <span id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) far
superior to me has well said, in reference to this point, “A clever
imitation in glass casts contempt, as it were, on that precious jewel
the emerald (which is most highly esteemed by some), unless it come
under the eye of one able to test and expose the counterfeit. Or, again,
what inexperienced person can with ease detect the presence of brass
when it has been mixed up with silver?” Lest, therefore, through my
neglect, some should be carried off, even as sheep are by wolves, while
they perceive not the true character of these men,—because they
outwardly are covered with sheep’s clothing (against whom the Lord has
enjoined <span id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658) us to be on our
guard), and because their language resembles ours, while their
sentiments are very different,—I have deemed it my duty (after reading
some of the *Commentaries*, as they call them, of the disciples of
Valentinus, and after making myself acquainted with their tenets through
personal intercourse with some of them) to unfold to thee, my friend,
these portentous and profound mysteries, which do not fall within the
range of every intellect, because all have not sufficiently purged <span
id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659) their brains. I do this, in order
that thou, obtaining an acquaintance with these things, mayest in turn
explain them to all those with whom thou art connected, and exhort them
to avoid such an abyss of madness and of blasphemy against Christ. I
intend, then, to the best of my ability, with brevity and clearness to
set forth the opinions of those who are now <span id="page_316">p.
316</span> <span id="ix.ii.i-Page_316"></span> promulgating heresy. I
refer especially to the disciples of Ptolemæus, whose school may be
described as a bud from that of Valentinus. I shall also endeavour,
according to my moderate ability, to furnish the means of overthrowing
them, by showing how absurd and inconsistent with the truth are their
statements. Not that I am practised either in composition or eloquence;
but my feeling of affection prompts me to make known to thee and all thy
companions those doctrines which have been kept in concealment until
now, but which are at last, through the goodness of God, brought to
light. “For there is nothing hidden which shall not be revealed, nor
secret that shall not be made known.” <span
id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660)

<span id="ix.ii.i-p10"></span>3. <span id="ix.ii.i-p10.1"></span>Thou
wilt not expect from me, who am resident among the Keltæ, <span
id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661) and am accustomed for the most part
to use a barbarous dialect, any display of rhetoric, which I have never
learned, or any excellence of composition, which I have never practised,
or any beauty and persuasiveness of style, to which I make no
pretensions. But thou wilt accept in a kindly spirit what I in a like
spirit write to thee simply, truthfully, and in my own homely way;
whilst thou thyself (as being more capable than I am) wilt expand those
ideas of which I send thee, as it were, only the seminal principles; and
in the comprehensiveness of thy understanding, wilt develop to their
full extent the points on which I briefly touch, so as to set with power
before thy companions those things which I have uttered in weakness. In
fine, as I (to gratify thy long-cherished desire for information
regarding the tenets of these persons) have spared no pains, not only to
make these doctrines known to thee, but also to furnish the means of
showing their falsity; so shalt thou, according to the grace given to
thee by the Lord, prove an earnest and efficient minister to others,
that men may no longer be drawn away by the plausible system of these
heretics, which I now proceed to describe. <span
id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[315:2655](0010697.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p2"></span> The Greek original of the work of Irenæus
is from time to time recovered through the numerous quotations made from
it by subsequent writers, especially by the author’s pupil Hippolytus,
and by Epiphanius. The latter preserves (*Hær.* xxxi. secs. 9–32) the
preface of Irenæus, and most of the first book. An important difference
of reading occurs between the Latin and Greek in the very first word.
The translator manifestly read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.i-p2.1"></span>ἐπεί</span>, *quatenus*, while in Epiphanius we
find <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.i-p2.2"></span>ἐπί</span>,
*against*. The former is probably correct, and has been followed in our
version. We have also supplied a clause, in order to avoid the extreme
length of the sentence in the original, which runs on without any
apodosis to the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.i-p2.3"></span>ἀναγκαῖον ἡγησάμην</span>, “I have judged it
necessary.”

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[315:2656](0010697.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p2.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p3"></span> [1 Tim. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004)<span id="ix.ii.i-p3.1"></span>. The
Latin has here *genealogias infinitas*, “endless genealogies,” as in
*textus receptus* of New Testament.

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[315:2657](0010697.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p4"></span> As will be seen by and by, this fancied
being was, in the Valentinian system, the creator of the material
universe, but far inferior to the supreme ruler Bythus.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[315:2658](0010697.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p6"></span> There are frequent references to Irenæus
to some venerable men who had preceded him in the Church. It is supposed
that Pothinus, whom he succeeded at Lyons, is generally meant; but the
reference may sometimes be to Polycarp, with whom in early life he had
been acquainted. \[On this matter of quotations from anonymous authors
of the apostolic times, not infrequently made by Irenæus, consult the
important tractate of Dr. Routh, in his *Reliquiæ Sacræ*, vol. i.
45–68.\]

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[315:2659](0010697.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p7"></span> Comp. [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span id="ix.ii.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[315:2660](0010697.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p8"></span> The original is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.i-p8.1"></span>ἐγκέφαλον ἐξεπτύκασιν</span>, which the Latin
translator renders simply, “have not sufficient brains.” He probably
followed a somewhat different reading. Various emendations have been
proposed, but the author may be understood by the ordinary text to be
referring ironically to the boasted subtlety and sublimity of the
Gnostics.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[316:2661](0010697.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p9"></span> [Matt. x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026)<span id="ix.ii.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[316:2662](0010697.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p11"></span> As Cæsar informs us (*Comm.*, i. 1), Gaul
was divided into three parts, one of which was called Celtic Gaul, lying
between the Seine and the Garonne. Of this division Lyons is the
principal city.

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[316:2663](0010697.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="ix.ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.i-p12"></span> \[The reader will find a logical and easy
introduction to the crabbed details which follow, by turning to chap.
xxiii., and reading through succeeding chapters down to chap. xxix.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I.—Absurd ideas of the...](0010698)
