[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010744)  [Next](0010746.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xvi"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—No account can be given of these productions.

<span id="ix.iii.xvi-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xvi-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.iii.xvi-p1.3"></span>But let us return to the fore-mentioned
question as to the production \[of the Æons\]. And, in the first place,
let them tell us the reason of the production of the Æons being of such
a kind that they do not come in contact with any of those things which
belong to creation. For they maintain that those things \[above\] were
not made on account of creation, but creation on account of them; and
that the former are not images of the latter, but the latter of the
former. As, therefore, they render a reason for the images, by saying
that the month has thirty days on account of the thirty Æons, and the
day twelve hours, and the year twelve months, on account of the twelve
Æons which are within the Pleroma, with other such nonsense of the same
kind, let them now tell us also the reason for that production of the
Æons, why it was of such a nature, for what reason the first and
first-begotten *Ogdoad* was sent forth, and not a Pentad, or a Triad, or
a Septenad, or any one of those which are defined by a different number?
Moreover, how did it come to pass, that from Logos and Zoe were sent
forth ten Æons, and neither more nor less; while again from Anthropos
and Ecclesia proceeded twelve, although these might have been either
more or less numerous?

<span id="ix.iii.xvi-p2"></span>2. And then, again, with reference to
the entire Pleroma, what reason is there that it should be divided into
these three —an Ogdoad, a Decad, and a Duodecad—and not into some other
number different from these? Moreover, with respect to the division
itself, why has it been made into *three* parts, and not into four, or
five, or six, or into some other number among those which have no
connection with such numbers <span id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067.md)
as belong to creation? For they describe those \[Æons above\] as being
more ancient than these \[created things below\], and it behoves them to
possess their principle \[of being\] in themselves, one which existed
before creation, and not after the pattern of creation, all exactly
agreeing as to the point. <span id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068.md)

<span id="ix.iii.xvi-p5"></span>3. The account which we give of creation
is one harmonious with that regular order \[of things prevailing in the
world\], for this scheme of ours is adapted to the <span
id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069.md) things which have \[actually\] been
made; but it is a matter of necessity that they, being unable to assign
any reason belonging to the things themselves, with regard to those
beings that existed before \[creation\], and were perfected by
themselves, should fall into the greatest perplexity. For, as to the
points on which they interrogate us as knowing nothing of creation, they
themselves, when questioned in turn respecting the Pleroma, either make
mention of mere human feelings, or have recourse to that sort of speech
which bears only upon that harmony observable in creation, improperly
giving us replies concerning things which are secondary, and not
concerning those which, as they maintain, are primary. For we do not
question them concerning that harmony which belongs to creation, nor
concerning human feelings; but because they must acknowledge, as to
their octiform, deciform, and duodeciform Pleroma (the image of which
they declare creation to be), that their Father formed it of that figure
vainly and thoughtlessly, and must ascribe to Him deformity, if He made
anything without a reason. Or, again, if they declare that the Pleroma
was so produced in accordance with the foresight of the Father, for the
sake of creation, as if He had thus symmetrically arranged its very
essence, then it follows that the Pleroma can no longer be regarded as
having been formed on its own account, but for the sake of that
\[creation\] which was to be its image as possessing its likeness (just
as the clay model is not moulded for its own sake, but for the sake of
the statue in brass, or gold, or silver about to be formed), then
creation will have greater honour than the Pleroma, if, for its sake,
those things \[above\] were produced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[379:3068](0010745.htm#fr_3067.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xvi-p3"></span> Referring to numbers like 4, 5, 6,
which do not correspond to any important fact in creation, as 7 e.g.,
does to the number of the planets.

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[379:3069](0010745.htm#fr_3068.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xvi-p4"></span> The Latin text is here scarcely
intelligible, and is variously pointed by the editors.

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[379:3070](0010745.htm#fr_3069.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xvi-p6"></span> Harvey explains “his” as here denoting
“in his,” but we are at a loss to know how he would translate the
passage. It is in the highest degree obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.—The Creator of the...](0010746.md)
