[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010636)  [Next](0010638) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xxvii"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Plato’s knowledge of the judgment.

<span id="viii.vi.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>And in the tenth book he plainly and
manifestly wrote what he had learned from the prophets about the
judgment, not as if he had learned it from them, but, on account of his
fear of the Greeks, as if he had heard it from a man who has been slain
in battle—for this story he thought fit to invent—and who, when he was
about to be buried on the twelfth day, and was lying on the funeral
pile, came to life again, and described the other world. The following
are his very words: <span id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562) “For he
said that he was present when one was asked by another person where the
great Ardiæus was. This Ardiæus had been prince in a certain city of
Pamphylia, and had killed his aged father and his elder brother, and
done many other unhallowed deeds, as was reported. He said, then that
the person who was asked said: He neither comes nor ever will come
hither. For we saw, among other terrible sights, this also. When we were
close to the mouth \[of the pit\], and were about to return to the upper
air, and had suffered everything else, we suddenly beheld both him and
others likewise, most of whom were tyrants. But there were also some
private sinners who had committed great crimes. And these, when they
thought they were to ascend, the mouth would not permit, but bellowed
when any of those who were so incurably wicked attempted to ascend,
unless they had paid the full penalty. Then fierce men, fiery to look
at, stood close by, and hearing the din, <span
id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563) took some and led them away; but
Ardiæus and the rest, having bound hand and foot, and striking their
heads down, and flaying, they dragged to the road outside, tearing them
with thorns, and signifying to those who were present the cause of their
suffering these things, and that they were leading them away to cast
them into Tartarus. Hence, he said, that amidst all their various fears,
this one was the greatest, lest the mouth should bellow when they
ascended, since if it were silent each one would most gladly ascend; and
that the punishments and torments were such as these, and that, on the
other hand, the rewards were the reverse of these.” Here Plato seems to
me to have learnt from the prophets not only the doctrine of the
judgment, but also of the resurrection, which the Greeks refuse to
believe. For his saying that the soul is judged along with the body,
proves nothing more clearly than that he believed the doctrine of the
resurrection. Since how could Ardiæus and the rest have undergone such
punishment in Hades, had they left on earth the body, with its head,
hands, feet, and skin? For certainly they will never say that the soul
has a head and hands, and feet and skin. But Plato, having fallen in
with the testimonies of the prophets in Egypt, and having accepted what
they teach concerning the resurrection of the body, teaches that the
soul is judged in company with the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[284:2563](0010637.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="viii.vi.xxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxvii-p2"></span> Plato, *Rep.*, p. 615, \[lib. x. p.
325. Ed. Bipont, 1785.\]

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[284:2564](0010637.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="viii.vi.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxvii-p3"></span> The bellowing of the mouth of the
pit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII.—Homer’s...](0010638)
