[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010837)  [Next](0010839) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.i"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.i-p0.1"></span>Preface.

<span id="ix.vii.i-p1"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vii.i-p1.1"></span>In</span> the four preceding books, my very
dear friend, which I put forth to thee, all the heretics have been
exposed, and their doctrines brought to light, and these men refuted who
have devised irreligious opinions. \[I have accomplished this by
adducing\] something from the doctrine peculiar to each of these men,
which they have left in their writings, as well as by using arguments of
a more general nature, and applicable to them all. <span
id="fr_4448"></span>[4449](#fn_4448) Then I have pointed out the truth,
and shown the preaching of the Church, which the prophets proclaimed (as
I have already demonstrated), but which Christ brought to perfection,
and the apostles have handed down, from whom the Church, receiving
\[these truths\], and throughout all the world alone preserving them in
their integrity (*bene*), has transmitted them to her sons. Then
also—having disposed of all questions which the heretics propose to us,
and having explained the doctrine of the apostles, and clearly set forth
many of those things which were said and done by the Lord in parables—I
shall endeavour, in this the fifth book of the entire work which treats
of the exposure and refutation of knowledge falsely so called, to
exhibit proofs from the rest of the Lord’s doctrine and the apostolical
epistles: \[thus\] complying with thy demand, as thou didst request of
me (since indeed I have been assigned a place in the ministry of the
word); and, labouring by every means in my power to furnish thee with
large assistance against the contradictions of the heretics, as also to
reclaim the wanderers and convert them to the Church of God, to confirm
at the same time the minds of the neophytes, that they may preserve
stedfast the faith which they have received, guarded by the Church in
its integrity, in order that they be in no way perverted by those who
endeavour to teach them false doctrines, and lead them away from the
truth. It will be incumbent upon thee, however, and all who may happen
to read this writing, to peruse with great attention what I have already
said, that thou mayest obtain a knowledge of the subjects against which
I am contending. For it is thus that thou wilt both controvert them in a
legitimate manner, and wilt be prepared to receive the proofs brought
forward against them, casting away their doctrines as filth by means of
the celestial faith; but following the only true and stedfast Teacher,
the Word of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who did, through His
transcendent love, become what we are, that He might bring us to be even
what He is Himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4448"></span>[526:4449](0010838.htm#fr_4448) <span
id="ix.vii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.i-p2"></span> Ex ratione universis ostensionibus
procedente. The words are very obscure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I.—Christ alone is able to...](0010839)
