[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010754)  [Next](0010756) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—God is not to be sought after by means of letters, syllables, and numbers; necessity of humility in such investigations.

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p1.2"></span>If any
one, however, say in reply to these things, What then? Is it a
meaningless and accidental thing, that the positions of names, and the
election of the apostles, and the working of the Lord, and the
arrangement of created things, are what they are?—we answer them:
Certainly not; but with great wisdom and diligence, all things have
clearly been made by God, fitted and prepared \[for their special
purposes\]; and His word formed both things ancient and those belonging
to the latest times; and men ought not to connect those things with the
number *thirty*, <span id="fr_3193"></span>[3194](#fn_3193) but to
harmonize them with what actually exists, or with right reason. Nor
should they seek to prosecute inquiries respecting God by means of
numbers, syllables, and letters. For this is an uncertain mode of
proceeding, on account of their varied and diverse systems, and because
every sort of hypothesis may at the present day be, in like manner,
devised <span id="fr_3194"></span>[3195](#fn_3194) by any one; so
that <span id="fr_3195"></span>[3196](#fn_3195) they can derive
arguments against the truth from these very theories, inasmuch as they
may be turned in many different directions. But, on the contrary, they
ought to adapt the numbers themselves, and those things which have been
formed, to the true theory lying before them. For system <span
id="fr_3196"></span>[3197](#fn_3196) does not spring out of numbers, but
numbers from a system; nor does God derive His being from things made,
but things made from God. For all things originate from one and the same
God.

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p6"></span>2. But since created things are various
and numerous, they are indeed well fitted and adapted to the whole
creation; yet, when viewed individually, are mutually opposite and
inharmonious, just as the sound of the lyre, which consists of many and
opposite notes, gives rise to one unbroken melody, through means of the
interval which separates each one from the others. The lover of truth
therefore ought not to be deceived by the interval between each note,
nor should he imagine that one was due to one artist and author, and
another to another, nor that one person fitted the treble, another the
bass, and yet another the tenor strings; but he should hold that one and
the same person \[formed the whole\], so as to prove the judgment,
goodness, and skill exhibited in the whole work and \[specimen of\]
wisdom. Those, too, who listen to the melody, ought to praise and extol
the artist, to admire the tension of some notes, to attend to the
softness of others, to catch the sound of others between both these
extremes, and to consider the special character of others, so as to
inquire at what each one aims, and what is the cause of their variety,
never failing to apply our rule, neither giving up the \[one <span
id="fr_3197"></span>[3198](#fn_3197) \] artist, nor casting off faith in
the one God who formed all things, nor blaspheming our Creator.

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p8"></span>3. If, however, any one do not discover
the cause of all those things which become objects of investigation, let
him reflect that man is infinitely inferior to God; that he has received
grace only in part, and is not yet equal or similar to his Maker; and,
moreover, that he cannot have experience or form a conception of all
things <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-Page_397"></span> like God; but in the same proportion
as he who was formed but to-day, and received the beginning of his
creation, is inferior to Him who is uncreated, and who is always the
same, in that proportion is he, as respects knowledge and the faculty of
investigating the causes of all things, inferior to Him who made him.
For thou, O man, art not an uncreated being, nor didst thou always
co-exist <span id="fr_3198"></span>[3199](#fn_3198) with God, as did His
own Word; but now, through His pre-eminent goodness, receiving the
beginning of thy creation, thou dost gradually learn from the Word the
dispensations of God who made thee.

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p10"></span>4. Preserve therefore the proper order
of thy knowledge, and do not, as being ignorant of things really good,
seek to rise above God Himself, for He cannot be surpassed; nor do thou
seek after any one above the Creator, for thou wilt not discover such.
For thy Former cannot be contained within limits; nor, although thou
shouldst measure all this \[universe\], and pass through all His
creation, and consider it in all its depth, and height, and length,
wouldst thou be able to conceive of any other above the Father Himself.
For thou wilt not be able to think Him fully out, but, indulging in
trains of reflection opposed to thy nature, thou wilt prove thyself
foolish; and if thou persevere in such a course, thou wilt fall into
utter madness, whilst thou deemest thyself loftier and greater than thy
Creator, and imaginest that thou canst penetrate beyond His dominions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3193"></span>[396:3194](0010755.htm#fr_3193) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p2"></span> Some read XX., but XXX. is probably
correct.

<span id="fn_3194"></span>[396:3195](0010755.htm#fr_3194) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p3"></span> Harvey proposes “commentitum” instead
of “commentatum,” but the alteration seems unnecessary.

<span id="fn_3195"></span>[396:3196](0010755.htm#fr_3195) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p4"></span> The syntax is in confusion, and the
meaning obscure.

<span id="fn_3196"></span>[396:3197](0010755.htm#fr_3196) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p5"></span> “Regula.”

<span id="fn_3197"></span>[396:3198](0010755.htm#fr_3197) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p7"></span> “Errantes ab artifice.” The whole
sentence is most obscure.

<span id="fn_3198"></span>[397:3199](0010755.htm#fr_3198) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvi-p9"></span> Alluding to the imaginary Æon
*Anthropos*, who existed from eternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI.—“Knowledge puffeth...](0010756)
