[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010642)  [Next](0010644) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xxxiii"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.—Plato’s idea of the beginning of time drawn from Moses.

<span id="viii.vi.xxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xxxiii-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xxxiii-p1.2"></span>And from what source did Plato draw the
information that time was created along with the heavens? For he wrote
thus: “Time, accordingly, was created along with the heavens; in order
that, coming into being together, they might also be together dissolved,
if ever their dissolution should take place.” Had he not learned this
from the divine history of Moses? For he knew that the creation of time
had received its original constitution from days and months and years.
Since, then, the first day which was created along with the heavens
constituted the beginning of all time (for thus Moses wrote, “In the
beginning God created the heavens and the earth,” and then immediately
subjoins, “And one day was made,” as if he would designate the whole of
time by one part of it), Plato names the day “time,” lest, if he
mentioned the “day,” he should seem to lay himself open to the
accusation of the Athenians, that he was completely adopting the
expressions of Moses. And from what source did he derive what he has
written regarding the dissolution of the heavens? Had he not learned
this, too, from the sacred prophets, and did he not think that this was
their doctrine?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV.—Whence men attributed...](0010644)
