[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010003)  [Next](0010005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_1"></span>

## <span id="ii.i-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note to the First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>\[<span
class="upper"><span id="ii.i-p1.2"></span>a.d.</span> 30–100.\] <span
class="upper"><span id="ii.i-p1.3"></span>Clement</span> was probably a
Gentile and a Roman. He seems to have been at Philippi with St. Paul
(<span class="upper"><span id="ii.i-p1.4"></span>a.d.</span> 57) when
that first-born of the Western churches was passing through great trials
of faith. There, with holy women and others, he ministered to the
apostle and to the saints. As this city was a Roman colony, we need not
inquire how a Roman happened to be there. He was possibly in some public
service, and it is not improbable that he had visited Corinth in those
days. From the apostle, and his companion, St. Luke, he had no doubt
learned the use of the Septuagint, in which his knowledge of the Greek
tongue soon rendered him an adept. His copy of that version, however,
does not always agree with the Received Text, as the reader will
perceive.

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>A co-presbyter with Linus and Cletus, he
succeeded them in the government of the Roman Church. I have reluctantly
adopted the opinion that his Epistle was written near the close of his
life, and not just after the persecution of Nero. It is not improbable
that Linus and Cletus both perished in that fiery trial, and that
Clement’s immediate succession to their work and place occasions the
chronological difficulties of the period. After the death of the
apostles, for the Roman imprisonment and martyrdom of St. Peter seem
historical, Clement was the natural representative of St. Paul, and even
of his companion, the “apostle of the circumcision;” and naturally he
wrote the Epistle in the name of the local church, when brethren looked
to them for advice. St. John, no doubt, was still surviving at Patmos or
in Ephesus; but the Philippians, whose intercourse with Rome is attested
by the visit of Epaphroditus, looked naturally to the surviving friends
of their great founder; nor was the aged apostle in the East equally
accessible. All roads pointed towards the Imperial City, and started
from its *Milliarium Aureum*. But, though Clement doubtless wrote the
letter, he conceals his own name, and puts forth the brethren, who seem
to have met in council, and sent a brotherly delegation (Chap. lix.).
The entire absence of the spirit of Diotrephes ([3 John
9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009)<span id="ii.i-p2.1"></span>), and
the close accordance of the Epistle, in humility and meekness, with that
of St. Peter ([1 Pet. v. 1-5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)<span
id="ii.i-p2.2"></span>), are noteworthy features. The whole will be
found animated with the loving and faithful spirit of St. Paul’s dear
Philippians, among whom the writer had learned the Gospel.

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span>Clement fell asleep, probably soon after he
despatched his letter. It is the legacy of one who reflects the
apostolic age in all the beauty and evangelical truth which were the
first-fruits of the Spirit’s presence with the Church. He shares with
others the aureole of glory attributed by St. Paul ([Phil. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)<span id="ii.i-p3.1"></span>), “His
name is in the Book of Life.”

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span>The plan of this publication does not permit
the restoration, in this volume, of the recently discovered portions of
his work. It is the purpose of the editor to present this, however, with
other recently discovered relics of primitive antiquity, in a
supplementary volume, should the <span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_2"></span> undertaking meet with sufficient encouragement.
The so-called second Epistle of Clement is now known to be the work of
another, and has been relegated to another place in this series.

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>The following is the <span class="upper"><span
id="ii.i-p5.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span> of the original editors
and translators, Drs. Roberts and Donaldson:—

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="ii.i-p6.1"></span>The</span> first Epistle, bearing the name of
Clement, has been preserved to us in a single manuscript only. Though
very frequently referred to by ancient Christian writers, it remained
unknown to the scholars of Western Europe until happily discovered in
the Alexandrian manuscript. This <span class="upper"><span
id="ii.i-p6.2"></span>ms.</span> of the Sacred Scriptures (known and
generally referred to as Codex A) was presented in 1628 by Cyril,
Patriarch of Constantinople, to Charles I., and is now preserved in the
British Museum. Subjoined to the books of the New Testament contained in
it, there are two writings described as the Epistles of one Clement. Of
these, that now before us is the first. It is tolerably perfect, but
there are many slight *lacunæ*, or gaps, in the <span
class="upper"><span id="ii.i-p6.3"></span>ms.</span>, and one whole leaf
is supposed to have been lost towards the close. These *lacunæ*,
however, so numerous in some chapters, do not generally extend beyond a
word or syllable, and can for the most part be easily supplied.

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>Who the Clement was to whom these writings are
ascribed, cannot with absolute certainty be determined. The general
opinion is, that he is the same as the person of that name referred to
by St. Paul ([Phil. iv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)<span
id="ii.i-p7.1"></span>). The writings themselves contain no statement as
to their author. The first, and by far the longer of them, simply
purports to have been written in the name of the Church at Rome to the
Church at Corinth. But in the catalogue of contents prefixed to the
<span class="upper"><span id="ii.i-p7.2"></span>ms.</span> they are both
plainly attributed to one Clement; and the judgment of most scholars is,
that, in regard to the first Epistle at least, this statement is
correct, and that it is to be regarded as an authentic production of the
friend and fellow-worker of St. Paul. This belief may be traced to an
early period in the history of the Church. It is found in the writings
of Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*, iii. 15), of Origen (*Comm. in Joan.*, i.
29), and others. The internal evidence also tends to support this
opinion. The doctrine, style, and manner of thought are all in
accordance with it; so that, although, as has been said, positive
certainty cannot be reached on the subject, we may with great
probability conclude that we have in this Epistle a composition of that
Clement who is known to us from Scripture as having been an associate of
the great apostle.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>The date of this Epistle has been the subject
of considerable controversy. It is clear from the writing itself that it
was composed soon after some persecution (chap. i.) which the Roman
Church had endured; and the only question is, whether we are to fix upon
the persecution under Nero or Domitian. If the former, the date will be
about the year 68; if the latter, we must place it towards the close of
the first century or the beginning of the second. We possess no external
aid to the settlement of this question. The lists of early Roman bishops
are in hopeless confusion, some making Clement the immediate successor
of St. Peter, others placing Linus, and others still Linus and
Anacletus, between him and the apostle. The internal evidence, again,
leaves the matter doubtful, though it has been strongly pressed on both
sides. The probability seems, on the whole, to be in favour of the
Domitian period, so that the Epistle may be dated about <span
class="upper"><span id="ii.i-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 97.

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>This Epistle was held in very great esteem by
the early Church. The account given of it by Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*,
iii. 16) is as follows: “There is one acknowledged Epistle of this
Clement (whom he has just identified with the friend of St. Paul), great
and admirable, which he wrote in the name of the Church of Rome to the
Church at Corinth, sedition having then arisen in the latter Church. We
are aware that this Epistle has been publicly read in very many churches
both in old times, and also in our own day.” The Epistle before us thus
appears to have been read in numerous churches, as being almost on a
level with the canonical writings. And its place in the Alexandrian
<span class="upper"><span id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>ms.</span>, immediately
after the inspired books, is in harmony with the position thus assigned
it in the primitive Church. There does indeed appear a great difference
between it and <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="ii.i-Page_3"></span> the inspired writings in many respects, such as
the fanciful use sometimes made of Old-Testament statements, the
fabulous stories which are accepted by its author, and the general
diffuseness and feebleness of style by which it is distinguished. But
the high tone of evangelical truth which pervades it, the simple and
earnest appeals which it makes to the heart and conscience, and the
anxiety which its writer so constantly shows to promote the best
interests of the Church of Christ, still impart an undying charm to this
precious relic of later apostolic times.

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>\[N.B.—A sufficient guide to the recent
literature of the Clementine <span class="upper"><span
id="ii.i-p10.1"></span>mss.</span> and discoveries may be found in *The
Princeton Review*, 1877, p. 325, also in Bishop Wordsworth’s succinct
but learned *Church History to the Council of Nicæa*, p. 84. The
invaluable edition of the *Patres Apostolici*, by Jacobson (Oxford,
1840), with a critical text and rich *prolegomena* and annotations,
cannot be dispensed with by any Patristic inquirer. A. C. C.\]

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="ii.i-Page_4"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Epistle to the Corinthians](0010005)
