[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010443)  [Next](0010445) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi"></span>

### <span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p0.1"></span>Epistle of Marcus Aurelius to the senate, in which he testifies that the Christians were the cause of his victory. <span id="fr_1918"></span>[1919](#fn_1918)

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p2"></span><span
id="viii.ii.lxxi-p2.1"></span><span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p2.2"></span>The
Emperor Cæsar Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Germanicus, Parthicus,
Sarmaticus, to the People of Rome, and to the sacred Senate greeting: I
explained to you my grand design, and what advantages I gained on the
confines of Germany, with much labour and suffering, in consequence of
the circumstance that I was surrounded by the enemy; I myself being shut
up in Carnuntum by seventy-four cohorts, nine miles off. And the enemy
being at hand, the scouts pointed out to us, and our general Pompeianus
showed us that there was close on us a mass of a mixed multitude of
977,000 men, which indeed we saw; and I was shut up by this vast host,
having with me only a battalion composed of the first, tenth, double and
marine legions. Having then examined my own position, and my host, with
respect to the vast mass of barbarians and of the enemy, I quickly
betook myself to prayer to the gods of my country. But being disregarded
by them, I summoned those who among us go by the name of Christians. And
having made inquiry, I discovered a great number and vast host of them,
and raged against them, which was by no means becoming; for afterwards I
learned their power. Wherefore they began the battle, not by preparing
weapons, nor arms, nor bugles; for such preparation is hateful to them,
on account of the God they bear about in their conscience. Therefore it
is probable that those whom we suppose to be atheists, have God as their
ruling power entrenched in their conscience. For having cast themselves
on the ground, they prayed not only for me, but also for the whole army
as it stood, that they might be delivered from the present thirst and
famine. For during five days we had got no water, because there was
none; for we were in the heart of Germany, and in the enemy’s territory.
And simultaneously with their casting themselves on the ground, and
praying to God (a God of whom I am ignorant), water poured from heaven,
upon us most refreshingly cool, but upon the enemies of Rome a
withering <span id="fr_1919"></span>[1920](#fn_1919) hail. And
immediately we recognised the presence of God following on the prayer —a
God unconquerable and indestructible. Founding upon this, then, let us
pardon such as are Christians, lest they pray for and obtain such a
weapon against ourselves. And I counsel that no such person be accused
on the ground of his being a Christian. But if any one be found laying
to the charge of a Christian that he is a Christian, I desire that it be
made manifest that he who is accused as a Christian, and acknowledges
that he is one, is accused of nothing else than only this, that he is a
Christian; but that he who arraigns him be burned alive. And I further
desire, that he who is entrusted with the government of the province
shall not compel the Christian, who confesses and certifies such a
matter, to retract; neither shall he commit him. And I desire that these
things be confirmed by a decree of the Senate. And I command this my
edict to be published in the Forum of Trajan, in order that it may be
read. The prefect Vitrasius Pollio will see that it be transmitted to
all the provinces round about, and that no one who wishes to make use of
or to possess it be hindered from obtaining a copy from the document I
now publish. <span id="fr_1920"></span>[1921](#fn_1920)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1918"></span>[187:1919](0010444.htm#fr_1918) <span
id="viii.ii.lxxi-p0.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p1"></span> \[Spurious, no doubt; but the
literature of the subject is very rich. See text and notes, Milman’s
*Gibbon*, vol. ii. 46.\]

<span id="fn_1919"></span>[187:1920](0010444.htm#fr_1919) <span
id="viii.ii.lxxi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p3"></span> Literally, “fiery.”

<span id="fn_1920"></span>[187:1921](0010444.htm#fr_1920) <span
id="viii.ii.lxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p4"></span> <span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p4.1"></span>
\[Note I. (See capp. xxvi. and lvi.)

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p5"></span>In 1851 I recognised this stone in the
Vatican, and read it with emotion. I copied it, as follows:

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p6"></span>“<span class="upper"><span
id="viii.ii.lxxi-p6.1"></span>Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio Sacrvm Sex.
Pompeius. S. P. F. Col. Mussianvs. Quinquennalis Decur Bidentalis Donum
Dedit.</span>”

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p7"></span>The explanation is possibly this:
Simon Magus was actually recognised as the God *Semo*, just as Barnabas
and Paul were supposed to be Zeus and Hermes ([Acts xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012)<span
id="viii.ii.lxxi-p7.1"></span>.), and were offered divine honours
accordingly. Or the Samaritans may so have informed Justin on their
understanding of this inscription, and with pride in the success of
their countryman ([Acts viii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#010)<span
id="viii.ii.lxxi-p7.2"></span>.), whom they had recognised “as the great
power of God.” See *Orelli* (No. 1860), *Insc.*, vol. i. 337.

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p8"></span>Note II. (The Thundering Legion.)

<span id="viii.ii.lxxi-p9"></span>The bas-relief on the column of
Antonine, in Rome, is a very striking complement of the story, but an
answer to prayer is not a miracle. I simply transcribe from the American
Translation of Alzog’s *Universal Church History* the references there
given to the *Legio Fulminatrix*: “Tertull., Apol., cap. 5; Ad Scap.,
cap. 4; Euseb., v. 5; Greg. Nyss. Or., II in Martyr.; Oros., vii. 15;
Dio. Cass. Epit.: Xiphilin., lib. lxxi. cap. 8; Jul. Capitol, in Marc.
Antonin., cap. 24.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Apology](0010445)
