[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010735)  [Next](0010737) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.vii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.—The angels and the Creator of the world could not have been ignorant of the Supreme God.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.vii-p1.2"></span>How,
again, could either the angels, or the Creator of the world, have been
ignorant of the Supreme God, seeing they were His property, and His
creatures, and were contained by Him? He might indeed have been
invisible to them on account of His superiority, but He could by no
means have been unknown to them on account of His providence. For though
it is true, as they declare, that they were very far separated from Him
through their inferiority \[of nature\], yet, as His dominion extended
over all of them, it behoved them to know their Ruler, and to be aware
of this in particular, that He who created them is Lord of all. For
since His invisible essence is mighty, it confers on all a profound
mental intuition and perception of His most powerful, yea, omnipotent
greatness. Wherefore, although “no one knows the Father, except the Son,
nor the Son except the Father, and those to whom the Son will reveal
Him,” <span id="fr_3012"></span>[3013](#fn_3012) yet all \[beings\] do
know this one fact at least, because reason, implanted in their minds,
moves them, and reveals to them \[the truth\] that there is one God, the
Lord of all.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p3"></span>2. And on this account all things have
been \[by general consent\] placed under the sway of Him who is styled
the Most High, and the Almighty. By calling upon Him, even before the
coming of our Lord, men were saved both from most wicked spirits, and
from all kinds of demons, and from every sort of apostate power. This
was the case, not as if earthly spirits or demons had seen Him, but
because they knew of the existence of Him who is God over all, at whose
invocation they trembled, as there does tremble every creature, and
principality, and power, and every being endowed with energy under His
government. By way of parallel, shall not those who live under the
empire of the Romans, although they have never seen the emperor, but are
far separated from him both by land and sea, know very well, as they
experience his rule, who it is that possesses the principal power in the
state? How then could it be, that those angels who were superior to us
\[in nature\], or even He whom they call the Creator of the world, did
not know the Almighty, when even dumb animals tremble and yield at the
invocation of His name? And as, although they have not seen Him, yet all
things are subject to the name of our Lord, <span
id="fr_3013"></span>[3014](#fn_3013) so must they also be to His who
made and established all things by His word, since it was no other than
He who formed the world. And for this reason do the Jews even now put
demons to flight by means <span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="ix.iii.vii-Page_366"></span> of this very adjuration, inasmuch as
all beings fear the invocation of Him who created them.

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p5"></span>3. If, then, they shrink from affirming
that the angels are more irrational than the dumb animals, they will
find that it behoved these, although they had not seen Him who is God
over all, to know His power and sovereignty. For it will appear truly
ridiculous, if they maintain that they themselves indeed, who dwell upon
the earth, know Him who is God over all whom they have never seen, but
will not allow Him who, according to their opinion, formed them and the
whole world, although He dwells in the heights and above the heavens, to
know those things with which they themselves, though they dwell below,
are acquainted. \[This is the case\], unless perchance they maintain
that Bythus lives in Tartarus below the earth, and that on this account
they have attained to a knowledge of Him before those angels who have
their abode on high. Thus do they rush into such an abyss of madness as
to pronounce the Creator of the world void of understanding. They are
truly deserving of pity, since with such utter folly they affirm that He
(the Creator of the world) neither knew His Mother, nor her seed, nor
the Pleroma of the Æons, nor the Propator, nor what the things were
which He made; but that these are images of those things which are
within the Pleroma, the Saviour having secretly laboured that they
should be so formed \[by the unconscious Demiurge\], in honour of those
things which are above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3012"></span>[365:3013](0010736.htm#fr_3012) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p2"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="ix.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3013"></span>[365:3014](0010736.htm#fr_3013) <span
id="ix.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vii-p4"></span> Massuet refers this to the Roman
emperor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII.—Created things are not...](0010737)
