[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010591)  [Next](0010593) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.cxxxi"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter CXXXI.—How much more faithful to God the Gentiles are who are converted to Christ than the Jews.

<span id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p1.1"></span>“But I shall quote the passage by which
it is made known that God divided all the nations. It is as follows:
‘Ask thy father, and he will show thee; thine elders, and they will tell
thee; when the Most High divided the nations, as He dispersed the sons
of Adam. He set the bounds of the nations according to the numbers of
the children of Israel; and the Lord’s portion became His people Jacob,
and Israel was the lot of His inheritance.’ ” <span
id="fr_2460"></span>[2461](#fn_2460) And having said this, I added: “The
Seventy have translated it, ‘He set the bounds of the nations according
to the number of the angels of God.’ But because my argument is again in
nowise weakened by this, I have adopted your exposition. And you
yourselves, if you will confess the truth, must acknowledge that we, who
have been called by God through the despised and shameful mystery of the
cross (for the confession of which, and obedience to which, and for our
piety, punishments even to death have been inflicted on us by demons,
and by the host of the devil, through the aid ministered to them by
you), and endure all torments rather than deny Christ even by word,
through whom we are called to the salvation prepared beforehand by the
Father, are more faithful to God than you, who were redeemed from Egypt
with a high hand and a visitation of great glory, when the sea was
parted for you, and a passage left dry, in which \[God\] slew those who
pursued you with a very great equipment, and splendid chariots, bringing
back upon them the sea which had been made a way for your sakes; on whom
also a pillar of light shone, in order that you, more than any other
nation in the world, might possess a peculiar light, never-failing and
never-setting; for whom He rained manna as nourishment, fit for the
heavenly angels, in order that you might have no need to prepare your
food; and the water at Marah was made sweet; and a sign of Him that was
to be crucified was made, both in the matter of the serpents which bit
you, as I already mentioned (God anticipating before the proper times
these mysteries, in order to confer grace upon you, to whom you are
always convicted of being thankless), as well as in the type of the
extending of the hands of Moses, and of <span
id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p2.2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p2.3"></span>Oshea being named Jesus (Joshua); when
you fought against Amalek: concerning which God enjoined that the
incident be recorded, and the name of Jesus laid up in your
understandings; saying that this is He who would blot out the memorial
of Amalek from under heaven. <span id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p2.4"></span>Now it
is clear that the memorial of Amalek remained after the son of Nave
(Nun): but He makes it manifest through Jesus, who was crucified, of
whom also those symbols were fore-announcements of all that would happen
to Him, the demons would be destroyed, and would dread His name, and
that all principalities and kingdoms would fear Him; and that they who
believe in Him out of all nations would be shown as God-fearing and
peaceful men; and the facts already quoted by me, Trypho, indicate this.
Again, when you desired flesh, so vast a quantity of quails was given
you, that they could not be told; for whom also water gushed from the
rock; and a cloud followed you for a shade from heat, and covering from
cold, declaring the manner and signification of another and new heaven;
the latchets of your shoes did not break, and your shoes waxed not old,
and your garments wore not away, but even those of the children grew
along with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2460"></span>[265:2461](0010592.htm#fr_2460) <span
id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p2"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007)<span id="viii.iv.cxxxi-p2.1"></span>
ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter CXXXII.—How great the power...](0010593)
