[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010756)  [Next](0010758.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.—Proper mode of interpreting parables and obscure passages of Scripture.

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p1.2"></span>A
sound mind, and one which does not expose its possessor to danger, and
is devoted to piety and the love of truth, will eagerly meditate upon
those things which God has placed within the power of mankind, and has
subjected to our knowledge, and will make advancement in \[acquaintance
with\] them, rendering the knowledge of them easy to him by means of
daily study. These things are such as fall \[plainly\] under our
observation, and are clearly and unambiguously in express terms set
forth in the Sacred Scriptures. And therefore the parables ought not to
be adapted to ambiguous expressions. For, if this be not done, both he
who explains them will do so without danger, and the parables will
receive a like interpretation from all, and the body <span
id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206.md) of truth remains entire, with a
harmonious adaptation of its members, and without any collision \[of its
several parts\]. But to apply expressions which are not clear or evident
to interpretations of the parables, such as every one discovers for
himself as inclination leads him, \[is absurd. <span
id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207.md) \] For in this way no one will
possess the rule of truth; but in accordance with the number of persons
who explain the parables will be found the various systems of truth, in
mutual opposition to each other, and setting forth antagonistic
doctrines, like the questions current among the Gentile philosophers.

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p4"></span>2. According to this course of
procedure, therefore, man would always be inquiring but never finding,
because he has rejected the very method of discovery. And when the
Bridegroom <span id="fr_3208"></span>[3209](#fn_3208.md) comes, he who has
his lamp untrimmed, and not burning with the brightness of a steady
light, is classed among those who obscure the interpretations of the
parables, forsaking Him who by His plain announcements freely imparts
gifts to all who come to Him, and is excluded from His marriage-chamber.
Since, therefore, the entire Scriptures, the prophets, and the Gospels,
can be clearly, unambiguously, and harmoniously understood by all,
although all do not believe them; and <span
id="fr_3209"></span>[3210](#fn_3209.md) since they proclaim that one only
God, to the exclusion of all others, formed all things by His word,
whether visible or invisible, heavenly or earthly, in the water or under
the earth, as I have shown <span id="fr_3210"></span>[3211](#fn_3210.md)
from the very words of Scripture; and since the very system of creation
to which we belong testifies, by what falls under our notice, that one
Being made and governs it,—those persons will seem truly foolish who
blind their eyes to such a clear demonstration, and will not behold the
light of the announcement \[made to them\]; but they put fetters upon
themselves, and every one of them imagines, by means of their obscure
interpretations of the parables, that he has found out a God of his own.
For that there is nothing whatever openly, expressly, and without
controversy said in any part of Scripture respecting the Father
conceived of by those who hold a contrary opinion, they themselves
testify, when they maintain that the Saviour privately taught these same
things not to all, but to certain only of His disciples who could
comprehend them, and who understood what was intended by Him through
means of arguments, enigmas, and parables. They come, \[in fine,\] to
this, that they maintain there is one Being who is proclaimed as God,
and another as Father, He who is set forth as such through means of
parables and enigmas.

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p8"></span> <span id="page_399">p. 399</span>
<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-Page_399"></span> 3. But since parables admit of
many interpretations, what lover of truth will not acknowledge, that for
them to assert God is to be searched out from these, while they desert
what is certain, indubitable, and true, is the part of men who eagerly
throw themselves into danger, and act as if destitute of reason? And is
not such a course of conduct not to build one’s house upon a rock <span
id="fr_3211"></span>[3212](#fn_3211.md) which is firm, strong, and placed
in an open position, but upon the shifting sand? Hence the overthrow of
such a building is a matter of ease.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[398:3207](0010757.htm#fr_3206.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p2"></span> We read “veritatis corpus” for “a
veritate corpus” in the text.

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[398:3208](0010757.htm#fr_3207.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p3"></span> Some such expression of disapproval
must evidently be supplied, though wanting in the Latin text.

<span id="fn_3208"></span>[398:3209](0010757.htm#fr_3208.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p5"></span> [Matt. xxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#005.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3209"></span>[398:3210](0010757.htm#fr_3209.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p6"></span> The text is here elliptical, and we
have supplied what seems necessary to complete the sense.

<span id="fn_3210"></span>[398:3211](0010757.htm#fr_3210.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p7"></span> It is doubtful whether
“demonstravimus” or “demonstrabimus” be the proper reading: if the
former, the reference will be to book i. 22, or ii. 2; if the latter, to
book iii. 8.

<span id="fn_3211"></span>[399:3212](0010757.htm#fr_3211.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxviii-p9"></span> [Matt. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII.—Perfect knowledge...](0010758.md)
