[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010867)  [Next](0010869.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.—Although certain as to the number of the name of Antichrist, yet we should come to no rash conclusions as to the name itself, because this number is capable of being fitted to many names. Reasons for this point being reserved by the Holy Spirit. Antichrist’s reign and death.

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p1.2"></span>Such,
then, being the state of the case, and this number being found in all
the most approved and ancient copies <span
id="fr_4699"></span>[4700](#fn_4699.md) \[of the Apocalypse\], and those
men who saw John face to face bearing their testimony \[to it\]; while
reason also leads us to conclude that the number of the name of the
beast, \[if reckoned\] according to the Greek mode of calculation by the
\[value of\] the letters contained in it, will amount to six hundred and
sixty and six; that is, the number of tens shall be equal to that of the
hundreds, and the number of hundreds equal to that of the units (for
that number which \[expresses\] the digit six being adhered to
throughout, indicates the recapitulations of that apostasy, taken in its
full extent, which occurred at the beginning, during the intermediate
periods, and which shall take place at the end),—I do not know how it is
that some have erred following the ordinary mode of speech, and have
vitiated the middle number in the name, deducting the amount of fifty
from it, so that instead of six decads they will have it that there is
but one. \[I am inclined to think that this occurred through the fault
of the copyists, as is wont to happen, since numbers also are expressed
by letters; so that the Greek letter which expresses the number sixty
was easily expanded into the letter Iota of the Greeks.\] <span
id="fr_4700"></span>[4701](#fn_4700.md) Others then received this reading
<span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-Page_559"></span> without examination; some in their
simplicity, and upon their own responsibility, making use of this number
expressing one decad; while some, in their inexperience, have ventured
to seek out a name which should contain the erroneous and spurious
number. Now, as regards those who have done this in simplicity, and
without evil intent, we are at liberty to assume that pardon will be
granted them by God. But as for those who, for the sake of vainglory,
lay it down for certain that names containing the spurious number are to
be accepted, and affirm that this name, hit upon by themselves, is that
of him who is to come; such persons shall not come forth without loss,
because they have led into error both themselves and those who confided
in them. Now, in the first place, it is loss to wander from the truth,
and to imagine that as being the case which is not; then again, as there
shall be no light punishment \[inflicted\] upon him who either adds or
subtracts anything from the Scripture, <span
id="fr_4701"></span>[4702](#fn_4701.md) under that such a person must
necessarily fall. Moreover, another danger, by no means trifling, shall
overtake those who falsely presume that they know the name of
Antichrist. For if these men assume one \[number\], when this
\[Antichrist\] shall come having another, they will be easily led away
by him, as supposing him not to be the expected one, who must be guarded
against.

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p5"></span>2. These men, therefore, ought to learn
\[what really is the state of the case\], and go back to the true number
of the name, that they be not reckoned among false prophets. But,
knowing the sure number declared by Scripture, that is, six hundred
sixty and six, let them await, in the first place, the division of the
kingdom into ten; then, in the next place, when these kings are
reigning, and beginning to set their affairs in order, and advance their
kingdom, \[let them learn\] to acknowledge that he who shall come
claiming the kingdom for himself, and shall terrify those men of whom we
have been speaking, having a name containing the aforesaid number, is
truly the abomination of desolation. This, too, the apostle affirms:
“When they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall
come upon them.” <span id="fr_4702"></span>[4703](#fn_4702.md) And Jeremiah
does not merely point out his sudden coming, but he even indicates the
tribe from which he shall come, where he says, “We shall hear the voice
of his swift horses from Dan; the whole earth shall be moved by the
voice of the neighing of his galloping horses: he shall also come and
devour the earth, and the fulness thereof, the city also, and they that
dwell therein.” <span id="fr_4703"></span>[4704](#fn_4703.md) This, too, is
the reason that this tribe is not reckoned in the Apocalypse along with
those which are saved. <span id="fr_4704"></span>[4705](#fn_4704.md)

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p9"></span>3. It is therefore more certain, and
less hazardous, to await the fulfilment of the prophecy, than to be
making surmises, and casting about for any names that may present
themselves, inasmuch as many names can be found possessing the number
mentioned; and the same question will, after all, remain unsolved. For
if there are many names found possessing this number, it will be asked
which among them shall the coming man bear. <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p9.1"></span>It is not through a want of names
containing the number of that name that I say this, but on account of
the fear of God, and zeal for the truth: for the name *Evanthas* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p9.2"></span>ΕΥΑΝΘΑΣ</span>)
contains the required number, but I make no allegation regarding it.
<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p9.3"></span>Then also *Lateinos* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p9.4"></span>ΛΑΤΕΙΝΟΣ</span>) has
the number six hundred and sixty-six; and it is a very probable
\[solution\], this being the name of the last kingdom \[of the four seen
by Daniel\]. For the Latins are they who at present bear rule: <span
id="fr_4705"></span>[4706](#fn_4705.md) I will not, however, make any boast
over this \[coincidence\]. <span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p10.1"></span>*Teitan*
too, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p10.2"></span>ΤΕΙΤΑΝ</span>, the first syllable being
written with the two Greek vowels <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p10.3"></span>ε</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p10.4"></span>ι</span>, among all the names which are
found among us, is rather worthy of credit. For it has in itself the
predicted number, and is composed of six letters, each syllable
containing three letters; and \[the word itself\] is ancient, and
removed from ordinary use; for among our kings we find none bearing this
name Titan, nor have any of the idols which are worshipped in public
among the Greeks and barbarians this appellation. Among many persons,
too, this name is accounted divine, so that even the sun is termed
“Titan” by those who do now possess \[the rule\]. This word, too,
contains a certain outward appearance of vengeance, and of one
inflicting merited punishment because he (Antichrist) pretends that he
vindicates the oppressed. <span id="fr_4706"></span>[4707](#fn_4706.md) And
besides this, it is an ancient name, one worthy of credit, of royal
dignity, and still further, a name belonging to a tyrant. Inasmuch,
then, as this name “Titan” has so much to recommend it, there is a
strong degree of probability, that from among the many \[names
suggested\], we infer, that perchance he who is to come shall be called
“Titan.” We will not, however, incur the risk of pronouncing positively
as to the name of Antichrist; for if it were necessary that his name
should be distinctly revealed in this present time, it would have been
announced by him who beheld the apocalyptic vision. For that was seen no
very long time <span id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-Page_560"></span> since, but almost in our day, towards
the end of Domitian’s reign.

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p12"></span>4. But he indicates the number of the
name now, that when this man comes we may avoid him, being aware who he
is: the name, however, is suppressed, because it is not worthy of being
proclaimed by the Holy Spirit. For if it had been declared by Him, he
(Antichrist) might perhaps continue for a long period. But now as “he
was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the abyss, and goes into
perdition,” <span id="fr_4707"></span>[4708](#fn_4707.md) as one who has no
existence; so neither has his name been declared, for the name of that
which does not exist is not proclaimed. But when this Antichrist shall
have devastated all things in this world, he will reign for three years
and six months, and sit in the temple at Jerusalem; and then the Lord
will come from heaven in the clouds, in the glory of the Father, sending
this man and those who follow him into the lake of fire; but bringing in
for the righteous the times of the kingdom, that is, the rest, the
hallowed seventh day; and restoring to Abraham the promised inheritance,
in which kingdom the Lord declared, that “many coming from the east and
from the west should sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.” <span
id="fr_4708"></span>[4709](#fn_4708.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4699"></span>[558:4700](0010868.htm#fr_4699.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς σπουδαίοις καὶ ἀρχαίοις
ἀντιγράφοις</span> This passage is interesting, as showing how very soon
the autographs of the New Testament must have perished, and various
readings crept into the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p2.2"></span>mss.</span> of the canonical books.

<span id="fn_4700"></span>[558:4701](0010868.htm#fr_4700.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p3"></span> That is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>Ξ</span> into <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p3.2"></span>ΕΙ</span>, according to Harvey, who
considers the whole of this clause as an evident interpolation. It does
not occur in the Greek here preserved by Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*, v. 8).

<span id="fn_4701"></span>[559:4702](0010868.htm#fr_4701.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p4"></span> [Rev. xxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#019.md)<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4702"></span>[559:4703](0010868.htm#fr_4702.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p6"></span> [1 Thess. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4703"></span>[559:4704](0010868.htm#fr_4703.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p7"></span> [Jer. viii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4704"></span>[559:4705](0010868.htm#fr_4704.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p8"></span> [Rev. vii.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#005.md)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p8.1"></span>. \[The Danites (though not all) corrupted
the Hebrew church and the Levitical priesthood, by image-worship,
([Judg. xviii.](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p8.2"></span>), and forfeited the blessings of the old
covenant.\]

<span id="fn_4705"></span>[559:4706](0010868.htm#fr_4705.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p9.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p10"></span> \[A very pregnant passage, as has
often been noted. But let us imitate the pious reticence with which this
section concludes.\]

<span id="fn_4706"></span>[559:4707](0010868.htm#fr_4706.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p10.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p11"></span> Massuet here quotes Cicero and Ovid
in proof of the sun being termed *Titan*. The Titans waged war against
the gods, to avenge themselves upon Saturn.

<span id="fn_4707"></span>[560:4708](0010868.htm#fr_4707.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p13"></span> [Rev. xvii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4708"></span>[560:4709](0010868.htm#fr_4708.md) <span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxxi-p14"></span> [Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md)<span
id="ix.vii.xxxi-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI.—The preservation of...](0010869.md)
