[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010474)  [Next](0010476.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.xiv"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Righteousness is not placed in Jewish rites, but in the conversion of the heart given in baptism by Christ.

<span id="viii.iv.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.xiv-p1.2"></span>“By
reason, therefore, of this laver of repentance and knowledge of God,
which has been ordained on account of the transgression of God’s people,
as Isaiah cries, we have believed, and testify that that very baptism
which he announced is alone able to purify those who have repented; and
this is the water of life. But the cisterns which you have dug for
yourselves are broken and profitless to you. For what is the use of that
baptism which cleanses the flesh and body alone? Baptize the soul from
wrath and from covetousness, from envy, and from hatred; and, lo! the
body is pure. For this is the symbolic significance of unleavened bread,
that you do not commit the old deeds of wicked leaven. But you have
understood all things in a carnal sense, and you suppose it to be piety
if you do such things, while your souls are filled with deceit, and, in
short, with every wickedness. Accordingly, also, after the seven days of
eating unleavened bread, God commanded them to mingle new leaven, that
is, the performance of other works, and not the imitation of the old and
evil works. And because this is what this new Lawgiver demands of you, I
shall again refer to the words which have been quoted by me, and to
others also which have been passed over. They are related by Isaiah to
the following effect: ‘Hearken to me, and your soul shall live; and I
will make with you an everlasting covenant, even the sure mercies of
David. Behold, I have given Him for a witness to the people, a leader
and commander to the nations. Nations which know not Thee shall call on
Thee; and peoples who know not Thee shall escape unto Thee, because of
Thy God, the Holy One of Israel, for He has glorified Thee. Seek ye God;
and when you find Him, call on Him, so long as He may be nigh you. Let
the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will obtain mercy, because He will
abundantly pardon your sins. For my thoughts are not as your thoughts,
neither are my ways as your ways; but as far removed as the heavens are
from the earth, so far is my way removed from your way, and your
thoughts from my thoughts. For as the snow or the rain descends from
heaven, and shall not return till it waters the earth, and makes it
bring forth and bud, and gives seed to the sower and bread for food, so
shall My word be that goeth forth out of My mouth: it shall not return
until it shall have <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="viii.iv.xiv-Page_202"></span> accomplished all that I desired, and I
shall make My commandments prosperous. For ye shall go out with joy, and
be taught with gladness. For the mountains and the hills shall leap
while they expect you, and all the trees of the fields shall applaud
with their branches: and instead of the thorn shall come up the cypress,
and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle. And the Lord shall be
for a name, and for an everlasting sign, and He shall not fail!’ <span
id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978.md) Of these and such like words
written by the prophets, O Trypho,” said I, “some have reference to the
first advent of Christ, in which He is preached as inglorious, obscure,
and of mortal appearance: but others had reference to His second advent,
when He shall appear in glory and above the clouds; and your nation
shall see and know Him whom they have pierced, as Hosea, one of the
twelve prophets, and Daniel, foretold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[202:1979](0010475.htm#fr_1978.md) <span
id="viii.iv.xiv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xiv-p2"></span> [Isa. lv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003.md)<span id="viii.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>
to end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.—In what the true fasting...](0010476.md)
