[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010494)  [Next](0010496) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.xxxiv"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—Nor does [Ps. lxxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#000)<span id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p0.2"></span> apply to Solomon, whose faults Christians shudder at.

<span id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p1.3"></span>“Further, to persuade you that you have
not understood anything of the Scriptures, I will remind you of another
psalm, dictated to David by the Holy Spirit, which you say refers to
Solomon, who was also your king. But it refers also to our Christ. But
you deceive yourselves by the ambiguous forms of speech. For where it is
said, ‘The law of the Lord is perfect,’ you do not understand it of the
law which was to be after Moses, but of the law which was given by
Moses, although God declared that He would establish a new law and a new
covenant. And where it has been said, ‘O God, give Thy judgment to the
king,’ since Solomon was king, you say that the Psalm refers to him,
although the words of the Psalm expressly proclaim that reference is
made to the everlasting King, i.e., to Christ. For Christ is King, and
Priest, and God, and Lord, and angel, and man, and captain, and stone,
and a Son born, and first made subject to suffering, then returning to
heaven, and again coming with glory, and He is preached as having the
everlasting kingdom: so I prove from all the Scriptures. But that you
may perceive what I have said, I quote the words of the Psalm; they are
these: ‘O God, give Thy judgment to the king, and Thy righteousness unto
the king’s son, to judge Thy people with righteousness, and Thy poor
with judgment. The mountains shall take up peace to the people, and the
little hills righteousness. He shall judge the poor of the people, and
shall save the children of the needy, and shall abase the slanderer. He
shall co-endure with the sun, and before the moon unto all generations.
He shall come down like rain upon the fleece, as drops falling on the
earth. In His days shall righteousness flourish, and abundance of peace
until the moon be taken away. And He shall have dominion from sea to
sea, and from the rivers unto the ends of the earth. Ethiopians shall
fall down before Him, and His enemies shall lick the dust. The kings of
Tarshish and the isles shall offer gifts; the kings of Arabia and Seba
shall offer gifts; and all the kings of the earth shall worship Him, and
all the nations shall serve Him: for He has delivered the poor from the
man of power, and the needy that hath no helper. He shall spare the poor
and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy: He shall redeem their
souls from usury and injustice, and His name shall be honourable before
them. And He shall live, and to Him shall be given of the gold of
Arabia, and they shall pray continually for Him: they shall bless Him
all the day. And there shall be a foundation on the earth, it shall be
exalted on the tops of the mountains: His fruit shall be on Lebanon, and
they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth. His name shall
be blessed for ever. His name shall endure before the sun; and all
tribes of the earth shall be blessed in Him, all nations shall call Him
blessed. Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous
things; and blessed be His glorious name for ever, and for ever and
ever; and the whole earth shall be filled with His glory. Amen,
amen.’ <span id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032) And at the close of
this Psalm which I have quoted, it is written, ‘The hymns of David the
son of Jesse are ended.’ <span id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033)
Moreover, that Solomon was a renowned and great king, by whom the temple
called that at Jerusalem was built, I know; but that none of those
things mentioned in the Psalm happened to him, is evident. For neither
did all kings worship him; nor did he reign to the ends of the earth;
nor did his enemies, falling before him, lick the dust. Nay, also, I
venture to repeat what is <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="viii.iv.xxxiv-Page_212"></span> written in the book of Kings as
committed by him, how through a woman’s influence he worshipped the
idols of Sidon, which those of the Gentiles who know God, the Maker of
all things through Jesus the crucified, do not venture to do, but abide
every torture and vengeance even to the extremity of death, rather than
worship idols, or eat meat offered to idols.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[211:2033](0010495.htm#fr_2032) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p1.4"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span> [Ps.
lxxii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#000)<span
id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[211:2034](0010495.htm#fr_2033) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxiv-p3"></span> \[A striking passage in De Maistre
(*Œuvres*, vol. vi. p. 275) is worthy of comparison.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV.—Heretics confirm the...](0010496)
