[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010394)  [Next](0010396) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.xxii"></span>

### <span id="viii.ii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Analogies to the sonship of Christ.

<span id="viii.ii.xxii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.ii.xxii-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xxii-p1.3"></span>Moreover, the Son of God called Jesus,
even if only a man by ordinary generation, yet, on account of His
wisdom, is worthy to be called the Son of God; for all writers call God
the Father of men and gods. And if we assert that the Word of God was
born of God in a peculiar manner, different from ordinary generation,
let this, as said above, be no extraordinary thing to you, who say that
Mercury is the angelic word of God. <span
id="viii.ii.xxii-p1.4"></span>But if any one objects that He was
crucified, in this also He is on a par with those reputed sons of
Jupiter of yours, who suffered as we have now enumerated. For their
sufferings at death are recorded to have been not all alike, but
diverse; so that not even by the peculiarity of His sufferings does He
seem to be inferior to them; but, on the contrary, as we promised in the
preceding part of this discourse, we will now prove Him superior— or
rather have already proved Him to be so—for the superior is revealed by
His actions. And if we even affirm that He was born of a virgin, accept
this in common with what you accept of Perseus. And in that we say that
He made whole the lame, the paralytic, and those born blind, we seem to
say what is very similar to the deeds said to have been done by
Æsculapius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.—The argument.](0010396)
