[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010468)  [Next](0010470) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.viii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Justin by his colloquy is kindled with love to Christ.

<span id="viii.iv.viii-p1"></span>“When he had spoken these and many
other things, which there is no time for mentioning at present, he went
away, bidding me attend to them; and I have not seen him since. But
straightway a flame was kindled in my soul; and a love of the prophets,
and of those men who are friends of Christ, possessed me; and whilst
revolving his words in my mind, I found this philosophy alone to be safe
and profitable. Thus, and for this reason, I am a philosopher. Moreover,
I would wish that all, making a resolution similar to my own, do not
keep themselves away from the words of the Saviour. For they possess a
terrible power in themselves, and are sufficient to inspire those who
turn aside from the path of rectitude with awe; while the sweetest rest
is afforded those who make a diligent practice of them. If, then, you
have any concern for yourself, and if you are eagerly looking for
salvation, and if you believe in God, you may—since you are not
indifferent to the matter <span id="fr_1963"></span>[1964](#fn_1963)
—become acquainted with the Christ of God, and, after being
initiated, <span id="fr_1964"></span>[1965](#fn_1964) live a happy
life.”

<span id="viii.iv.viii-p4"></span>When I had said this, my beloved
friends <span id="fr_1965"></span>[1966](#fn_1965) those who were with
Trypho laughed; but he, smiling, says, “I approve of your other remarks,
and admire the eagerness with which you study divine things; but it were
better for you still to abide in the philosophy of Plato, or of some
other man, cultivating endurance, self-control, and moderation, rather
than be deceived by false words, and follow the opinions of men of no
reputation. For if you remain in that mode of philosophy, and live
blamelessly, a hope of a better destiny were left to you; but when you
have forsaken God, and reposed confidence in man, what safety still
awaits you? If, then, you are willing to listen to me (for I have
already considered you a friend), first be circumcised, then observe
what ordinances have been enacted with respect to the Sabbath, and the
feasts, and <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="viii.iv.viii-Page_199"></span> the new moons of God; and, in a word,
do all things which have been written in the law: and then perhaps you
shall obtain mercy from God. But Christ —if He has indeed been born, and
exists anywhere—is unknown, and does not even know Himself, and has no
power until Elias come to anoint Him, and make Him manifest to all. And
you, having accepted a groundless report, invent a Christ for
yourselves, and for his sake are inconsiderately perishing.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[198:1964](0010469.htm#fr_1963) <span
id="viii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.viii-p2"></span> According to one interpretation, this
clause is applied to God: “If you believe in God, seeing He is not
indifferent to the matter,” etc. Maranus says that it means: A Jew who
reads so much of Christ in the Old Testament, cannot be indifferent to
the things which pertain to Him.

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[198:1965](0010469.htm#fr_1964) <span
id="viii.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.viii-p3"></span> Literally: having become perfect.
Some refer the words to perfection of character; some initiation by
baptism.

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[198:1966](0010469.htm#fr_1965) <span
id="viii.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.viii-p5"></span> Latin version, “beloved Pompeius.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—The Christians have not...](0010470)
