[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010000)  [Next](0010002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="i.i"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="i.i-Page_v"></span>

## <span id="i.i-p0.1"></span>PREFACE.

<span id="i.i-p1"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="i.i-p1.1"></span>This</span> volume, containing the equivalent of
three volumes of the Edinburgh series of the <span class="upper"><span
id="i.i-p1.2"></span>Ante-Nicene Fathers</span>, will be found a library
somewhat complete in itself. The Apostolic Fathers and those associated
with them in the third generation, are here placed together in a
handbook, which, with the inestimable Scriptures, supplies a succinct
autobiography of the Spouse of Christ for the first two centuries. No
Christian scholar has ever before possessed, in faithful versions of
such compact form, a supplement so essential to the right understanding
of the New Testament itself. It is a volume indispensable to all
scholars, and to every library, private or public, in this country.

<span id="i.i-p2"></span>The American Editor has performed the humble
task of ushering these works into American use, with scanty
contributions of his own. Such was the understanding with the public:
they were to be presented with the Edinburgh series, free from
appreciable colour or alloy. His duty was (1) to give historic
arrangement to the confused mass of the original series; (2) to supply,
in continuity, such brief introductory notices as might slightly
popularize what was apparently meant for scholars only, in the
introductions of the translators; (3) to supply a few deficiencies by
short notes and references; (4) to add such references to Scripture, or
to authors of general repute, as might lend additional aid to students,
without clogging or overlaying the comments of the translators; and (5)
to note such corruptions or distortions of Patristic testimony as have
been circulated, in the spirit of the forged Decretals, by those who
carry on the old imposture by means essentially equivalent. Too long
have they been allowed to speak to the popular mind as if the Fathers
were their own; while, to every candid reader, it must be evident that,
alike, the testimony, the arguments, and the silence of the Ante-Nicene
writers confound all attempts to identify the ecclesiastical
establishment of “the Holy Roman Empire,” with “the Holy Catholic
Church” of the ancient creeds.

<span id="i.i-p3"></span>In performing this task, under the pressure of
a virtual obligation to issue the first volume in the first month of the
new year, the Editor has relied upon the kindly aid of an able friend,
as typographical corrector of the Edinburgh sheets. It is only necessary
to add, that he has bracketed all his own notes, so as to assume the
responsibility for them; but his introductions are so separated from
those of the translators, that, after the first instance, he has not
thought it requisite to suffix his initials to these brief
contributions. He regrets that the most important volume of the series
is necessarily the experimental one, and comes out under disadvantages
from which it may be expected that succeeding issues will be free. May
the Lord God of our Fathers bless the undertaking to all my
fellow-Christians, and make good to them the promise which was once
felicitously chosen for the motto of a similar series of publications:
“Yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine
eyes shall see thy teachers.”

<span id="i.i-p4"></span>A. C. C.

<span id="i.i-p5"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="i.i-p5.1"></span>January</span>, 6, 1885.

<span id="i.i-p6"></span> <span id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span
id="i.i-Page_vi"></span> N.B.—The following advertisement of the
original editors will be useful here:—

<span id="i.i-p7"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="i.i-p7.1"></span>The Ante-Nicene Christian Library</span> is meant
to comprise translations into English of all the extant works of the
Fathers down to the date of the first General Council held at Nice in
<span class="upper"><span id="i.i-p7.2"></span>a.d.</span> 325. The sole
provisional exception is that of the more bulky writings of Origen. It
is intended at present only to embrace in the scheme the *Contra Celsum*
and the *De Principiis* of that voluminous author; but the whole of his
works will be included should the undertaking prove successful.

<span id="i.i-p8"></span>The present volume has been translated by the
Editors. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) Their object has been to
place the English reader as nearly as possible on a footing of equality
with those who are able to read the original. With this view they have
for the most part leaned towards literal exactness; and wherever any
considerable departure from this has been made, a *verbatim* rendering
has been given at the foot of the page. Brief introductory notices have
been prefixed, and short notes inserted, to indicate varieties of
reading, specify references, or elucidate any obscurity which seemed to
exist in the text.

<span id="i.i-p10"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="i.i-p10.1"></span>Edinburgh</span>, 1867.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vi:1](0010001.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="i.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="i.i-p9"></span> This refers to the first volume only of the
original series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introductory Notice](0010002.md)
