[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010758)  [Next](0010760) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxx"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—Refutation of the views of the heretics as to the future destiny of the soul and body.

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxx-p1.2"></span>Let us
return, however, to the remaining points of their system. For when they
declare <span id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237) that, at the
consummation of all things, their mother shall re-enter the Pleroma, and
receive the Saviour as her consort; that they themselves, as being
spiritual, when they have got rid of their animal souls, and become
intellectual spirits, will be the consorts of the spiritual angels; but
that the Demiurge, since they call him animal, will pass into the place
of the Mother; that the souls of the righteous shall psychically repose
in the intermediate place;—when they declare that like will be gathered
to like, spiritual things to spiritual, while material things continue
among those that are material, they do in fact contradict themselves,
inasmuch as they no longer maintain that souls pass, on account of their
nature, into the intermediate place to those substances which are
similar to themselves, but \[that they do so\] on account of the deeds
done \[in the body\], since they affirm that those of the righteous do
pass \[into that abode\], but those of the impious continue in the fire.
For if it is on account of their nature that all souls attain to the
place of enjoyment, <span id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238) and all
belong to the intermediate place simply because they are souls, as being
thus of the same nature with it, then it follows that faith is
altogether superfluous, as was also the descent <span
id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239) of the Saviour \[to this world\].
If, on the other hand, it is on account of their righteousness \[that
they attain to such a place of rest\], then it is no longer because they
are *souls* but because they are *righteous*. But if souls would
have <span id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240) perished unless they had
been righteous, then righteousness must have power to save the bodies
also \[which these souls inhabited\]; for why should it not save them,
since they, too, participated in righteousness? For if nature and
substance are the means of salvation, then all souls shall be saved; but
if righteousness and faith, why should these not save those bodies
which, equally with the souls, will enter <span
id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241) into <span id="page_403">p.
403</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxx-Page_403"></span> immortality? For
righteousness will appear, in matters of this kind, either impotent or
unjust, if indeed it saves some substances through participating in it,
but not others.

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p7"></span>2. For it is manifest that those acts
which are deemed righteous are performed in bodies. Either, therefore,
all souls will of necessity pass into the intermediate place, and there
will never be a judgment; or bodies, too, which have participated in
righteousness, will attain to the place of enjoyment, along with the
souls which have in like manner participated, if indeed righteousness is
powerful enough to bring thither those substances which have
participated in it. And then the doctrine concerning the resurrection of
bodies which we believe, will emerge true and certain \[from their
system\]; since, \[as we hold,\] God, when He resuscitates our mortal
bodies which preserved righteousness, will render them incorruptible and
immortal. For God is superior to nature, and has in Himself the
disposition \[to show kindness\], because He is good; and the ability to
do so, because He is mighty; and the faculty of fully carrying out His
purpose, because He is rich and perfect.

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p8"></span>3. But these men are in all points
inconsistent with themselves, when they decide that all souls do not
enter into the intermediate place, but those of the righteous only. For
they maintain that, according to nature and substance, three sorts \[of
being\] were produced by the Mother: the first, which proceeded from
perplexity, and weariness, and fear—that is material substance; the
second from impetuosity <span id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242) —that
is animal substance; but that which she brought forth after the vision
of those angels who wait upon Christ, is spiritual substance. If, then,
that substance <span id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243) which she
brought forth will by all means enter into the Pleroma because it is
spiritual, while that which is material will remain below because it is
material, and shall be totally consumed by the fire which burns within
it, why should not the whole animal substance go into the intermediate
place, into which also they send the Demiurge? But what is it which
shall enter within their Pleroma? For they maintain that souls shall
continue in the intermediate place, while bodies, because they possess
material substance, when they have been resolved into matter, shall be
consumed by that fire which exists in it; but their body being thus
destroyed, and their soul remaining in the intermediate place, no part
of man will any longer be left to enter in within the Pleroma. For the
intellect of man—his mind, thought, mental intention, and such like—is
nothing else than his soul; but the emotions and operations of the soul
itself have no substance apart from the soul. What part of them, then,
will still remain to enter into the Pleroma? For they themselves, in as
far as they are souls, remain in the intermediate place; while, in as
far as they are body, they will be consumed with the rest of matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[402:3238](0010759.htm#fr_3237) <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p2"></span> Comp. i. 7, 1.

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[402:3239](0010759.htm#fr_3238) <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p3"></span> “Refrigerium,” *place of refreshment*.

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[402:3240](0010759.htm#fr_3239) <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p4"></span> Billius, with great apparent reason,
proposes to read “descensio” for the unintelligible “discessio” of the
Latin text.

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[402:3241](0010759.htm#fr_3240) <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p5"></span> Grabe and Massuet read, “Si autem animæ
perire inciperent, nisi justæ fuissent,” for “Si autem animæ quæ
perituræ essent inciperent nisi justæ fuissent,”—words which defy all
translation.

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[402:3242](0010759.htm#fr_3241) <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p6"></span> The text is here uncertain and
confused; but, as Harvey remarks, “the argument is this, That if souls
are saved *qua* intellectual substance, then all are saved alike; but if
by reason of any moral qualities, then the bodies that have executed the
moral purposes of the soul, must also be considered to be heirs of
salvation.”

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[403:3243](0010759.htm#fr_3242) <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p9"></span> “De impetu:” it is generally supposed
that these words correspond to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p9.1"></span>ἐκ τῆς ἐπιστροφῆς</span> (comp. i. 5, 1),
but Harvey thinks <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p9.2"></span>ἐξ ὁρμῆς</span> preferable (i. 4, 1).

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[403:3244](0010759.htm#fr_3243) <span
id="ix.iii.xxx-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxx-p10"></span> The syntax of this sentence is in
utter confusion, but the meaning is doubtless that given above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX.—Absurdity of their...](0010760)
