[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010761)  [Next](0010763) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.—Further exposure of the wicked and blasphemous doctrines of the heretics.

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p1.3"></span>Moreover, this impious opinion of theirs
with respect to actions—namely, that it is incumbent on them to have
experience of all kinds of deeds, even the most abominable—is refuted by
the teaching of the Lord, with whom not only is the adulterer rejected,
but also the man who desires to commit adultery; <span
id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265) and not only is the actual murderer
held guilty of having killed another to his own damnation, but the man
also who is angry with his brother without a cause: who commanded \[His
disciples\] not only not to hate men, but also to love their enemies;
and enjoined them not only not to swear falsely, but not even to swear
at all; and not only not to speak evil of their neighbours, but not even
to style any one “Raca” and “fool;” \[declaring\] that otherwise they
were in danger of hell-fire; and not only not to strike, but even, when
themselves struck, to present the other cheek \[to those that maltreated
them\]; and not only not to refuse to give up the property of others,
but even if their own were taken away, not to demand it back again from
those that took it; and not only not to injure their neighbours, nor to
do them any evil, but also, when themselves wickedly dealt with, to be
long-suffering, and to show kindness towards those \[that injured
them\], and to pray for them, that by means of repentance they might be
saved—so that we should in no respect imitate the arrogance, lust, and
pride of others. Since, therefore, He whom these men boast of as their
Master, and of whom they affirm that He had a soul greatly better and
more highly toned than others, did indeed, with much earnestness,
command certain things to be done as being good and excellent, and
certain things to be abstained from not only in their actual
perpetration, but even in the thoughts which lead to their performance,
as being wicked, pernicious, and abominable, —how then can they escape
being put to confusion, when they affirm that such a Master was more
highly toned \[in spirit\] and better than others, and yet manifestly
give instruction of a kind utterly opposed to His teaching? And, again,
if there were really no such thing as good and evil, but certain things
were deemed righteous, and certain others unrighteous, in human opinion
only, He never would have expressed Himself thus in His teaching: “The
righteous shall shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father;” <span id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266) but He shall send
the unrighteous, and those who do not the works of righteousness, “into
everlasting fire, where their worm shall not die, and the fire shall not
be quenched.” <span id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267)

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p5"></span>2. When they further maintain that it
is incumbent on them to have experience of every kind <span
id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) of work and conduct, so that, if it
be possible, accomplishing all during one manifestation in this life,
they may \[at once\] pass over to the state of perfection, they are, by
no chance, found striving to do those things which wait upon virtue, and
are laborious, glorious, and skilful, <span
id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) which also are approved universally
as being good. For if it be necessary to go through every work and every
kind of operation, they ought, in the first place, to learn all the
arts: all of them, \[I say,\] whether referring to theory or practice,
whether they be acquired by self-denial, or are mastered through means
of labour, exercise, and perseverance; as, for example, every kind of
music, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and all such as are occupied
with intellectual pursuits: then, again, the whole study of medicine,
and the knowledge of plants, so as to become acquainted with those which
are prepared for the health of man; the art of painting and sculpture,
brass and marble work, and the kindred arts: moreover, \[they have to
study\] every kind of country labour, the veterinary art, pastoral
occupations, the various kinds of skilled labour, which are said to
pervade the whole circle of \[human\] exertion; those, again, connected
with a maritime life, gymnastic exercises, hunting, military and kingly
pursuits, and as many others as may exist, of which, with the utmost
labour, they could not learn the tenth, or even the thousandth part, in
the whole course of their lives. The fact indeed is, that they endeavour
to learn none of these, although they maintain that it is incumbent on
them to have experience of every kind of work; but, turning aside to
voluptuousness, and lust, and abominable actions, they stand
self-condemned when they are tried by their own doctrine. For, since
they are destitute of all those \[virtues\] which have been mentioned,
they will \[of necessity\] pass into the destruction of fire. These men,
while they boast of Jesus as being their Master, do in fact emulate the
philosophy of Epicurus and the indifference of the Cynics, \[calling
Jesus their Master,\] who not only turned His disciples away from evil
deeds, but even from \[wicked\] words and thoughts, as I have already
shown.

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p8"></span>3. Again, while they assert that they
possess souls from the same sphere as Jesus, and that they are like to
Him, sometimes even maintaining that they are superior; while \[they
affirm that they were\] produced, like Him, for the <span
id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-Page_409"></span>
performance of works tending to the benefit and establishment of
mankind, they are found doing nothing of the same or a like kind \[with
His actions\], nor what can in any respect be brought into comparison
with them. And if they have in truth accomplished anything
\[remarkable\] by means of magic, they strive \[in this way\]
deceitfully to lead foolish people astray, since they confer no real
benefit or blessing on those over whom they declare that they exert
\[supernatural\] power; but, bringing forward mere boys <span
id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270) \[as the subjects on whom they
practise\], and deceiving their sight, while they exhibit phantasms that
instantly cease, and do not endure even a moment of time, <span
id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271) they are proved to be like, not
Jesus our Lord, but Simon the magician. It is certain, <span
id="fr_3272"></span>[3273](#fn_3272) too, from the fact that the Lord
rose from the dead on the third day, and manifested Himself to His
disciples, and was in their sight received up into heaven, that,
inasmuch as these men die, and do not rise again, nor manifest
themselves to any, they are proved as possessing souls in no respect
similar to that of Jesus.

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p12"></span>4. <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>I<span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p12.2"></span>f, however, they maintain that the Lord,
too, performed such works simply in appearance, we shall refer them to
the prophetical writings, and prove from these both that all things were
thus <span id="fr_3273"></span>[3274](#fn_3273) predicted regarding Him,
and did take place undoubtedly, and that He is the only Son of God.
Wherefore, also, those who are in truth His disciples, receiving grace
from Him, do in His name perform \[miracles\], so as to promote the
welfare of other men, according to the gift which each one has received
from Him. For some do certainly and truly drive out devils, so that
those who have thus been cleansed from evil spirits frequently both
believe \[in Christ\], and join themselves to the Church. Others have
foreknowledge of things to come: they see visions, and utter prophetic
expressions. Others still, heal the sick by laying their hands upon
them, and they are made whole. Yea, moreover, as I have said, the dead
even have been raised up, and remained <span
id="fr_3274"></span>[3275](#fn_3274) among us for many years. And what
shall I more say? <span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>It is not
possible to name the number of the gifts which the Church, \[scattered\]
throughout the whole world, has received from God, in the name of Jesus
Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and which she exerts day
by day for the benefit of the Gentiles, neither practising deception
upon any, nor taking any reward <span
id="fr_3275"></span>[3276](#fn_3275) from them \[on account of such
miraculous interpositions\]. For as she has received freely <span
id="fr_3276"></span>[3277](#fn_3276) from God, freely also does she
minister \[to others\].

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p17"></span>5. <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>Nor does she perform anything by means
of angelic invocations, <span id="fr_3277"></span>[3278](#fn_3277) or by
incantations, or by any other wicked curious art; but, directing her
prayers to the Lord, who made all things, in a pure, sincere, and
straightforward spirit, and calling upon the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, she has been accustomed to work <span
id="fr_3278"></span>[3279](#fn_3278) miracles for the advantage of
mankind, and not to lead them into error. If, therefore, the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ even now confers benefits \[upon men\], and cures
thoroughly and effectively all who anywhere believe on Him, but not that
of Simon, or Menander, or Carpocrates, or of any other man whatever, it
is manifest that, when He was made man, He held fellowship with His own
creation, and <span id="fr_3279"></span>[3280](#fn_3279) did all things
truly through the power of God, according to the will of the Father of
all, as the prophets had foretold. But what these things were, shall be
described in dealing with the proofs to be found in the prophetical
writings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[408:3266](0010762.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p2"></span> [Matt. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021)<span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[408:3267](0010762.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p3"></span> [Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[408:3268](0010762.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p4"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>; [Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[408:3269](0010762.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p6"></span> Comp. i. 25, 4.

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[408:3270](0010762.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p7"></span> “Artificialia.”

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[409:3271](0010762.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p9"></span> “Pureos investes,” boys that have
not yet reached the age of puberty.

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[409:3272](0010762.htm#fr_3271) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p10"></span> The text has “stillicidio
temporis,” literally “ a *drop* of time” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>σταγμῇ χρόνου</span>); but the original
text was perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p10.2"></span>στιγμῇ χρόνου</span>, “a moment of
time.” With either reading the meaning is the same.

<span id="fn_3272"></span>[409:3273](0010762.htm#fr_3272) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p11"></span> Some have deemed the words “firmum
esse” an interpolation.

<span id="fn_3273"></span>[409:3274](0010762.htm#fr_3273) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p13"></span> That is, as being done *in
reality*, and not in appearance.

<span id="fn_3274"></span>[409:3275](0010762.htm#fr_3274) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p14"></span> Harvey here notes: “The reader will
not fail to remark this highly interesting testimony, that the divine
<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p14.1"></span>χαρίσματα</span> bestowed upon the
infant Church were not wholly extinct in the days of Irenæus. Possibly
the venerable Father is speaking from his own personal recollection of
some who had been raised from the dead, and had continued for a time
living witnesses of the efficacy of Christian faith.” \[See cap. xxxi.,
*supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3275"></span>[409:3276](0010762.htm#fr_3275) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p15"></span> Comp. [Acts
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018)<span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3276"></span>[409:3277](0010762.htm#fr_3276) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p16"></span> [Matt. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3277"></span>[409:3278](0010762.htm#fr_3277) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p18"></span> Grabe contends that these words
imply that no invocations of angels, good or bad, were practised in the
primitive Church. Massuet, on the other hand, maintains that the words
of Irenæus are plainly to be restricted to evil spirits, and have no
bearing on the general question of angelic invocation.

<span id="fn_3278"></span>[409:3279](0010762.htm#fr_3278) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p19"></span> We follow the common reading,
“perfecit;” but one <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>ms.</span> has “perficit,” *works*,
which suits the context better.

<span id="fn_3279"></span>[409:3280](0010762.htm#fr_3279) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxiii-p20"></span> We insert “et,” in accordance with
Grabe’s suggestion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII.—Absurdity of the...](0010763)
