[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010741)  [Next](0010743.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xiii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—The Triacontad of the heretics errs both by defect and excess: Sophia could never have produced anything apart from her consort; Logos and Sige could not have been contemporaries.

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>We may <span
id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035.md) remark, in the first place,
regarding their Triacontad, that the whole of it marvellously falls to
ruin on both sides, that is, both as respects defect and excess. They
say that to indicate it the Lord came to be baptized at the age of
thirty years. But this assertion really amounts to a manifest subversion
of their entire argument. As to defect, this happens as follows: first
of all, because they reckon the Propator among the other Æons. For the
Father of all ought not to be counted with other productions; He who was
not produced with that which was produced; He who was unbegotten with
that which was born; He whom no one comprehends with that which is
comprehended by Him, and who is on this account \[Himself\]
incomprehensible; and He who is without figure with that which has a
definite shape. For inasmuch as He is superior to the rest, He ought not
to be numbered with them, and that so that He who is impassible and not
in error should be reckoned with an Æon subject to passion, and actually
in error. For I have shown in the book which immediately precedes this,
that, beginning with Bythus, they reckon up the Triacontad to Sophia,
whom they describe as the erring Æon; and I have also there set forth
the names of their \[Æons\]; but if He be not reckoned, there are no
longer, on their own showing, thirty productions of Æons, but these then
become only twenty-nine.

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p3"></span>2. Next, with respect to the first
production Ennœa, whom they also term Sige, from whom again they
describe Nous and Aletheia as having been sent forth, they err in both
particulars. For it is impossible that the thought (Ennœa) of any one,
or his silence (Sige), should be understood apart from himself; and
that, being sent forth beyond him, it should possess a special figure of
its own. But if they assert that the (Ennœa) was not sent forth beyond
Him, but continued one with the Propator, why then do they reckon her
with the other Æons —with those who were not one \[with the Father\],
and are on this account ignorant of His greatness? If, however, she was
so united (let us take this also into consideration), there is then an
absolute necessity, that from this united and inseparable conjunction,
which constitutes but one being, there <span
id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036.md) should proceed an unseparated and
united production, so that it should not be dissimilar to Him who sent
it forth. But if this be so, then just as Bythus and Sige, so also Nous
and Aletheia will form one and the same being, ever cleaving mutually
together. And inasmuch as the one cannot be conceived of without the
other, just as water cannot \[be conceived of\] without \[the thought
of\] moisture, or fire without \[the thought of\] heat, or a stone
without \[the thought\] of hardness (for these things are mutually bound
together, and the one cannot be separated from the other, but always
co-exists with it), so it behoves Bythus to be united in the same way
with Ennœa, and Nous with Aletheia. Logos and Zoe again, as being sent
forth by those that are thus united, ought themselves to be united, and
to constitute only one being. But, according to such a process of
reasoning, Homo and Ecclesia too, and indeed all the remaining
conjunctions of the Æons produced, ought to be united, and always to
co-exist, the one with the other. For there is a necessity in their
opinion, that a female Æon should exist side by side with a male one,
inasmuch as she is, so to speak, \[the forthputting of\] his affection.

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p5"></span>3. <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>These things being so, and such opinions
being proclaimed by them, they again venture, without a blush, to teach
that the younger Æon of the Duodecad, whom they also style Sophia, did,
apart from union with her consort, whom they call Theletus, endure
passion, and separately, without any assistance from him, gave birth to
a production which they name “a female from a female.” They thus rush
into such utter frenzy, as to form two most clearly opposite opinions
respecting the same point. For if <span id="page_372">p. 372</span>
<span id="ix.iii.xiii-Page_372"></span> Bythus is ever one with Sige,
Nous with Aletheia, Logos with Zoe, and so on, as respects the rest, how
could Sophia, without union with her consort, either suffer or generate
anything? And if, again, she did really suffer passion apart from him,
it necessarily follows that the other conjunctions also admit of
disjunction and separation among themselves,—a thing which I have
already shown to be impossible. It is also impossible, therefore, that
Sophia suffered passion apart from Theletus; and thus, again, their
whole system of argument is overthrown. For they have yet <span
id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037.md) again derived the whole of
remaining \[material substance\], like the composition of a tragedy,
from that passion which they affirm she experienced apart from union
with her consort.

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p7"></span>4. If, however, they impudently
maintain, in order to preserve from ruin their vain imaginations, that
the rest of the conjunctions also were disjoined and separated from one
another on account of this latest conjunction, then \[I reply that\], in
the first place, they rest upon a thing which is impossible. For how can
they separate the Propator from his Ennœa, or Nous from Aletheia, or
Logos from Zoe, and so on with the rest? And how can they themselves
maintain that they tend again to unity, and are, in fact, all at one, if
indeed these very conjunctions, which are within the Pleroma, do not
preserve unity, but are separate from one another; and that to such a
degree, that they both endure passion and perform the work of generation
without union one with another, just as hens do apart from intercourse
with cocks.

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p8"></span>5. Then, again, their first and
first-begotten Ogdoad will be overthrown as follows: They must admit
that Bythus and Sige, Nous and Aletheia, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and
Ecclesia, do individually dwell in the same Pleroma. <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p8.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xiii-p8.2"></span>But it
is impossible that Sige (silence) can exist in the presence of Logos
(speech), or again, that Logos can manifest himself in the presence of
Sige. For these are mutually destructive of each other, even as light
and darkness can by no possibility exist in the same place: for if light
prevails, there cannot be darkness; and if darkness, there cannot be
light, since, where light appears, darkness is put to flight. In like
manner, where Sige is, there cannot be Logos; and where Logos is, there
certainly cannot be Sige. But if they say that Logos simply exists
within <span id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038) (unexpressed.md), Sige
also will exist within, and will not the less be destroyed by the Logos
within. But that he really is not merely conceived of in the mind, the
very order of the production of their (Æons) shows.

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p10"></span>6. Let them not then declare that the
first and principal Ogdoad consists of Logos and Sige, but let them \[as
a matter of necessity\] exclude either Sige or Logos; and then their
first and principal Ogdoad is at an end. For if they describe the
conjunctions \[of the Æons\] as united, then their whole argument fails
to pieces. Since, if they were united, how could Sophia have generated a
defect without union with her consort? If, on the other hand, they
maintain that, as in production, each of the Æons possesses his own
peculiar substance, then how can Sige and Logos manifest themselves in
the same place? So far, then, with respect to defect.

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p11"></span>7. But again, their Triacontad is
overthrown as to excess by the following considerations. They represent
Horos (whom they call by a variety of names which I have mentioned in
the preceding book) as having been produced by Monogenes just like the
other Æons. Some of them maintain that this Horos was produced by
Monogenes, while others affirm that he was sent forth by the Propator
himself in His own image. They affirm further, that a production was
formed by Monogenes— Christ and the Holy Spirit; and they do not reckon
these in the number of the Pleroma, nor the Saviour either, whom they
also declare to be *Totum* <span id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039.md)
(all things). Now, it is evident even to a blind man, that not merely
thirty productions, as they maintain, were sent forth, but four more
along with these thirty. For they reckon the Propator himself in the
Pleroma, and those too, who in succession were produced by one another.
Why is it, then, that those \[other beings\] are not reckoned as
existing with these in the same Pleroma, since they were produced in the
same manner? For what just reason can they assign for not reckoning
along with the other Æons, either Christ, whom they describe as having,
according to the Father’s will, been produced by Monogenes, or the Holy
Spirit, or Horos, whom they also call Soter <span
id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040) (Saviour.md), and not even the Saviour
Himself, who came to impart assistance and form to their Mother? Whether
is this as if these latter were weaker than the former, and therefore
unworthy of the name of Æons, or of being numbered among them, or as if
they were superior and more excellent? But how could they be weaker,
since they were produced for the establishment and rectification of the
others? And then, again, they cannot possibly be superior to the first
and principal Tetrad, by which they were also produced; for it, too, is
reckoned in the number above mentioned. <span id="page_373">p.
373</span> <span id="ix.iii.xiii-Page_373"></span> These latter beings,
then, ought also to have been numbered in the Pleroma of the Æons, or
that should be deprived of the honour of those Æons which bear this
appellation (the Tetrad).

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p14"></span>8. Since, therefore, their Triacontad
is thus brought to nought, as I have shown, both with respect to defect
and excess (for in dealing with such a number, either excess or defect
\[to any extent\] will render the number untenable, and how much more so
great variations?), it follows that what they maintain respecting their
Ogdoad and Duodecad is a mere fable which cannot stand. Their whole
system, moreover, falls to the ground, when their very foundation is
destroyed and dissolved into Bythus, <span
id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041.md) that is, into what has no
existence. Let them, then, henceforth seek to set forth some other
reasons why the Lord came to be baptized at the age of thirty years, and
\[explain in some other way\] the Duodecad of the apostles; and \[the
fact stated regarding\] her who suffered from an issue of blood; and all
the other points respecting which they so madly labour in vain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[371:3036](0010742.htm#fr_3035.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p2"></span> The text vacillates between “dicemus”
and “dicamus.”

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[371:3037](0010742.htm#fr_3036.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p4"></span> This sentence is confused in the Latin
text, but the meaning is evidently that given above.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[372:3038](0010742.htm#fr_3037.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p6"></span> It is difficult to see the meaning of
“iterum” here. Harvey begins a new paragraph with this sentence.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[372:3039](0010742.htm#fr_3038.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p9.1"></span>ἐνδιάθετος</span> —simply *conceived* in
the mind—used in opposition to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p9.2"></span>προφορικός</span>, *expressed*.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[372:3040](0010742.htm#fr_3039.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p12"></span> Harvey remarks that “the author
perhaps wrote <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p12.1"></span>Ορον</span> (*Horos*), which was read by
the translator <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p12.2"></span>῞Ολον</span> (*totum*).”

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[372:3041](0010742.htm#fr_3040.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p13"></span> Since *Soter* does not occur among
the various appellations of Horos mentioned by Irenæus (i. 11, 4), Grabe
proposes to read *Stauros*, and Massuet *Lytrotes*; but Harvey conceives
that the difficulty is explained by the fact that Horos was a *power* of
Soter (i. 3, 3).

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[373:3042](0010742.htm#fr_3041.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xiii-p15"></span> Irenæus here, after his custom, plays
upon the word *Bythus* (profundity), which, in the phraseology of the
Valentinians, was a name of the Propator, but is in this passage used to
denote *an unfathomable abyss*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—The first order of...](0010743.md)
