[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010620)  [Next](0010622) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xi"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.—Heathen oracles testify of Moses.

<span id="viii.vi.xi-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi.xi-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xi-p1.2"></span><span id="viii.vi.xi-p1.3"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xi-p1.4"></span>But as you do not see the necessity of
giving up the ancient error of your forefathers in obedience to these
teachers \[of ours\], what teachers of your own do you maintain to have
lived worthy of credit in the matter of religion? For, as I have
frequently said, it is impossible that those who have not themselves
learned these so great and divine things from such persons as are
acquainted with them, should either themselves know them, or be able
rightly to teach others. Since, therefore, it has been sufficiently
proved that the opinions of your philosophers are obviously full of all
ignorance and deceit, having now perhaps wholly abandoned the
philosophers as formerly you abandoned the poets, you will turn to the
deceit of the oracles; for in this style I have heard some speaking.
Therefore I think it fit to tell you at this step in our discourse what
I formerly heard among you concerning their utterances. For when one
inquired at your oracle—it is your own story—what religious men had at
any time happened to live, you say that the oracle answered thus: “Only
the Chaldæans have obtained wisdom, and the Hebrews, who worship God
Himself, the self-begotten King.”

<span id="viii.vi.xi-p2"></span>Since, therefore, you think that the
truth can be learned from your oracles, when you read the histories and
what has been written regarding the life of Moses by those who do not
belong to our religion, and when you know that Moses and the rest of the
prophets were descended from the race of the Chaldæans and Hebrews, do
not think that anything incredible has taken place if a man sprung from
a godly line, and who lived worthily of the godliness of his fathers,
was chosen by God to be honoured with this great gift and to be set
forth as the first of all the prophets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII.—Antiquity of Moses...](0010622)
