[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010663)  [Next](0010665.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.viii.viii"></span>

### <span id="viii.viii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Does the body cause the soul to sin?

<span id="viii.viii.viii-p1"></span>Quite true, say they; yet the flesh
is a sinner, so much so, that it forces the soul to sin along with it.
And thus they vainly accuse it, and lay to its charge alone the sins of
both. But in what instance can the flesh possibly sin by itself, if it
have not the soul going before it and inciting it? For as in the case of
a yoke of oxen, if one or other is loosed from the yoke, neither of them
can plough alone; so neither can soul or body alone effect anything, if
they be unyoked from their communion. And if it is the flesh that is the
sinner, then on its account alone did the Saviour come, as He says, “I
am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.” <span
id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629.md) Since, then, the flesh has been
proved to be valuable in the sight of God, and glorious above all His
works, it would very justly be saved by Him.

<span id="viii.viii.viii-p3"></span>We must meet, therefore, those who
say, that even though it be the special handiwork of God, and beyond all
else valued by Him, it would not immediately follow that it has the
promise of the resurrection. Yet is it not absurd, that that which has
been produced with such circumstance, and which is beyond all else
valuable, should be so neglected by its Maker, as to pass to nonentity?
Then the sculptor and painter, if they wish the works they have made to
endure, that they may win glory by them, renew them when they begin to
decay; but God would so neglect His own possession and work, that it
becomes annihilated, and no longer exists. Should we not call this
labour in vain? As if a man who has built a house should forthwith
destroy it, or should neglect it, though he sees it falling into decay,
and is able to repair it: we would blame him for labouring in vain; and
should we not so blame God? But not such an one is the
Incorruptible,—not senseless is the Intelligence of the universe. Let
the unbelieving be silent, even though they themselves do not believe.

<span id="viii.viii.viii-p4"></span>But, in truth, He has even called
the flesh to the resurrection, and promises to it everlasting life. For
where He promises to save man, there He gives the promise to the flesh.
For what is man but the reasonable animal composed of body and soul? Is
the soul by itself man? No; but the soul of man. Would the body be
called man? No, but it is called the body of man. If, then, neither of
these is by itself man, but that which is made up of the two together is
called man, and God has called man to life and <span id="page_298">p.
298</span> <span id="viii.viii.viii-Page_298"></span> resurrection, He
has called not a part, but the whole, which is the soul and the body.
Since would it not be unquestionably absurd, if, while these two are in
the same being and according to the same law, the one were saved and the
other not? And if it be not impossible, as has already been proved, that
the flesh be regenerated, what is the distinction on the ground of which
the soul is saved and the body not? Do they make God a grudging God? But
He is good, and will have all to be saved. And by God and His
proclamation, not only has your soul heard and believed on Jesus Christ,
and with it the flesh, <span id="fr_2630"></span>[2631](#fn_2630.md) but
both were washed, and both wrought righteousness. They make God, then
ungrateful and unjust, if, while both believe on Him, He desires to save
one and not the other. Well, they say, but the soul is incorruptible,
being a part of God and inspired by Him, and therefore He desires to
save what is peculiarly His own and akin to Himself; but the flesh is
corruptible, and not from Him, as the soul is. Then what thanks are due
to Him, and what manifestation of His power and goodness is it, if He
purposed to save what is by nature saved and exists as a part of
Himself? For it had its salvation from itself; so that in saving the
soul, God does no great thing. For to be saved is its natural destiny,
because it is a part of Himself, being His inspiration. But no thanks
are due to one who saves what is his own; for this is to save himself.
For he who saves a part himself, saves himself by his own means, lest he
become defective in that part; and this is not the act of a good man.
For not even when a man does good to his children and offspring, does
one call him a good man; for even the most savage of the wild beasts do
so, and indeed willingly endure death, if need be, for the sake of their
cubs. But if a man were to perform the same acts in behalf of his
slaves, that man would justly be called good. Wherefore the Saviour also
taught us to love our enemies, since, says He, what thank have ye? So
that He has shown us that it is a good work not only to love those that
are begotten of Him, but also those that are without. And what He
enjoins upon us, He Himself first of all does. <span
id="fr_2631"></span>[2632](#fn_2631.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[297:2630](0010664.htm#fr_2629.md) <span
id="viii.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.viii-p2"></span> [Mark ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.viii.viii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2630"></span>[298:2631](0010664.htm#fr_2630.md) <span
id="viii.viii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.viii-p5"></span> Migne proposes to read here <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.viii.viii-p5.1"></span>καὶ οὐ σὺν
αὐτῇ</span>, “without the flesh,” which gives a more obvious meaning.
The above reading is, however, defensible. Justin means that the flesh
was not merely partaking of the soul’s faith and promise, but had rights
of its own.

<span id="fn_2631"></span>[298:2632](0010664.htm#fr_2631.md) <span
id="viii.viii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.viii.viii-p6"></span> It is supposed that a part of the
treatise has been here dropped out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—The resurrection of...](0010665.md)
