[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010781)  [Next](0010783.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xvi"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—Refutation of the Ebionites, who disparaged the authority of St. Paul, from the writings of St. Luke, which must be received as a whole. Exposure of the hypocrisy, deceit, and pride of the Gnostics. The apostles and their disciples knew and preached one God, the Creator of the world.

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.iv.xvi-p1.2"></span><span id="ix.iv.xvi-p1.3"></span>But again,
we allege the same against those who do not recognise Paul as an
apostle: that they should either reject the other words of the Gospel
which we have come to know through Luke alone, and not make use of them;
or else, if they do receive all these, they must necessarily admit also
that testimony concerning Paul, when he (Luke) tells us that the Lord
spoke at first to him from heaven: “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?
I am Jesus Christ, whom thou persecutest;” <span
id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563.md) and then to Ananias, saying
regarding him: “Go thy way; for he is a chosen vessel unto Me, to bear
My name among the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel. For I
will show him, from this time, how great things he must suffer for My
name’s sake.” <span id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564.md) Those,
therefore, who do not accept of him \[as a teacher\], who was chosen by
God for this purpose, that he might boldly bear His name, as being sent
to the forementioned nations, do despise the election of God, and
separate themselves from the company of the apostles. For neither can
they contend that Paul was no apostle, when he was chosen for this
purpose; nor can they prove Luke guilty of falsehood, when he proclaims
the truth to us with all diligence. It may be, indeed, that it was with
this view that God set forth very many Gospel truths, through Luke’s
instrumentality, which all should esteem it necessary to use, in order
that all persons, following his subsequent testimony, which treats upon
the acts and the doctrine of the apostles, and holding the unadulterated
rule of truth, may be saved. His testimony, therefore, is true, and the
doctrine of the apostles is open and stedfast, holding nothing in
reserve; nor did they teach one set of doctrines in private, and another
in public.

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p4"></span>2. <span id="ix.iv.xvi-p4.1"></span>For
this is the subterfuge of false persons, evil seducers, and hypocrites,
as they act who are from Valentinus. These men discourse to the
multitude about those who belong to the Church, whom they do themselves
term “vulgar,” and “ecclesiastic.” <span
id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565.md) By these words they entrap the more
simple, and entice them, imitating our phraseology, that these \[dupes\]
may listen to them the oftener; and then these are asked <span
id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566.md) regarding us, how it is, that when
they hold doctrines similar to ours, we, without cause, keep ourselves
aloof from their company; and \[how it is, that\] when they say the same
things, and hold the same doctrine, we call them heretics? When they
have thus, by means of questions, overthrown the faith of any, and
rendered them uncontradicting hearers of their own, they describe to
them in private the unspeakable mystery of their Pleroma. But they are
altogether deceived, who imagine that they may learn from the Scriptural
texts adduced by heretics, that \[doctrine\] which their words plausibly
teach. <span id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567.md) For error is
plausible, and bears a resemblance <span id="page_440">p. 440</span>
<span id="ix.iv.xvi-Page_440"></span> to the truth, but requires to be
disguised; while truth is without disguise, and therefore has been
entrusted to children. And if any one of their auditors do indeed demand
explanations, or start objections to them, they affirm that he is one
not capable of receiving the truth, and not having from above the seed
\[derived\] from their Mother; and thus really give him no reply, but
simply declare that he is of the intermediate regions, that is, belongs
to animal natures. But if any one do yield himself up to them like a
little sheep, and follows out their practice, and their “redemption,”
such an one is puffed up to such an extent, that he thinks he is neither
in heaven nor on earth, but that he has passed within the Pleroma; and
having already embraced his angel, he walks with a strutting gait and a
supercilious countenance, possessing all the pompous air of a cock.
There are those among them who assert that that man who comes from above
ought to follow a good course of conduct; wherefore they do also pretend
a gravity \[of demeanour\] with a certain superciliousness. The
majority, however, having become scoffers also, as if already perfect,
and living without regard \[to appearances\], yea, in contempt \[of that
which is good\], call themselves “the spiritual,” and allege that they
have already become acquainted with that place of refreshing which is
within their Pleroma.

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p8"></span>3. But let us revert to the same line of
argument \[hitherto pursued\]. For when it has been manifestly declared,
that they who were the preachers of the truth and the apostles of
liberty termed no one else God, or named him Lord, except the only true
God the Father, and His Word, who has the pre-eminence in all things; it
shall then be clearly proved, that they (the apostles) confessed as the
Lord God Him who was the Creator of heaven and earth, who also spoke
with Moses, gave to him the dispensation of the law, and who called the
fathers; and that they knew no other. The opinion of the apostles,
therefore, and of those (Mark and Luke) who learned from their words,
concerning God, has been made manifest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[439:3564](0010782.htm#fr_3563.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xvi-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p2"></span> [Acts xxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>,
[Acts xxvi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#015.md)<span
id="ix.iv.xvi-p2.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[439:3565](0010782.htm#fr_3564.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xvi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p3"></span> [Acts
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[439:3566](0010782.htm#fr_3565.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p5"></span> Latin, “communes et ecclesiasticos:”
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>καθολικούς</span>
is translated here “communes,” as for some time after the word
*catholicus* had not been added to the Latin language in its
ecclesiastical sense. \[The Roman Creed was remarkable for its omission
of the word *Catholic*. See Bingham, *Antiquities*, book x. cap. iv.
sect 11.\]

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[439:3567](0010782.htm#fr_3566.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p6"></span> We here follow the text of Harvey, who
prints, without remark, *quæruntur*, instead of *queruntur*, as in
Migne’s edition.

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[439:3568](0010782.htm#fr_3567.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xvi-p7"></span> Such is the sense educed by Harvey from
the old Latin version, which thus runs: “Decipiuntur autem omnes, qui
quod est in verbis verisimile, se putant posse discere a veritate.” For
“omnes” he would read “omnino,” and he discards the emendation proposed
by the former editors, viz., “discernere” for “discere.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.—Proofs from the...](0010783.md)
