[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010780)  [Next](0010782) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xv"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—If Paul had known any mysteries unrevealed to the other apostles, Luke, his constant companion and fellow-traveller, could not have been ignorant of them; neither could the truth have possibly lain hid from him, through whom alone we learn many and most important particulars of the Gospel history.

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iv.xv-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.iv.xv-p1.2"></span>But that this Luke was inseparable from Paul,
and his fellow-labourer in the Gospel, he himself clearly evinces, not
as a matter of boasting, but as bound to do so by the truth itself. For
he says that when Barnabas, and John who was called Mark, had parted
company from Paul, and sailed to Cyprus, “we came to Troas;” <span
id="fr_3538"></span>[3539](#fn_3538) and when Paul had beheld in a dream
a man of Macedonia, saying, “Come into Macedonia, Paul, and help us,”
“immediately,” he says, “we endeavoured to go into Macedonia,
understanding that the Lord had called us to preach the Gospel unto
them. Therefore, sailing from Troas, we directed our ship’s course
towards Samothracia.” And then he carefully indicates all the rest of
their journey as far as Philippi, and how they delivered their first
address: “for, sitting down,” he says, “we spake unto the women who had
assembled;” <span id="fr_3539"></span>[3540](#fn_3539) and certain
believed, even a great many. And again does he say, “But we sailed from
Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and came to Troas, where we
abode seven days.” <span id="fr_3540"></span>[3541](#fn_3540) And all
the remaining \[details\] of his course with Paul he recounts,
indicating with all diligence both places, and cities, and number of
days, until they went up to Jerusalem; and what befell Paul there, <span
id="fr_3541"></span>[3542](#fn_3541) how he was sent to Rome in bonds;
the name of the centurion who took him in charge; <span
id="fr_3542"></span>[3543](#fn_3542) and the signs of the ships, and how
they made shipwreck; <span id="fr_3543"></span>[3544](#fn_3543) and the
island upon which they escaped, and how they received kindness there,
Paul healing the chief man of that island; and how they sailed from
thence to Puteoli, and from that arrived at Rome; and for what period
they sojourned at Rome. As Luke was present at all these occurrences, he
carefully noted them down in writing, so that he cannot be convicted of
falsehood or boastfulness, because all these \[particulars\] proved both
that he was senior to all those who now teach otherwise, and that he was
not ignorant of the truth. That he <span id="page_438">p. 438</span>
<span id="ix.iv.xv-Page_438"></span> was not merely a follower, but also
a fellow-labourer of the apostles, but especially of Paul, Paul has
himself declared also in the Epistles, saying: “Demas hath forsaken me,
… and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus to
Dalmatia. Only Luke is with me.” <span
id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544) From this he shows that he was
always attached to and inseparable from him. And again he says, in the
Epistle to the Colossians: “Luke, the beloved physician, greets
you.” <span id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545) But surely if Luke, who
always preached in company with Paul, and is called by him “the
beloved,” and with him performed the work of an evangelist, and was
entrusted to hand down to us a Gospel, learned nothing different from
him (Paul), as has been pointed out from his words, how can these men,
who were never attached to Paul, boast that they have learned hidden and
unspeakable mysteries?

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p10"></span>2. But that Paul taught with simplicity
what he knew, not only to those who were \[employed\] with him, but to
those that heard him, he does himself make manifest. For when the
bishops and presbyters who came from Ephesus and the other cities
adjoining had assembled in Miletus, since he was himself hastening to
Jerusalem to observe Pentecost, after testifying many things to them,
and declaring what must happen to him at Jerusalem, he added: “I know
that ye shall see my face no more. Therefore I take you to record this
day, that I am pure from the blood of all. For I have not shunned to
declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take heed, therefore, both to
yourselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has placed
you as bishops, to rule the Church of the Lord, <span
id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546) which He has acquired for Himself
through His own blood.” <span id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547) Then,
referring to the evil teachers who should arise, he said: “I know that
after my departure shall grievous wolves come to you, not sparing the
flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse
things, to draw away disciples after them.” “I have not shunned,” he
says, “to declare unto you all the counsel of God.” Thus did the
apostles simply, and without respect of persons, deliver to all what
they had themselves learned from the Lord. Thus also does Luke, without
respect of persons, deliver to us what he had learned from them, as he
has himself testified, saying, “Even as they delivered them unto us, who
from the beginning were eye-witnesses and ministers of the Word.” <span
id="fr_3548"></span>[3549](#fn_3548)

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p14"></span>3. Now if any man set Luke aside, as one
who did not know the truth, he will, \[by so acting,\] manifestly reject
that Gospel of which he claims to be a disciple. For through him we have
become acquainted with very many and important parts of the Gospel; for
instance, the generation of John, the history of Zacharias, the coming
of the angel to Mary, the exclamation of Elisabeth, the descent of the
angels to the shepherds, the words spoken by them, the testimony of Anna
and of Simeon with regard to Christ, and that twelve years of age He was
left behind at Jerusalem; also the baptism of John, the number of the
Lord’s years when He was baptized, and that this occurred in the
fifteenth year of Tiberius Cæsar. And in His office of teacher this is
what He has said to the rich: “Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have
received your consolation;” <span id="fr_3549"></span>[3550](#fn_3549)
and “Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger; and ye who laugh
now, for ye shall weep;” and, “Woe unto you when all men shall speak
well of you: for so did your fathers to the false prophets.” All things
of the following kind we have known through Luke alone (and numerous
actions of the Lord we have learned through him, which also all \[the
Evangelists\] notice): the multitude of fishes which Peter’s companions
enclosed, when at the Lord’s command they cast the nets; <span
id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550) the woman who had suffered for
eighteen years, and was healed on the Sabbath-day; <span
id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551) the man who had the dropsy, whom
the Lord made whole on the Sabbath, and how He did defend Himself for
having performed an act of healing on that day; how He taught His
disciples not to aspire to the uppermost rooms; how we should invite the
poor and feeble, who cannot recompense us; the man who knocked during
the night to obtain loaves, and did obtain them, because of the urgency
of his importunity; <span id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552) how, when
\[our Lord\] was sitting at meat with a Pharisee, a woman that was a
sinner kissed His feet, and anointed them with ointment, with what the
Lord said to Simon on her behalf concerning the two debtors; <span
id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553) also about the parable of that rich
man who stored up the goods which had accrued to him, to whom it was
also said, “In this night they shall demand thy soul from thee; whose
then shall those things be which thou hast prepared?” <span
id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554) and similar to this, that of the
rich man, who was clothed in purple and who fared sumptuously, and the
indigent Lazarus; <span id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555) also the
answer which He gave to His disciples when they said, “Increase our
faith;” <span id="fr_3556"></span>[3557](#fn_3556) also His conversation
with Zaccheus the publican; <span id="fr_3557"></span>[3558](#fn_3557)
also about <span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xv-Page_439"></span> the Pharisee and the publican, who were
praying in the temple at the same time; <span
id="fr_3558"></span>[3559](#fn_3558) also the ten lepers, whom He
cleansed in the way simultaneously; <span
id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559) also how He ordered the lame and
the blind to be gathered to the wedding from the lanes and
streets; <span id="fr_3560"></span>[3561](#fn_3560) also the parable of
the judge who feared not God, whom the widow’s importunity led to avenge
her cause; <span id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561) and about the
fig-tree in the vineyard which produced no fruit. There are also many
other particulars to be found mentioned by Luke alone, which are made
use of by both Marcion and Valentinus. And besides all these, \[he
records\] what \[Christ\] said to His disciples in the way, after the
resurrection, and how they recognised Him in the breaking of
bread. <span id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562)

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p29"></span>4. It follows then, as of course, that
these men must either receive the rest of his narrative, or else reject
these parts also. For no persons of common sense can permit them to
receive some things recounted by Luke as being true, and to set others
aside, as if he had not known the truth. And if indeed Marcion’s
followers reject these, they will then possess no Gospel; for,
curtailing that according to Luke, as I have said already, they boast in
having the Gospel \[in what remains\]. But the followers of Valentinus
must give up their utterly vain talk; for they have taken from that
\[Gospel\] many occasions for their own speculations, to put an evil
interpretation upon what he has well said. If, on the other hand, they
feel compelled to receive the remaining portions also, then, by studying
the perfect Gospel, and the doctrine of the apostles, they will find it
necessary to repent, that they may be saved from the danger \[to which
they are exposed\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3538"></span>[437:3539](0010781.htm#fr_3538) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p2"></span> [Acts xvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p2.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3539"></span>[437:3540](0010781.htm#fr_3539) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p3"></span> [Acts xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3540"></span>[437:3541](0010781.htm#fr_3540) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p4"></span> [Acts
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3541"></span>[437:3542](0010781.htm#fr_3541) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p5"></span> [Acts
xxi.](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3542"></span>[437:3543](0010781.htm#fr_3542) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p6"></span> [Acts
xxvii.](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3543"></span>[437:3544](0010781.htm#fr_3543) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p7"></span> [Acts xxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[438:3545](0010781.htm#fr_3544) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p8"></span> [2 Tim.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[438:3546](0010781.htm#fr_3545) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p9"></span> [Col. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[438:3547](0010781.htm#fr_3546) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p11"></span> In this very important passage of
Scripture, Irenæus manifestly read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xv-p11.1"></span>Κυρίου</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xv-p11.2"></span>Θεοῦ</span>, which is
found in *text. rec*. The Codex Bezæ has the same reading; but all the
other most ancient <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iv.xv-p11.3"></span>mss.</span> agree with the received text.

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[438:3548](0010781.htm#fr_3547) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p12"></span> [Acts xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#025)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p12.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3548"></span>[438:3549](0010781.htm#fr_3548) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p13"></span> [Luke i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3549"></span>[438:3550](0010781.htm#fr_3549) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p15"></span> [Luke vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p15.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[438:3551](0010781.htm#fr_3550) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p16"></span> [Luke
v.](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[438:3552](0010781.htm#fr_3551) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p17"></span> [Luke
xiii.](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[438:3553](0010781.htm#fr_3552) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p18"></span> [Luke
xi.](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[438:3554](0010781.htm#fr_3553) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p19"></span> [Luke
vii.](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[438:3555](0010781.htm#fr_3554) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p20"></span> [Luke xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[438:3556](0010781.htm#fr_3555) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p21"></span> [Luke
xvi.](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3556"></span>[438:3557](0010781.htm#fr_3556) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p22"></span> [Luke xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3557"></span>[438:3558](0010781.htm#fr_3557) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p23"></span> [Luke
xix.](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3558"></span>[439:3559](0010781.htm#fr_3558) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p24"></span> [Luke
xviii.](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#000)<span
id="ix.iv.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[439:3560](0010781.htm#fr_3559) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p25"></span> [Luke
xvii.](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3560"></span>[439:3561](0010781.htm#fr_3560) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p26"></span> [Luke
xviii.](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#000)<span
id="ix.iv.xv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[439:3562](0010781.htm#fr_3561) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p27"></span> [Luke
xiii.](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[439:3563](0010781.htm#fr_3562) <span
id="ix.iv.xv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xv-p28"></span> [Luke
xxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv.xv-p28.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV.—Refutation of the...](0010782)
