[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010727)  [Next](0010729) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—Doctrines of the Cainites.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Others again declare that Cain derived his
being from the Power above, and acknowledge that Esau, Korah, the
Sodomites, and all such persons, are related to themselves. On this
account, they add, they have been assailed by the Creator, yet no one of
them has suffered injury. For Sophia was in the habit of carrying off
that which belonged to her from them to herself. They declare that Judas
the traitor was thoroughly acquainted with these things, and that he
alone, knowing the truth as no others did, accomplished the mystery of
the betrayal; by him all things, both earthly and heavenly, were thus
thrown into confusion. They produce a fictitious history of this kind,
which they style the Gospel of Judas.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p2"></span>2. I have also made a collection of
their writings in which they advocate the abolition of the doings of
Hystera. <span id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981) Moreover, they call
this Hystera the creator of heaven and earth. They also hold, like
Carpocrates, that men cannot be saved until they have gone through all
kinds of experience. An angel, they maintain, attends them in every one
of their sinful and abominable actions, and urges them to venture on
audacity and incur pollution. Whatever may be the nature <span
id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982) of the action, they declare that
they do it in the name of the angel, saying, “O thou angel, I use thy
work; O thou power, I accomplish thy operation!” And they maintain that
this is “perfect knowledge,” without shrinking to rush into such actions
as it is not lawful even to name.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p5"></span>3. It was necessary clearly to prove,
that, as their very opinions and regulations exhibit them, those who are
of the school of Valentinus derive their origin from such mothers,
fathers, and ancestors, and also to bring forward their doctrines, with
the hope that perchance some of them, exercising repentance and
returning to the only Creator, and God the Former of the universe, may
obtain salvation, and that others may not henceforth be drawn away by
their wicked, although plausible, persuasions, imagining that they will
obtain from them the knowledge of some greater and more sublime
mysteries. But let them rather, learning to good effect from us the
wicked tenets of these men, look with contempt upon their doctrines,
while at the same time they pity those who, still cleaving to these
miserable and baseless fables, have reached such a pitch of arrogance as
to reckon themselves superior to all others on account of such
knowledge, or, as it should rather be called, ignorance. They have now
been fully exposed; and simply to exhibit their sentiments, is to obtain
a victory over them.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p6"></span>4. Wherefore I have laboured to bring
forward, and make clearly manifest, the utterly ill-conditioned carcase
of this miserable little fox. <span id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983)
For there will not now be need of many words to overturn their system of
doctrine, when it has been made manifest to all. It is as when, on a
beast hiding itself in a wood, and by rushing forth from it is in the
habit of destroying multitudes, one who beats round the wood and
thoroughly explores it, so as to compel the animal to break cover, does
not strive to capture it, seeing that it is truly a ferocious beast; but
those present can then watch and avoid its assaults, and can cast darts
at it from all sides, and wound it, and finally slay that destructive
brute. So, in our case, since we have brought their hidden mysteries,
which they keep in silence among themselves, to the light, it will not
now be necessary to use many words in destroying their system of
opinions. For it is now in thy power, and in the power of all thy
associates, to familiarize yourselves with what has been said, to
overthrow their wicked and undigested doctrines, and to set forth
doctrines agreeable to the truth. Since then the case is so, I shall,
according to promise, and as my ability serves, labour to overthrow
them, by refuting them all in the following book. Even to give an
account of them is a tedious affair, as thou seest. <span
id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984) But I shall furnish means for
overthrowing them, by meeting all their opinions in the order in which
they have been described, that I may not only expose the wild beast to
view, but may inflict wounds upon it from every side.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[358:2982](0010728.htm#fr_2981) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p3"></span> According to Harvey, Hystera
corresponds to the “passions” of Achamoth. \[Note the “Americanism,”
*advocate* used as a verb.\]

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[358:2983](0010728.htm#fr_2982) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p4"></span> The text is here imperfect, and the
translation only conjectural.

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[358:2984](0010728.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p7"></span> \[[Cant. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#015)<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p7.1"></span>;
St. [Luke xiii. 32](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032)<span
id="ix.ii.xxxii-p7.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[358:2985](0010728.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxii-p8"></span> \[Let the reader bear in mind that the
Greek of this original and very precious author exists only in
fragments. We are reading the translation of a translation; the Latin
very rude, and the subject itself full of difficulties. It may yet be
discovered that some of the faults of the work are not chargeable to
Irenæus.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against Heresies: Book II](0010729)
