[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010644)  [Next](0010646) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xxxv"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xxxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.—Appeal to the Greeks.

<span id="viii.vi.xxxv-p1"></span>The time, then, ye men of Greece, is
now come, that ye, having been persuaded by the secular histories that
Moses and the rest of the prophets were far more ancient than any of
those who have been esteemed sages among you, abandon the ancient
delusion of your forefathers, and read the divine histories of the
prophets, and ascertain from them the true religion; for they do not
present to you artful discourses, nor speak speciously and plausibly—for
this is the property of those who wish to rob you of the truth—but use
with simplicity the words and expressions which offer themselves, and
declare to you whatever the Holy Ghost, who descended upon them, chose
to teach through them to those who are desirous to learn the true
religion. Having then laid aside all false shame, and the inveterate
error of mankind, with all its bombastic parade and empty noise, though
by means of it you fancy you are possessed of all advantages, do you
give yourselves to the things that profit you. For neither will you
commit any offence against your fathers, if you now show a desire to
betake yourselves to that which is quite opposed to their error, since
it is likely enough that they <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="viii.vi.xxxv-Page_288"></span> themselves are now lamenting in
Hades, and repenting with a too late repentance; and if it were possible
for them to show you thence what had befallen them after the termination
of this life, ye would know from what fearful ills they desired to
deliver you. But now, since it is not possible in this present life that
ye either learn from them, or from those who here profess to teach that
philosophy which is falsely so called, it follows as the one thing that
remains for you to do, that, renouncing the error of your fathers, ye
read the prophecies of the sacred writers, <span
id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584) not requiring from them
unexceptionable diction (for the matters of our religion lie in
works, <span id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585) not in words), and
learn from them what will give you life everlasting. For those who
bootlessly disgrace the name of philosophy are convicted of knowing
nothing at all, as they are themselves forced, though unwillingly, to
confess, since not only do they disagree with each other, but also
expressed their own opinions sometimes in one way, sometimes in another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[288:2585](0010645.htm#fr_2584) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxv-p2"></span> Literally, “sacred men.”

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[288:2586](0010645.htm#fr_2585) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxv-p3"></span> \[A noteworthy apology for early
Christian writers.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI.—True knowledge not...](0010646)
