[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010538)  [Next](0010540.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter LXXVIII.—He proves that this prophecy harmonizes with Christ alone, from what is afterwards written.

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p1.2"></span>“Now this king Herod, at the time when
the Magi came to him from Arabia, and said they knew from a star which
appeared in the heavens that a King had been born in your country, and
that they had come to worship Him, learned from the elders of your
people that it was thus written regarding Bethlehem in the prophet: ‘And
thou, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, art by no means least among the
princes of Judah; for out of thee shall go forth the leader who shall
feed my people.’ <span id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p2.2"></span>Accordingly the Magi <span
id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-Page_238"></span>
from Arabia came to Bethlehem and worshipped the Child, and presented
Him with gifts, gold and frankincense, and myrrh; but returned not to
Herod, being warned in a revelation after worshipping the Child in
Bethlehem. And Joseph, the spouse of Mary, who wished at first to put
away his betrothed Mary, supposing her to be pregnant by intercourse
with a man, i.e., from fornication, was commanded in a vision not to put
away his wife; and the angel who appeared to him told him that what is
in her womb is of the Holy Ghost. Then he was afraid, and did not put
her away; but on the occasion of the first census which was taken in
Judæa, under Cyrenius, he went up from Nazareth, where he lived, to
Bethlehem, to which he belonged, to be enrolled; for his family was of
the tribe of Judah, which then inhabited that region. Then along with
Mary he is ordered to proceed into Egypt, and remain there with the
Child until another revelation warn them to return into Judæa. But when
the Child was born in Bethlehem, since Joseph could not find a lodging
in that village, he took up his quarters in a certain cave near the
village; and while they were there Mary brought forth the Christ and
placed Him in a manger, and here the Magi who came from Arabia found
Him. I have repeated to you,” I continued, “what Isaiah foretold about
the sign which foreshadowed the cave; but for the sake of those who have
come with us to-day, I shall again remind you of the passage.” Then I
repeated the passage from Isaiah which I have already written, adding
that, by means of those words, those who presided over the mysteries of
Mithras were stirred up by the devil to say that in a place, called
among them a cave, they were initiated by him. <span
id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243.md) “So Herod, when the Magi from
Arabia did not return to him, as he had asked them to do, but had
departed by another way to their own country, according to the commands
laid on them; and when Joseph, with Mary and the Child, had now gone
into Egypt, as it was revealed to them to do; as he did not know the
Child whom the Magi had gone to worship, ordered simply the whole of the
children then in Bethlehem to be massacred. And Jeremiah prophesied that
this would happen, speaking by the Holy Ghost thus: ‘A voice was heard
in Ramah, lamentation and much wailing, Rachel weeping for her children;
and she would not be comforted, because they are not.’ <span
id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244.md) Therefore, on account of the voice
which would be heard from Ramah, i.e., from Arabia (for there is in
Arabia at this very time a place called Rama), wailing would come on the
place where Rachel the wife of Jacob called Israel, the holy patriarch,
has been buried, i.e., on Bethlehem; while the women weep for their own
slaughtered children, and have no consolation by reason of what has
happened to them. For that expression of Isaiah ‘He shall take the power
of Damascus and spoils of Samaria,’ foretold that the power of the evil
demon that dwelt in Damascus should be overcome by Christ as soon as He
was born; and this is proved to have happened. For the Magi, who were
held in bondage <span id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245.md) for the
commission of all evil deeds through the power of that demon, by coming
to worship Christ, shows that they have revolted from that dominion
which held them captive; and this \[dominion\] the Scripture has showed
us to reside in Damascus. Moreover, that sinful and unjust power is
termed well in parable, Samaria. <span
id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246.md) And none of you can deny that
Damascus was, and is, in the region of Arabia, although now it belongs
to what is called Syrophœnicia. Hence it would be becoming for you,
sirs, to learn what you have not perceived, from those who have received
grace from God, namely, from us Christians; and not to strive in every
way to maintain your own doctrines, dishonouring those of God. Therefore
also this grace has been transferred to us, as Isaiah says, speaking to
the following effect: ‘This people draws near to Me, they honour Me with
their lips, but their heart is far from Me; but in vain they worship Me,
teaching the commands and doctrines of men. Therefore, behold, I will
proceed <span id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247.md) to remove this
people, and I shall remove them; and I shall take away the wisdom of
their wise men, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent
men.’ ” <span id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[237:2243](0010539.htm#fr_2242.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p2"></span> [Mic. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md)<span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[238:2244](0010539.htm#fr_2243.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p3"></span> Text has, by “them;” but Maranus
says the artifice lay in the priest’s compelling the initiated to say
that Mithras himself was the initiator in the cave.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[238:2245](0010539.htm#fr_2244.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p4"></span> [Jer. xxxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015.md)<span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[238:2246](0010539.htm#fr_2245.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p5"></span> Literally, “spoiled.”

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[238:2247](0010539.htm#fr_2246.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p6"></span> Justin thinks the “spoils of
Samaria” denote spoils of Satan; Tertull. thinks that they are spoils of
Christ.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[238:2248](0010539.htm#fr_2247.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p7"></span> Literally, “add.”

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[238:2249](0010539.htm#fr_2248.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p8"></span> [Isa.
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014.md)<span
id="viii.iv.lxxviii-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIX.—He proves against...](0010540.md)
