[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010755)  [Next](0010757.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—“Knowledge puffeth up, but love edifieth.”

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>It is therefore better and more profitable
to belong to the simple and unlettered class, and by means of love to
attain to nearness to God, than, by imagining ourselves learned and
skilful, to be found \[among those who are\] blasphemous against their
own God, inasmuch as they conjure up another God as the Father. And for
this reason Paul exclaimed, “Knowledge puffeth up, but love
edifieth:” <span id="fr_3199"></span>[3200](#fn_3199.md) not that he meant
to inveigh against a true knowledge of God, for in that case he would
have accused himself; but, because he knew that some, puffed up by the
pretence of knowledge, fall away from the love of God, and imagine that
they themselves are perfect, for this reason that they set forth an
imperfect Creator, with the view of putting an end to the pride which
they feel on account of knowledge of this kind, he says, “Knowledge
puffeth up, but love edifieth.” Now there can be no greater conceit than
this, that any one should imagine he is better and more perfect than He
who made and fashioned him, and imparted to him the breath of life, and
commanded this very thing into existence. It is therefore better, as I
have said, that one should have no knowledge whatever of any one reason
why a single thing in creation has been made, but should believe in God,
and continue in His love, than <span
id="fr_3200"></span>[3201](#fn_3200.md) that, puffed up through knowledge
of this kind, he should fall away from that love which is the life of
man; and that he should search after no other knowledge except \[the
knowledge of\] Jesus Christ the Son of God, who was crucified for us,
than that by subtle questions and hair-splitting expressions he should
fall into impiety. <span id="fr_3201"></span>[3202](#fn_3201.md)

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p5"></span>2. For how would it be, if any one,
gradually elated by attempts of the kind referred to, should, because
the Lord said that “even the hairs of your head are all numbered,” <span
id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202.md) set about inquiring into the number
of hairs on each one’s head, and endeavour to search out the reason on
account of which one man has so many, and another so many, since all
have not an equal number, but many thousands upon thousands are to be
found with still varying numbers, on this account that some have larger
and others smaller heads, some have bushy heads of hair, others thin,
and others scarcely any hair at all,—and then those who imagine that
they have discovered the number of the hairs, should endeavour to apply
that for the commendation of their own sect which they have conceived?
Or again, if any one should, because of this expression which occurs in
the Gospel, “Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and not one of
them falls to the ground without the will of your Father,” <span
id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203.md) take occasion to reckon up the
number of sparrows caught daily, whether over all the world or in some
particular district, and to make inquiry as to the reason of so many
having been captured yesterday, so many the day before, and so many
again on this day, and should then join on the number of sparrows to his
\[particular\] hypothesis, would he not in that case mislead himself
altogether, and drive into absolute insanity those that agreed with him,
since men are always eager in such matters to be thought to have
discovered something more extraordinary than their masters? <span
id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204.md)

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p9"></span>3. But if any one should ask us
whether every number of all the things which have been made, and which
are made, is known to God, and whether every one of these \[numbers\]
has, according to His providence, received that special amount which it
contains; and on our agreeing <span id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-Page_398"></span> that such is the case, and
acknowledging that not one of the things which have been, or are, or
shall be made, escapes the knowledge of God, but that through His
providence every one of them has obtained its nature, and rank, and
number, and special quantity, and that nothing whatever either has been
or is produced in vain or accidentally, but with exceeding suitability
\[to the purpose intended\], and in the exercise of transcendent
knowledge, and that it was an admirable and truly divine intellect <span
id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205.md) which could both distinguish and
bring forth the proper causes of such a system: if, \[I say,\] any one,
on obtaining our adherence and consent to this, should proceed to reckon
up the sand and pebbles of the earth, yea also the waves of the sea and
the stars of heaven, and should endeavour to think out the causes of the
number which he imagines himself to have discovered, would not his
labour be in vain, and would not such a man be justly declared mad, and
destitute of reason, by all possessed of common sense? And the more he
occupied himself beyond others in questions of this kind, and the more
he imagines himself to find out beyond others, styling them unskilful,
ignorant, and animal beings, because they do not enter into his so
useless labour, the more is he \[in reality\] insane, foolish, struck as
it were with a thunderbolt, since indeed he does in no one point own
himself inferior to God; but, by the knowledge which he imagines himself
to have discovered, he changes God Himself, and exalts his own opinion
above the greatness of the Creator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3199"></span>[397:3200](0010756.htm#fr_3199.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p2"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3200"></span>[397:3201](0010756.htm#fr_3200.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p3"></span> “Aut;” <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>ἤ</span> having been thus mistakenly
rendered instead of “quam.”

<span id="fn_3201"></span>[397:3202](0010756.htm#fr_3201.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p4"></span> \[This seems anticipatory of the
dialects of scholasticism, and of its immense influence in Western
Christendom, after St. Bernard’s feeble adhesion to the Biblical system
of the ancients.\]

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[397:3203](0010756.htm#fr_3202.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p6"></span> [Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[397:3204](0010756.htm#fr_3203.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p7"></span> [Matt. x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[397:3205](0010756.htm#fr_3204.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p8"></span> \[Illustrated by the history of
modern thought in Germany. See the meritorious work of Professor Kahnis,
on *German Protestantism* (translated). Edinburgh, T. & T. Clark,
1856.\]

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[398:3206](0010756.htm#fr_3205.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxvii-p10"></span> “Rationem.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII.—Proper mode of...](0010757.md)
