[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010806)  [Next](0010808) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xiii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—It clearly appears that there was but one author of both the old and the new law, from the fact that Christ condemned traditions and customs repugnant to the former, while He confirmed its most important precepts, and taught that He was Himself the end of the Mosaic law.

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.xiii-p1.2"></span>For the
tradition of the elders themselves, which they pretended to observe from
the law, was contrary to the law given by Moses. Wherefore also Esaias
declares: “Thy dealers mix the wine with water,” <span
id="fr_3935"></span>[3936](#fn_3935) showing that the elders were in the
habit of mingling a watered tradition with the simple command of God;
that is, they set up a spurious law, and one contrary to the \[true\]
law; as also the Lord made plain, when He said to them, “Why do ye
transgress the commandment of God, for the sake of your
tradition?” <span id="fr_3936"></span>[3937](#fn_3936) For not only by
actual transgression did they set the law of God at nought, mingling the
wine with water; but they also set up their own law in opposition to it,
which is termed, even to the present day, the pharisaical. In this
\[law\] they suppress certain things, add others, and interpret others,
again, as they think proper, which their teachers use, each one in
particular; and desiring to uphold these traditions, they were unwilling
to be subject to the law of God, which prepares them for the coming of
Christ. But they did even blame the Lord for healing on the
Sabbath-days, which, as I have already observed, the law did not
prohibit. For they did themselves, in one sense, perform acts of healing
upon the Sabbath-day, when they circumcised a man \[on that day\]; but
they did not blame themselves for transgressing the command of God
through tradition and the aforesaid pharisaical law, and for not keeping
the commandment of the law, which is the love of God.

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p4"></span>2. But that this is the first and
greatest commandment, and that the next \[has respect to love\] towards
our neighbour, the Lord has taught, when He says that the entire law and
the prophets hang upon these two commandments. Moreover, He did not
Himself bring down \[from heaven\] any other commandment greater than
this one, but renewed this very same one to His disciples, when He
enjoined them to love God with all their heart, and others as
themselves. But if He had descended from another Father, He never would
have made use of the first and greatest commandment of the law; but He
would undoubtedly have endeavoured by all means to bring down a greater
one than this from the perfect Father, so as not to make use of that
which had been given by the <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-Page_476"></span> God of the law. <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>And Paul in like manner declares, “Love is
the fulfilling of the law:” <span id="fr_3937"></span>[3938](#fn_3937)
and \[he declares\] that when all other things have been destroyed,
there shall remain “faith, hope, and love; but the greatest of all is
love;” <span id="fr_3938"></span>[3939](#fn_3938) and that apart from
the love of God, neither knowledge avails anything, <span
id="fr_3939"></span>[3940](#fn_3939) nor the understanding of mysteries,
nor faith, nor prophecy, but that without love all are hollow and vain;
moreover, that love makes man perfect; and that he who loves God is
perfect, both in this world and in that which is to come. For we do
never cease from loving God; but in proportion as we continue to
contemplate Him, so much the more do we love Him.

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p8"></span>3. <span id="ix.vi.xiii-p8.1"></span>As
in the law, therefore, and in the Gospel \[likewise\], the first and
greatest commandment is, to love the Lord God with the whole heart, and
then there follows a commandment like to it, to love one’s neighbour as
one’s self; the author of the law and the Gospel is shown to be one and
the same. For the precepts of an absolutely perfect life, since they are
the same in each Testament, have pointed out \[to us\] the same God, who
certainly has promulgated particular laws adapted for each; but the more
prominent and the greatest \[commandments\], without which salvation
cannot \[be attained\], He has exhorted \[us to observe\] the same in
both.

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p9"></span>4. The Lord, too, does not do away with
this \[God\], when He shows that the law was not derived from another
God, expressing Himself as follows to those who were being instructed by
Him, to the multitude and to His disciples: “The scribes and Pharisees
sit in Moses’ seat. All, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and
do not. For they bind heavy burdens, and lay them upon men’s shoulders;
but they themselves will not so much as move them with a finger.” <span
id="fr_3940"></span>[3941](#fn_3940) He therefore did not throw blame
upon that law which was given by Moses, when He exhorted it to be
observed, Jerusalem being as yet in safety; but He *did* throw blame
upon those persons, because they repeated indeed the words of the law,
yet were without love. And for this reason were they held as being
unrighteous as respects God, and as respects their neighbours. As also
Isaiah says: “This people honoureth Me with their lips, but their heart
is far from Me: howbeit in vain do they worship Me, teaching the
doctrines and the commandments of men.” <span
id="fr_3941"></span>[3942](#fn_3941) He does not call the law given by
Moses commandments of men, but the traditions of the elders themselves
which they had invented, and in upholding which they made the law of God
of none effect, and were on this account also not subject to His Word.
<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p11.2"></span>For this is what Paul says concerning
these men: “For they, being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believeth.” <span
id="fr_3942"></span>[3943](#fn_3942) And how is Christ the end of the
law, if He be not also the final cause of it? For He who has brought in
the end has Himself also wrought the beginning; and it is He who does
Himself say to Moses, “I have surely seen the affliction of my people
which is in Egypt, and I have come down to deliver them;” <span
id="fr_3943"></span>[3944](#fn_3943) it being customary from the
beginning with the Word of God to ascend and descend for the purpose of
saving those who were in affliction.

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p14"></span>5. Now, that the law did beforehand
teach mankind the necessity of following Christ, He does Himself make
manifest, when He replied as follows to him who asked Him what he should
do that he might inherit eternal life: “If thou wilt enter into life,
keep the commandments.” <span id="fr_3944"></span>[3945](#fn_3944) But
upon the other asking “Which?” again the Lord replies: “Do not commit
adultery, do not kill, do not steal, do not bear false witness, honour
father and mother, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself,”—setting as an ascending series (*velut gradus*) before those
who wished to follow Him, the precepts of the law, as the entrance into
life; and what He then said to one He said to all. But when the former
said, “All these have I done” (and most likely he had not kept them, for
in that case the Lord would not have said to him, “Keep the
commandments”), the Lord, exposing his covetousness, said to him, “If
thou wilt be perfect, go, sell all that thou hast, and distribute to the
poor; and come, follow me;” promising to those who would act thus, the
portion belonging to the apostles (*apostolorum partem*). And He did not
preach to His followers another God the Father, besides Him who was
proclaimed by the law from the beginning; nor another Son; nor the
Mother, the enthymesis of the Æon, who existed in suffering and
apostasy; nor the Pleroma of the thirty Æons, which has been proved
vain, and incapable of being believed in; nor that fable invented by the
other heretics. But He taught that they should obey the commandments
which God enjoined from the beginning, and do away with their former
covetousness by good works, <span id="fr_3945"></span>[3946](#fn_3945)
and follow after Christ. But that <span id="page_477">p. 477</span>
<span id="ix.vi.xiii-Page_477"></span> possessions distributed to the
poor do annul former covetousness, Zaccheus made evident, when he said,
“Behold, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have
defrauded any one, I restore fourfold.” <span
id="fr_3946"></span>[3947](#fn_3946)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3935"></span>[475:3936](0010807.htm#fr_3935) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p2"></span> [Isa. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3936"></span>[475:3937](0010807.htm#fr_3936) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p3"></span> [Matt. xv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3937"></span>[476:3938](0010807.htm#fr_3937) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p5"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3938"></span>[476:3939](0010807.htm#fr_3938) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3939"></span>[476:3940](0010807.htm#fr_3939) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3940"></span>[476:3941](0010807.htm#fr_3940) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p10"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002)<span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3941"></span>[476:3942](0010807.htm#fr_3941) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p11"></span> [Isa. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3942"></span>[476:3943](0010807.htm#fr_3942) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p12"></span> [Rom.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3943"></span>[476:3944](0010807.htm#fr_3943) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p13"></span> [Exod.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3944"></span>[476:3945](0010807.htm#fr_3944) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p15"></span> [Matt.
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#018)<span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p15.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_3945"></span>[476:3946](0010807.htm#fr_3945) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p16"></span> Harvey here remarks: “In a theological
point of view, it should be observed, that no saving merit is ascribed
to almsgiving: it is spoken of here as the negation of the vice of
covetousness, which is wholly inconsistent with the state of salvation
to which we are called.”

<span id="fn_3946"></span>[477:3947](0010807.htm#fr_3946) <span
id="ix.vi.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p17"></span> [Luke xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.xiii-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—Christ did not...](0010808)
