[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010570)  [Next](0010572.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.cx"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.cx-p0.1"></span>Chapter CX.—A portion of the prophecy already fulfilled in the Christians: the rest shall be fulfilled at the second advent.

<span id="viii.iv.cx-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv.cx-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cx-p1.2"></span>And when I had finished these words, I
continued: “Now I am aware that your teachers, sirs, admit the whole of
the words of this passage to refer to Christ; and I am likewise aware
that they maintain He has not yet come; or if they say that He has come,
they assert that it is not known who He is; but when He shall become
manifest and glorious, then it shall be known who He is. And then, they
say, the events mentioned in this passage shall happen, just as if there
was no fruit as yet from the words of the prophecy. O unreasoning men!
understanding not what has been proved by all these passages, that two
advents of Christ have been announced: the one, in which He is set forth
as suffering, inglorious, dishonoured, and crucified; but the other, in
which He shall come from heaven with glory, when the man of
apostasy, <span id="fr_2366"></span>[2367](#fn_2366.md) who speaks strange
things against the Most <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="viii.iv.cx-Page_254"></span> High, shall venture to do unlawful
deeds on the earth against us the Christians, who, having learned the
true worship of God from the law, and the word which went forth from
Jerusalem by means of the apostles of Jesus, have fled for safety to the
God of Jacob and God of Israel; and we who were filled with war, and
mutual slaughter, and every wickedness, have each through the whole
earth changed our warlike weapons,— our swords into ploughshares, and
our spears into implements of tillage, —and we cultivate piety,
righteousness, philanthropy, faith, and hope, which we have from the
Father Himself through Him who was crucified; and sitting each under his
vine, i.e., each man possessing his own married wife. For you are aware
that the prophetic word says, ‘And his wife shall be like a fruitful
vine.’ <span id="fr_2367"></span>[2368](#fn_2367.md) Now it is evident that
no one can terrify or subdue us who have believed in Jesus over all the
world. For it is plain that, though beheaded, and crucified, and thrown
to wild beasts, and chains, and fire, and all other kinds of torture, we
do not give up our confession; but the more such things happen, the more
do others and in larger numbers become faithful, and worshippers of God
through the name of Jesus. For just as if one should cut away the
fruit-bearing parts of a vine, it grows up again, and yields other
branches flourishing and fruitful; even so the same thing happens with
us. For the vine planted by God and Christ the Saviour is His people.
But the rest of the prophecy shall be fulfilled at His second coming.
<span id="viii.iv.cx-p3.2"></span>For the expression, ‘He that is
afflicted \[and driven out\],’ i.e., from the world, \[implies\] that,
so far as you and all other men have it in your power, each Christian
has been driven out not only from his own property, but even from the
whole world; for you permit no Christian to live. But you say that the
same fate has befallen your own nation. Now, if you have been cast out
after defeat in battle, you have suffered such treatment justly indeed,
as all the Scriptures bear witness; but we, though we have done no such
\[evil acts\] after we knew the truth of God, are testified to by God,
that, together with the most righteous, and only spotless and sinless
Christ, we are taken away out of the earth. For Isaiah cries, ‘Behold
how the righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and righteous
men are taken away, and no man considers it.’ <span
id="fr_2368"></span>[2369](#fn_2368.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2366"></span>[253:2367](0010571.htm#fr_2366.md) <span
id="viii.iv.cx-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cx-p2"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003.md)<span id="viii.iv.cx-p2.1"></span>;
and see chap. xxxii.

<span id="fn_2367"></span>[254:2368](0010571.htm#fr_2367.md) <span
id="viii.iv.cx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cx-p3"></span> [Ps. cxxviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003.md)<span id="viii.iv.cx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2368"></span>[254:2369](0010571.htm#fr_2368.md) <span
id="viii.iv.cx-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cx-p4"></span> [Isa. lvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001.md)<span id="viii.iv.cx-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter CXI.—The two advents were...](0010572.md)
