[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010748)  [Next](0010750) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xx"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—Absurdities of the heretics as to their own origin: their opinions respecting the Demiurge shown to be equally untenable and ridiculous.

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iii.xx-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.iii.xx-p1.2"></span>But what sort of talk also is this concerning
their seed—that it was conceived by the mother according to the
configuration of those angels who wait upon the Saviour,—shapeless,
without form, and imperfect; and that it was deposited in the Demiurge
without his knowledge, in order that through his instrumentality it
might attain to perfection and form in that soul which he had, \[so to
speak,\] filled with seed? This is to affirm, in the first place, that
those angels who wait upon their Saviour are imperfect, and without
figure or form; if indeed that which was conceived according to their
appearance was generated any such kind of being \[as has been
described\].

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p2"></span>2. Then, in the next place, as to their
saying that the Creator was ignorant of that deposit of seed which took
place into him, and again, of that impartation of seed which was made by
him to man, their words are futile and vain, and are in no way
susceptible of proof. For how could he have been ignorant of it, if that
seed had possessed any substance and peculiar properties? If, on the
other hand, it was without substance and without quality, and so was
really nothing, then, as a matter of course, he was ignorant of it. For
those things which have a certain motion of their own, and quality,
either of heat, or swiftness, or sweetness, or which differ from others
in brilliance, do not escape the notice even of men, since they mingle
in the sphere of human action: far less can they \[be hidden from\] God,
the Maker of this universe. With reason, however, \[is it said, that\]
their seed was not known to Him, since it is without any quality of
general utility, and without the substance requisite for any action, and
is, in fact, a pure nonentity. It really seems to me, that, with a view
to such opinions, the Lord expressed Himself thus: “For every idle word
that men speak, they shall give account on the day of judgment.” <span
id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) For all teachers of a like
character to these, who fill men’s ears with idle talk, shall, when they
stand at the throne of judgment, render an account for those things
which they have vainly imagined and falsely uttered against the Lord,
proceeding, as they have done, to such a height of audacity as to
declare of themselves that, on account of the substance of their seed,
they are acquainted with the spiritual Pleroma, because that man who
dwells within reveals to them the true Father; for the animal nature
required <span id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088) to be disciplined by
means of the senses. But \[they hold that\] the Demiurge, while
receiving into himself the whole of this seed, through its being
deposited in him by the Mother, still remained utterly ignorant of all
things, and had no understanding of anything connected with the Pleroma.

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p5"></span> <span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xx-Page_386"></span> 3. <span id="ix.iii.xx-p5.1"></span>And
that they are the truly “spiritual,” inasmuch as a certain particle of
the Father of the universe has been deposited in their souls, since,
according to their assertions, they have souls formed of the same
substance as the Demiurge himself, yet that he, although he received
from the Mother, once for all, the whole \[of the divine\] seed, and
possessed it in himself, still remained of an animal nature, and had not
the slightest understanding of those things which are above, which
things they boast that they themselves understand, while they are still
on earth;—does not this crown all possible absurdity? For to imagine
that the very same seed conveyed knowledge and perfection to the souls
of these men, while it only gave rise to ignorance in the God who made
them, is an opinion that can be held only by those utterly frantic, and
totally destitute of common sense.

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p6"></span>4. Further, it is also a most absurd and
groundless thing for them to say that the seed was, by being thus
deposited, reduced to form and increased, and so was prepared for all
the reception of perfect rationality. For there will be in it an
admixture of matter —that substance which they hold to have been derived
from ignorance and defect; \[and this will prove itself\] more apt and
useful than was the light of their Father, if indeed, when born,
according to the contemplation of that \[light\], it was without form or
figure, but derived from this \[matter\], form, and appearance, and
increase, and perfection. For if that light which proceeds from the
Pleroma was the cause to a spiritual being that it possessed neither
form, nor appearance, nor its own special magnitude, while its descent
to this world added all these things to it, and brought it to
perfection, then a sojourn here (which they also term darkness) would
seem much more efficacious and useful than was the light of their
Father. But how can it be regarded as other than ridiculous, to affirm
that their mother ran the risk of being almost extinguished in matter,
and was almost on the point of being destroyed by it, had she not then
with difficulty stretched herself outwards, and leaped, \[as it were,\]
out of herself, receiving assistance from the Father; but that her seed
increased in this same matter, and received a form, and was made fit for
the reception of perfect rationality; and this, too, while “bubbling up”
among substances dissimilar and unfamiliar to itself, according to their
own declaration that the earthly is opposed to the spiritual, and the
spiritual to the earthly? How, then, could “a little particle,” <span
id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089) as they say, increase, and receive
shape, and reach perfection, in the midst of substances contrary to and
unfamiliar to itself?

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p8"></span>5. But further, and in addition to what
has been said, the question occurs, Did their mother, when she beheld
the angels, bring forth the seed all at once, or only one by one \[in
succession\]? If she brought forth the whole simultaneously and at once,
that which was thus produced cannot now be of an infantile character:
its descent, therefore, into those men who now exist must be
superfluous. <span id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090) But if one by
one, then she did not form her conception according to the figure of
those angels whom she beheld; for, contemplating them all together, and
once for all, so as to conceive by them, she ought to have brought forth
once for all the offspring of those from whose forms she had once for
all conceived.

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p10"></span>6. Why was it, too, that, beholding the
angels along with the Saviour, she did indeed conceive *their* images,
but not that of the *Saviour*, who is far more beautiful than they? Did
He not please her; and did she not, on that account, conceive after His
likeness? <span id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091) How was it, too,
that the Demiurge, whom they can call an animal being, having, as they
maintain, his own special magnitude and figure, was produced perfect as
respects his substance; while that which is spiritual, which also ought
to be more effective than that which is animal, was sent forth
imperfect, and he required to descend into a soul, that in it he might
obtain form, and thus becoming perfect, might be rendered fit for the
reception of perfect reason? If, then, he obtains form in mere earthly
and animal men, he can no longer be said to be after the likeness of
angels whom they call lights, but \[after the likeness\] of those men
who are here below. For he will not possess in that case the likeness
and appearance of angels, but of those souls in whom also he receives
shape; just as water when poured into a vessel takes the form of that
vessel, and if on any occasion it happens to congeal in it, it will
acquire the form of the vessel in which it has thus been frozen, since
souls themselves possess the figure <span
id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092) of the body \[in which they
dwell\]; for they themselves have been adapted to the vessel \[in which
they exist\], as I have said before. If, then, that seed \[referred to\]
is here solidified and formed into a definite shape, it will possess the
figure of a man. and not the form of the angels. How is it possible,
therefore, that that seed should be after images of the angels, seeing
it has obtained a form after the likeness of men? Why, again, since it
was of a spiritual nature, had it any need of descending into flesh? For
what is carnal stands in need of that which is spiritual, if indeed
<span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span id="ix.iii.xx-Page_387"></span>
it is to be saved, that in it it may be sanctified and cleared from all
impurity, and that what is mortal may be swallowed up by
immortality; <span id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093) but that which
is spiritual has no need whatever of those things which are here below.
For it is not we who benefit it, but it that improves us.

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p14"></span>7. Still more manifestly is that talk of
theirs concerning their seed proved to be false, and that in a way which
must be evident to every one, by the fact that they declare those souls
which have received seed from the Mother to be superior to all others;
wherefore also they have been honoured by the Demiurge, and constituted
princes, and kings, and priests. For if this were true, the high priest
Caiaphas, and Annas, and the rest of the chief priests, and doctors of
the law, and rulers of the people, would have been the first to believe
in the Lord, agreeing as they did with respect <span
id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094) to that relationship; and even
before them should have been Herod the king. But since neither he, nor
the chief priests, nor the rulers, nor the eminent of the people, turned
to Him \[in faith\], but, on the contrary, those who sat begging by the
highway, the deaf, and the blind, while He was rejected and despised by
others, according to what Paul declares, “For ye see your calling,
brethren, that there are not many wise men among you, not many noble,
not many mighty; but those things of the world which were despised hath
God chosen.” <span id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095) Such souls,
therefore, were not superior to others on account of the seed deposited
in them, nor on this account were they honoured by the Demiurge.

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p17"></span>8. As to the point, then, that their
system is weak and untenable as well as utterly chimerical, enough has
been said. For it is not needful, to use a common proverb, that one
should drink up the ocean who wishes to learn that its water is salt.
But, just as in the case of a statue which is made of clay, but coloured
on the outside that it may be thought to be of gold, while it really is
of clay, any one who takes out of it a small particle, and thus laying
it open reveals the clay, will set free those who seek the truth from a
false opinion; in the same way have I (by exposing not a small part
only, but the several heads of their system which are of the greatest
importance) shown to as many as do not wish wittingly to be led astray,
what is wicked, deceitful, seductive, and pernicious, connected with the
school of the Valentinians, and all those other heretics who
promulgate <span id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096) wicked opinions
respecting the Demiurge, that is, the Fashioner and Former of this
universe, and who is in fact the only true God—exhibiting, \[as I have
done,\] how easily their views are overthrown.

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p19"></span>9. For who that has any intelligence,
and possesses only a small proportion of truth, can tolerate them, when
they affirm that there is another god above the Creator; and that there
is another Monogenes as well as another Word of God, whom also they
describe as having been produced in \[a state of\] degeneracy; and
another Christ, whom they assert to have been formed, along with the
Holy Spirit, later than the rest of the Æons; and another Saviour, who,
they say, did not proceed from the Father of all, but was a kind of
joint production of those Æons who were formed in \[a state of\]
degeneracy, and that He was produced of necessity on account of this
very degeneracy? It is thus their opinion that, unless the Æons had been
in a state of ignorance and degeneracy, neither Christ, nor the Holy
Spirit, nor Horos, nor the Saviour, nor the angels, nor their Mother,
nor her seed, nor the rest of the fabric of the world, would have been
produced at all; but the universe would have been a desert, and
destitute of the many good things which exist in it. They are therefore
not only chargeable with impiety against the Creator, declaring Him the
fruit of a defect, but also against Christ and the Holy Spirit,
affirming that they were produced on account of that defect; and, in
like manner, that the Saviour \[was produced\] subsequently to \[the
existence of\] that defect. And who will tolerate the remainder of their
vain talk, which they cunningly endeavour to accommodate to the
parables, and have in this way plunged both themselves, and those who
give credit to them, in the profoundest depths of impiety?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[385:3088](0010749.htm#fr_3087) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p3"></span> [Matt. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span id="ix.iii.xx-p3.1"></span>.
\[The serious spirit of this remark lends force to it as exposition.\]

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[385:3089](0010749.htm#fr_3088) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p4"></span> Comp. i. 6, 1.

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[386:3090](0010749.htm#fr_3089) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p7"></span> “Parvum emissum”—*a small emission*.

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[386:3091](0010749.htm#fr_3090) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p9"></span> That is, there could be no need for its
descending into them that it might increase, receive form, and thus be
prepared for the reception of perfect reason.

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[386:3092](0010749.htm#fr_3091) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p11"></span> Or, “on beholding Him.”

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[386:3093](0010749.htm#fr_3092) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p12"></span> As Massuet here remarks, we may infer
from this passage that Irenæus believed souls to be corporeal, as being
possessed of a definite form,—an opinion entertained by not a few of the
ancients. \[And, before we censure them, let us reflect whether their
perceptions of “the carnal mind” as differing from the spirit of a man,
may not account for it. [1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span
id="ix.iii.xx-p12.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[387:3094](0010749.htm#fr_3093) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p13"></span> Comp. [1 Cor. xv.
44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044)<span id="ix.iii.xx-p13.1"></span>;
[2 Cor. v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span
id="ix.iii.xx-p13.2"></span>. \[As a Catholic I cannot accept everything
contained in the *Biblical Psychology* of Dr. Delitzsch, but may I
entreat the reader who has not studied it to do so before dismissing the
ideas of Irenæus on such topics. A translation has been provided for
English readers, by the Messrs. T. & T. Clark of Edinburgh, 1867.\]

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[387:3095](0010749.htm#fr_3094) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p15"></span> The meaning apparently is, that by the
high position which all these in common occupied, they proved
themselves, on the principles of the heretics, to belong to the favoured
“seed,” and should therefore have eagerly have welcomed the Lord. Or the
meaning may be, “hurrying together to that relationship,” that is, to
the relationship secured by faith in Christ.

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[387:3096](0010749.htm#fr_3095) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)<span id="ix.iii.xx-p16.1"></span>,
somewhat loosely quoted.

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[387:3097](0010749.htm#fr_3096) <span
id="ix.iii.xx-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xx-p18"></span> “Male tractant;” literally, *handle
badly*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.—Futility of the...](0010750)
