[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010753)  [Next](0010755) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxv"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—Folly of the arguments derived by the heretics from numbers, letters, and syllables.

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p1.2"></span>This very
thing, too, still further demonstrates their opinion false, and their
fictitious system untenable, that they endeavour to bring forward proofs
of it, sometimes through means of numbers and the syllables of names,
sometimes also through the letter of syllables, and yet again through
those numbers which are, according to the practice followed by the
Greeks, contained in \[different\] letters;—\[this, I say,\]
demonstrates in the clearest manner their overthrow or confusion, <span
id="fr_3150"></span>[3151](#fn_3150) as well as the untenable and
perverse character of their \[professed\] knowledge. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p2.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p2.2"></span>For,
transferring the name *Jesus*, which belongs to another language, to the
numeration of the Greeks, they sometimes call it “Episemon,” <span
id="fr_3151"></span>[3152](#fn_3151) as having six letters, and at other
times “the Plenitude of the Ogdoads,” as containing the number eight
hundred and eighty-eight. But His \[corresponding\] Greek name, which is
“Soter,” that is, *Saviour*, because it does not fit in with their
system, either with respect to numerical value or as regards its
letters, they pass over in silence. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p3.1"></span>Yet surely, if they regard the names of the
Lord, as, in accordance with the preconceived purpose of the Father, by
means of their numerical value and letters, indicating number in the
Pleroma, *Soter*, as being a Greek name, ought by means of its letters
and the numbers \[expressed by these\], in virtue of its being Greek, to
show forth the mystery of the Pleroma. But the case is not so, because
it is a word of five letters, and its numerical value is one thousand
four hundred and eight. <span id="fr_3152"></span>[3153](#fn_3152) But
these things do not in any way correspond with their Pleroma; the
account, therefore, which they give of transactions in the Pleroma
cannot be true.

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p5"></span>2. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>Moreover, *Jesus*, which is a word belonging
to the proper tongue of the Hebrews, contains, as the learned among them
declare, two letters and a half, <span
id="fr_3153"></span>[3154](#fn_3153) and signifies that Lord who
contains heaven and earth; <span id="fr_3154"></span>[3155](#fn_3154)
for *Jesus* in the ancient Hebrew language means “heaven,” while again
“earth” is expressed by the words *sura usser*. <span
id="fr_3155"></span>[3156](#fn_3155) The word, therefore, which contains
heaven and earth is just *Jesus*. Their explanation, then, of the
*Episemon* is false, and their numerical calculation is also manifestly
overthrown. For, in their own language, *Soter* is a Greek word of five
letters; but, on the other hand, in the Hebrew tongue, *Jesus* contains
only two letters and a half. The total which they reckon up, viz., eight
hundred and eighty-eight, therefore falls to the ground. And throughout,
the Hebrew letters do not correspond in number with the Greek, although
these especially, as being the more ancient and unchanging, ought to
uphold the reckoning connected with the names. For these ancient,
original, and generally called *sacred* letters <span
id="fr_3156"></span>[3157](#fn_3156) of the Hebrews are ten in number
(but they are written by means of fifteen <span
id="fr_3157"></span>[3158](#fn_3157) ), the last letter <span
id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxv-Page_394"></span> being
joined to the first. And thus they write some of these letters according
to their natural sequence, just as we do, but others in a reverse
direction, from the right hand towards the left, thus tracing the
letters backwards. The name *Christ*, too, ought to be capable of being
reckoned up in harmony with the Æons of their Pleroma, inasmuch as,
according to their statements, He was produced for the establishment and
rectification of their Pleroma. The Father, too, in the same way, ought,
both by means of letters and numerical value, to contain the number of
those Æons who were produced by Him; Bythus, in like manner, and not
less Monogenes; but pre-eminently the name which is above all others, by
which God is called, and which in the Hebrew tongue is expressed by
*Baruch*, <span id="fr_3158"></span>[3159](#fn_3158) \[a word\] which
also contains two and a half letters. From this fact, therefore, that
the more important names, both in the Hebrew and Greek languages, do not
conform to their system, either as respects the number of letters or the
reckoning brought out of them, the forced character of their
calculations respecting the rest becomes clearly manifest.

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p12"></span>3. For, choosing out of the law
whatever things agree with the number adopted in their system, they thus
violently strive to obtain proofs of its validity. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p12.1"></span>But if it was really the purpose of their
Mother, or the Saviour, to set forth, by means of the Demiurge, types of
those things which are in the Pleroma, they should have taken care that
the types were found in things more exactly correspondent and more holy;
and, above all, in the case of the Ark of the Covenant, on account of
which the whole tabernacle of witness was formed. Now it was constructed
thus: its length <span id="fr_3159"></span>[3160](#fn_3159) was two
cubits and a half, its breadth one cubit and a half, its height one
cubit and a half; but such a number of cubits in no respect corresponds
with their system, yet by it the type ought to have been, beyond
everything else, clearly set forth. The mercy-seat <span
id="fr_3160"></span>[3161](#fn_3160) also does in like manner not at all
harmonize with their expositions. Moreover, the table of
shew-bread <span id="fr_3161"></span>[3162](#fn_3161) was two cubits in
length, while its height was a cubit and a half. These stood before the
holy of holies, and yet in them not a single number is of such an amount
as contains an indication of the Tetrad, or the Ogdoad, or of the rest
of their Pleroma. What of the candlestick, <span
id="fr_3162"></span>[3163](#fn_3162) too, which had seven <span
id="fr_3163"></span>[3164](#fn_3163) branches and seven lamps? while, if
these had been made according to the type, it ought to have had eight
branches and a like number of lamps, after the type of the primary
Ogdoad, which shines pre-eminently among the Æons, and illuminates the
whole Pleroma. They have carefully enumerated the curtains <span
id="fr_3164"></span>[3165](#fn_3164) as being ten, declaring these a
type of the ten Æons; but they have forgotten to count the coverings of
skin, which were eleven <span id="fr_3165"></span>[3166](#fn_3165) in
number. Nor, again, have they measured the size of these very curtains,
each curtain <span id="fr_3166"></span>[3167](#fn_3166) being
eight-and-twenty cubits in length. And they set forth the length of the
pillars as being ten cubits, with a reference to the Decad of Æons. “But
the breadth of each pillar was a cubit and a half;” <span
id="fr_3167"></span>[3168](#fn_3167) and this they do not explain, any
more than they do the entire number of the pillars or of their bars,
because that does not suit the argument. But what of the anointing
oil, <span id="fr_3168"></span>[3169](#fn_3168) which sanctified the
whole tabernacle? Perhaps it escaped the notice of the Saviour, or,
while their Mother was sleeping, the Demiurge of himself gave
instructions as to its weight; and on this account it is out of harmony
with their Pleroma, consisting, <span
id="fr_3169"></span>[3170](#fn_3169) as it did, of five hundred shekels
of myrrh, five hundred of cassia, two hundred and fifty of cinnamon, two
hundred and fifty of calamus, and oil in addition, so that it was
composed of five ingredients. The incense <span
id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170) also, in like manner, \[was
compounded\] of stacte, onycha, galbanum, mint, and frankincense, all
which do in no respect, either as to their mixture or weight, harmonize
with their argument. It is therefore unreasonable and altogether absurd
\[to maintain\] that the types were not preserved in the sublime and
more imposing enactments of the law; but in other points, when any
number coincides with their assertions, to affirm that it was a type of
the things in the Pleroma; while \[the truth is, that\] every number
occurs with the utmost variety in the Scriptures, so that, should any
one desire it, he might form not only an Ogdoad, and a Decad, and a
Duodecad, but any sort of number from the Scriptures, and then maintain
that this was a type of the system of error devised by himself.

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p25"></span>4. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p25.1"></span>But that this point is true, that that
number which is called *five*, which agrees in no respect with their
argument, and does not harmonize with their system, nor is suitable for
a typical manifestation of the things in the Pleroma, \[yet has a wide
prevalence, <span id="fr_3171"></span>[3172](#fn_3171) \] will be proved
as follows from the Scriptures. Soter is a name of <span
id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxv-Page_395"></span> five
letters; Pater, too, contains five letters; Agape (love), too, consists
of five letters; and our Lord, after <span
id="fr_3172"></span>[3173](#fn_3172) blessing the five loaves, fed with
them five thousand men. Five virgins <span
id="fr_3173"></span>[3174](#fn_3173) were called wise by the Lord; and,
in like manner, five were styled foolish. Again, five men are said to
have been with the Lord when He obtained testimony <span
id="fr_3174"></span>[3175](#fn_3174) from the Father,—namely, Peter, and
James, and John, and Moses, and Elias. The Lord also, as the fifth
person, entered into the apartment of the dead maiden, and raised her up
again; for, says \[the Scripture\], “He suffered no man to go in, save
Peter and James, <span id="fr_3175"></span>[3176](#fn_3175) and the
father and mother of the maiden.” <span
id="fr_3176"></span>[3177](#fn_3176) The rich man in hell <span
id="fr_3177"></span>[3178](#fn_3177) declared that he had five brothers,
to whom he desired that one rising from the dead should go. The pool
from which the Lord commanded the paralytic man to go into his house,
had five porches. The very form of the cross, too, has five
extremities, <span id="fr_3178"></span>[3179](#fn_3178) two in length,
two in breadth, and one in the middle, on which \[last\] the person
rests who is fixed by the nails. Each of our hands has five fingers; we
have also five senses; our internal organs may also be reckoned as five,
viz., the heart, the liver, the lungs, the spleen, and the kidneys.
Moreover, even the whole person may be divided into this number \[of
parts\],—the head, the breast, the belly, the thighs, and the feet. The
human race passes through five ages first infancy, then boyhood, then
youth, then maturity, <span id="fr_3179"></span>[3180](#fn_3179) and
then old age. Moses delivered the law to the people in five books. Each
table which he received from God contained five <span
id="fr_3180"></span>[3181](#fn_3180) commandments. The veil
covering <span id="fr_3181"></span>[3182](#fn_3181) the holy of holies
had five pillars. The altar of burnt-offering also was five cubits in
breadth. <span id="fr_3182"></span>[3183](#fn_3182) Five priests were
chosen in the wilderness,—namely, Aaron, <span
id="fr_3183"></span>[3184](#fn_3183) Nadab, Abiud, Eleazar, Ithamar. The
ephod and the breastplate, and other sacerdotal vestments, were formed
out of five <span id="fr_3184"></span>[3185](#fn_3184) materials; for
they combined in themselves gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen. And there were five <span
id="fr_3185"></span>[3186](#fn_3185) kings of the Amorites, whom Joshua
the son of Nun shut up in a cave, and directed the people to trample
upon their heads. Any one, in fact, might collect many thousand other
things of the same kind, both with respect to this number and any other
he chose to fix upon, either from the Scriptures, or from the works of
nature lying under his observation. <span
id="fr_3186"></span>[3187](#fn_3186) But although such is the case, we
do not therefore affirm that there are five Æons above the Demiurge; nor
do we consecrate the Pentad, as if it were some divine thing; nor do we
strive to establish things that are untenable, nor ravings \[such as
they indulge in\], by means of that vain kind of labour; nor do we
perversely force a creation well adapted by God \[for the ends intended
to be served\], to change itself into types of things which have no real
existence; nor do we seek to bring forward impious and abominable
doctrines, the detection and overthrow of which are easy to all
possessed of intelligence.

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p42"></span>5. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p42.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p42.2"></span>For who
can concede to them that the year has three hundred and sixty-five days
only, in order that there may be twelve months of thirty days each,
after the type of the twelve Æons, when the type is in fact altogether
out of harmony \[with the antitype\]? For, in the one case, each of the
Æons is a thirtieth part of the entire Pleroma, while in the other they
declare that a month is the twelfth part of a year. If, indeed, the year
were divided into thirty parts, and the month into twelve, then a
fitting type might be regarded as having been found for their fictitious
system. But, on the contrary, as the case really stands, their Pleroma
is divided into thirty parts, and a portion of it into twelve; while
again the whole year is divided into twelve parts, and a certain portion
of it into thirty. The Saviour therefore acted unwisely in constituting
the month a type of the entire Pleroma, but the year a type only of that
Duodecad which exists in the Pleroma; for it was more fitting to divide
the year into thirty parts, even as the whole Pleroma is divided, but
the month into twelve, just as the Æons are in their Pleroma. Moreover,
they divide the entire Pleroma into three portions,—namely, into an
Ogdoad, a Decad, and a Duodecad. But our year is divided into four
parts, —namely, spring, summer, autumn, and winter. And again, not even
do the months, which they maintain to be a type of the Triacontad,
consist precisely of thirty days, but some have more and some less,
inasmuch as five days remain to them as an overplus. <span
id="fr_3187"></span>[3188](#fn_3187) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p43.1"></span>The day, too, does not always consist
precisely of twelve hours, but rises from nine <span
id="fr_3188"></span>[3189](#fn_3188) to fifteen, and then falls again
from fifteen to nine. It cannot therefore be held that months of thirty
days each were so formed for the sake of \[typifying\] <span
id="page_396">p. 396</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxv-Page_396"></span> the
Æons; for, in that case, they would have consisted precisely of thirty
days: nor, again, the days of these months, that by means of twelve
hours they might symbolize the twelve Æons; for, in that case, they
would always have consisted precisely of twelve hours.

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p45"></span>6. But further, as to their calling
material substances “on the left hand,” and maintaining that those
things which are thus on the left hand of necessity fall into
corruption, while they also affirm that the Saviour came to the lost
sheep, in order to transfer it to the right hand, that is, to the ninety
and nine sheep which were in safety, and perished not, but continued
within the fold, yet were of the left hand, <span
id="fr_3189"></span>[3190](#fn_3189) it follows that they must
acknowledge that the enjoyment <span
id="fr_3190"></span>[3191](#fn_3190) of rest did not imply salvation.
And that which has not in like manner the same number, they will be
compelled to acknowledge as belonging to the left hand, that is, to
corruption. <span id="ix.iii.xxv-p47.2"></span>This Greek word *Agape*
(love), then, according to the letters of the Greeks, by means of which
reckoning is carried on among them, having a numerical value of
*ninety-three*, <span id="fr_3191"></span>[3192](#fn_3191) is in like
manner assigned to the place of rest on the left hand. <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.7"></span>Aletheia (truth), too, having in like
manner, according to the principle indicated above, a numerical value of
sixty-four, <span id="fr_3192"></span>[3193](#fn_3192) exists among
material substances. And thus, in fine, they will be compelled to
acknowledge that all those sacred names which do not reach a numerical
value of one hundred, but only contain the numbers summed by the left
hand, are corruptible and material.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3150"></span>[393:3151](0010754.htm#fr_3150) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p2"></span> “Sive confusionem” is very probably a
marginal gloss which has found its way into the text. The whole clause
is difficult and obscure.

<span id="fn_3151"></span>[393:3152](0010754.htm#fr_3151) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p3"></span> Comp. i. 14, 4.

<span id="fn_3152"></span>[393:3153](0010754.htm#fr_3152) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p4"></span> Thus: <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>Σωτήρ</span> ( <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p4.2"></span>σ</span> = 200, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p4.3"></span>ω</span> = 800, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p4.4"></span>τ</span> = 300, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p4.5"></span>η</span> = 8, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p4.6"></span>ρ</span> = 100 ) = 1408.

<span id="fn_3153"></span>[393:3154](0010754.htm#fr_3153) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p6"></span> Being written thus, <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p6.1"></span>ישו</span>, and the
small <span class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p6.2"></span>י</span>
being apparently regarded as only half a letter. Harvey proposes a
different solution which seems less probable.

<span id="fn_3154"></span>[393:3155](0010754.htm#fr_3154) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p7"></span> This is one of the most obscure
passages in the whole work of Irenæus, and the editors have succeeded in
throwing very little light upon it. We may merely state that <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>ישו</span> seems to be
regarded as containing in itself the initials of the three words <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p7.2"></span>יְהֹוָה</span>,
*Jehovah*; <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p7.3"></span>שְמַיִם</span>, *heaven*; and <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p7.4"></span>וְאָרָץ</span>, *and
earth*.

<span id="fn_3155"></span>[393:3156](0010754.htm#fr_3155) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p7.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p8"></span> Nothing can be made of these words;
they have probably been corrupted by ignorant transcribers, and are now
wholly unintelligible.

<span id="fn_3156"></span>[393:3157](0010754.htm#fr_3156) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p9"></span> “Literæ sacerdotales,”—another enigma
which no man can solve. Massuet supposes the reference to be to the
archaic Hebrew characters, still used by the *priests* after the square
Chaldaic letters had been generally adopted. Harvey thinks that
*sacerdotales* represents the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p9.1"></span>λειτουργικά</span>, “meaning letters as
popularly used in common computation.”

<span id="fn_3157"></span>[393:3158](0010754.htm#fr_3157) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p10"></span> The editors have again long notes on
this most obscure passage. Massuet expunges “quæque,” and gives a
lengthened explanation of the clause, to which we can only refer the
curious reader.

<span id="fn_3158"></span>[394:3159](0010754.htm#fr_3158) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p11"></span> <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p11.1"></span>בָרוּךְ</span>, Baruch, *blessed*, one of
the commonest titles of the Almighty. The final <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.iii.xxv-p11.2"></span>ך</span> seems to be
reckoned only a half-letter, as being different in form from what it is
when accompanied by a vowel at the beginning or in the middle of a word.

<span id="fn_3159"></span>[394:3160](0010754.htm#fr_3159) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p13"></span> [Ex. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3160"></span>[394:3161](0010754.htm#fr_3160) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p14"></span> [Ex. xxv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3161"></span>[394:3162](0010754.htm#fr_3161) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p15"></span> [Ex. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3162"></span>[394:3163](0010754.htm#fr_3162) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p16"></span> [Ex. xxv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p16.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3163"></span>[394:3164](0010754.htm#fr_3163) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p17"></span> Only *six* branches are mentioned in
[Ex. xxv. 32](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#032)<span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3164"></span>[394:3165](0010754.htm#fr_3164) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p18"></span> [Ex. xxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3165"></span>[394:3166](0010754.htm#fr_3165) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p19"></span> [Ex. xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3166"></span>[394:3167](0010754.htm#fr_3166) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p20"></span> [Ex. xxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3167"></span>[394:3168](0010754.htm#fr_3167) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p21"></span> [Ex. xxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#016)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3168"></span>[394:3169](0010754.htm#fr_3168) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p22"></span> [Ex. xxvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#026)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3169"></span>[394:3170](0010754.htm#fr_3169) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p23"></span> [Ex. xxx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p23.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[394:3171](0010754.htm#fr_3170) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p24"></span> [Ex. xxx.
34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3171"></span>[394:3172](0010754.htm#fr_3171) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p26"></span> Some such supplement as this seems
requisite, but the syntax in the Latin text is very confused.

<span id="fn_3172"></span>[395:3173](0010754.htm#fr_3172) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p27"></span> [Matt.
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#021)<span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p27.1"></span>; [Mark
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#041),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#044)<span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p27.2"></span>; [Luke
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#014)<span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p27.3"></span>; [John
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011)<span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p27.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3173"></span>[395:3174](0010754.htm#fr_3173) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p27.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p28"></span> [Matt. xxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p28.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3174"></span>[395:3175](0010754.htm#fr_3174) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p29"></span> [Matt. xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3175"></span>[395:3176](0010754.htm#fr_3175) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p30"></span> St. John is here strangely overlooked.

<span id="fn_3176"></span>[395:3177](0010754.htm#fr_3176) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p31"></span> [Luke viii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#051)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3177"></span>[395:3178](0010754.htm#fr_3177) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p32"></span> [Luke xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3178"></span>[395:3179](0010754.htm#fr_3178) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p33"></span> “Fines et summitates;” comp. Justin
Mart., *Dial. c. Tryph.*, 91.

<span id="fn_3179"></span>[395:3180](0010754.htm#fr_3179) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p34"></span> “Juvenis,” *one in the prime of life*.

<span id="fn_3180"></span>[395:3181](0010754.htm#fr_3180) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p35"></span> It has been usual in the Christian
Church to reckon four commandments in the first table, and six in the
second; but the above was the ancient Jewish division. See Joseph.,
*Antiq.*, iii. 6.

<span id="fn_3181"></span>[395:3182](0010754.htm#fr_3181) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p36"></span> [Ex. xxvi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#037)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3182"></span>[395:3183](0010754.htm#fr_3182) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p37"></span> [Ex. xxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p37.1"></span>;
“altitudo” in the text must be exchanged for “latitudo.”

<span id="fn_3183"></span>[395:3184](0010754.htm#fr_3183) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p38"></span> [Ex. xxviii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3184"></span>[395:3185](0010754.htm#fr_3184) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p39"></span> [Ex. xxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#005)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3185"></span>[395:3186](0010754.htm#fr_3185) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p40"></span> [Josh. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#017)<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3186"></span>[395:3187](0010754.htm#fr_3186) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p41"></span> \[Note the manly contempt with which
our author dismisses a class of similitudes, which seem, even in our
day, to have great attractions for some minds not otherwise narrow.\]

<span id="fn_3187"></span>[395:3188](0010754.htm#fr_3187) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p42.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p43"></span> 365 (the days of the year)—12 × 30 +
5.

<span id="fn_3188"></span>[395:3189](0010754.htm#fr_3188) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p44"></span> These hours of daylight, at the winter
and summer solstice respectively, correspond to the latitude of Lyons,
45° 45´ N., where Irenæus resided.

<span id="fn_3189"></span>[396:3190](0010754.htm#fr_3189) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p46"></span> “Alluding,” says Harvey, “to a custom
among the ancients, of summing the numbers below 100 by various
positions of the left hand and its fingers; 100 and upwards being
reckoned by corresponding gestures of the right hand. The ninety and
nine sheep, therefore, that remained quietly in the fold were summed
upon the left hand, and Gnostics professed that they were typical of the
true spiritual seed; but Scripture always places the workers of iniquity
of the left hand, and in the Gnostic theory the evil principle of matter
was sinistral, therefore,” etc., as above.

<span id="fn_3190"></span>[396:3191](0010754.htm#fr_3190) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p47"></span> “Levamen,” corresponding probably to
the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p47.1"></span>ἀνάπαυσιν</span>.

<span id="fn_3191"></span>[396:3192](0010754.htm#fr_3191) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.1"></span>᾽Αγάπη</span> ( <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.2"></span>α</span> = 1, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.3"></span>γ</span> = 3, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.4"></span>α</span> = 1, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.5"></span>π</span> = 80, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.6"></span>η</span> = 8 ) = 93.

<span id="fn_3192"></span>[396:3193](0010754.htm#fr_3192) <span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p48.8"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.1"></span>᾽Αλήθεια</span> ( <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.2"></span>α</span> = 1, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.3"></span>λ</span> = 30, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.4"></span>η</span> = 8, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.5"></span>θ</span> = 9, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.6"></span>ε</span> = 5, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.7"></span>ι</span> = 10, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxv-p49.8"></span>α</span> = 1 ) = 64.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.—God is not to be sought...](0010755)
