[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010398)  [Next](0010400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.xxvi"></span>

### <span id="viii.ii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—Magicians not trusted by Christians.

<span id="viii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span>And, thirdly, because after Christ’s
ascension into heaven the devils put forward certain men who said that
they themselves were gods; and they were not only not persecuted by you,
but even deemed worthy of honours. <span
id="viii.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>There was a Samaritan, Simon, a native of
the village called Gitto, who in the reign of Claudius Cæsar, and in
your royal city of Rome, did mighty acts of magic, by virtue of the art
of the devils operating in him. <span id="viii.ii.xxvi-p1.2"></span>He
was considered a god, and as a god was honoured by you with a statue,
which statue was erected on the river Tiber, between the two bridges,
and bore this inscription, in the language of Rome:—“Simoni Deo
Sancto,” <span id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817) “To Simon the holy
God.” And almost all the Samaritans, and a few even of other nations,
worship him, and acknowledge him as the first god; and a woman, Helena,
who went about with him at that time, and had formerly been a
prostitute, they say is the first idea generated by him. <span
id="viii.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>And a man, Menander, also a Samaritan, of
the town Capparetæa, a disciple of Simon, and inspired by devils, we
know to have deceived many while he was in Antioch by his magical art.
He persuaded those who adhered to him that they should never die, and
even now there are some living who hold this opinion of his. <span
id="viii.ii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>And there is Marcion, a man of Pontus, who
is even at this day alive, and teaching his disciples to believe in some
other god greater than the Creator. And he, by the aid of the devils,
has caused many of every nation to speak blasphemies, and to deny that
God is the maker of this universe, and to assert that some other being,
greater than He, has done greater works. All who take their opinions
from these men, are, as we before said, <span
id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818) called Christians; just as also
those who do not agree with <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span
id="viii.ii.xxvi-Page_172"></span> the philosophers in their doctrines,
have yet in common with them the name of philosophers given to them. And
whether they perpetrate those fabulous and shameful deeds <span
id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819) —the upsetting of the lamp, and
promiscuous intercourse, and eating human flesh—we know not; but we do
know that they are neither persecuted nor put to death by you, at least
on account of their opinions. But I have a treatise against all the
heresies that have existed already composed, which, if you wish to read
it, I will give you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[171:1818](0010399.htm#fr_1817) <span
id="viii.ii.xxvi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span> It is very generally supposed that
Justin was mistaken in understanding this to have been a statue erected
to Simon Magus. This supposition rests on the fact that in the year
1574, there was dug up in the island of the Tiber a fragment of marble,
with the inscription “Semoni Sanco Deo,” etc., being probably the base
of a statue erected to the Sabine deity Semo Sancus. This inscription
Justin is supposed to have mistaken for the one he gives above. This has
always seemed to us very slight evidence on which to reject so precise a
statement as Justin here makes; a statement which he would scarcely have
hazarded in an apology addressed to Rome, where every person had the
means of ascertaining its accuracy. If, as is supposed, he made a
mistake, it must have been at once exposed, and other writers would not
have so frequently repeated the story as they have done. See *Burton’s
Bampton Lectures*, p. 374. \[See Note in Grabe (1. 51), and also mine,
at the end.\]

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[171:1819](0010399.htm#fr_1818) <span
id="viii.ii.xxvi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> See chap. vii.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[172:1820](0010399.htm#fr_1819) <span
id="viii.ii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.xxvi-p4"></span> Which were commonly charged against
the Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII.—Guilt of exposing...](0010400)
