[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010840)  [Next](0010842) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.iv"></span> <span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="ix.vii.iv-Page_529"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.—The power and glory of God shine forth in the weakness of human flesh, as He will render our body a participator of the resurrection and of immortality, although He has formed it from the dust of the earth; He will also bestow upon it the enjoyment of immortality, just as He grants it this short life in common with the soul.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>The
Apostle Paul has, moreover, in the most lucid manner, pointed out that
man has been delivered over to his own infirmity, lest, being uplifted,
he might fall away from the truth. Thus he says in the second
\[Epistle\] to the Corinthians: “And lest I should be lifted up by the
sublimity of the revelations, there was given unto me a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me. And upon this I besought the
Lord three times, that it might depart from me. But he said unto me, My
grace is sufficient for thee; for strength is made perfect in weakness.
Gladly therefore shall I rather glory in infirmities, that the power of
Christ may dwell in me.” <span id="fr_4467"></span>[4468](#fn_4467)
What, therefore? (as some may exclaim:) did the Lord wish, in that case,
that His apostles should thus undergo buffeting, and that he should
endure such infirmity? Even so it was; the word says it. For strength is
made perfect in weakness, rendering him a better man who by means of his
infirmity becomes acquainted with the power of God. For how could a man
have learned that he is himself an infirm being, and mortal by nature,
but that God is immortal and powerful, unless he had learned by
experience what is in both? For there is nothing evil in learning one’s
infirmities by endurance; yea, rather, it has even the beneficial effect
of preventing him from forming an undue opinion of his own nature (*non
aberrare in natura sua*). But the being lifted up against God, and
taking His glory to one’s self, rendering man ungrateful, has brought
much evil upon him. \[And thus, I say, man must learn both things by
experience\], that he may not be destitute of truth and love either
towards himself or his Creator. <span
id="fr_4468"></span>[4469](#fn_4468) But the experience of both confers
upon him the true knowledge as to God and man, and increases his love
towards God. Now, where there exists an increase of love, there a
greater glory is wrought out by the power of God for those who love Him.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p4"></span>2. <span id="ix.vii.iv-p4.1"></span>Those
men, therefore, set aside the power of God, and do not consider what the
word declares, when they dwell upon the infirmity of the flesh, but do
not take into consideration the power of Him who raises it up from the
dead. For if He does not vivify what is mortal, and does not bring back
the corruptible to incorruption, He is not a God of power. But that He
is powerful in all these respects, we ought to perceive from our origin,
inasmuch as God, taking dust from the earth, formed man. And surely it
is much more difficult and incredible, from non-existent bones, and
nerves, and veins, and the rest of man’s organization, to bring it about
that all this should be, and to make man an animated and rational
creature, than to reintegrate again that which had been created and then
afterwards decomposed into earth (for the reasons already mentioned),
having thus passed into those \[elements\] from which man, who had no
previous existence, was formed. For He who in the beginning caused him
to have being who as yet was not, just when He pleased, shall much more
reinstate again those who had a former existence, when it is His will
\[that they should inherit\] the life granted by Him. And that flesh
shall also be found fit for and capable of receiving the power of God,
which at the beginning received the skilful touches of God; so that one
part became the eye for seeing; another, the ear for hearing; another,
the hand for feeling and working; another, the sinews stretched out
everywhere, and holding the limbs together; another, arteries and veins,
passages for the blood and the air; <span
id="fr_4469"></span>[4470](#fn_4469) another, the various internal
organs; another, the blood, which is the bond of union between soul and
body. But why go \[on in this strain\]? Numbers would fail to express
the multiplicity of parts in the human frame, which was made in no other
way than by the great wisdom of God. But those things which partake of
the skill and wisdom of God, do also partake of His power.

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p6"></span>3. The flesh, therefore, is not destitute
\[of participation\] in the constructive wisdom and power of God. But if
the power of Him who is the bestower of life is made perfect in weakness
—that is, in the flesh—let them inform us, when they maintain the
incapacity of flesh to receive the life granted by God, whether they do
say these things as being living men at present, and partakers of life,
or acknowledge that, having no part in life whatever, they are at the
present moment dead men. And if they really are dead men, how is it that
they move about, and speak, and perform those other functions which are
not the actions of the dead, but of the living? But if they are now
alive, and if their whole body partakes of life, how can they venture
the assertion that the flesh is not qualified <span id="page_530">p.
530</span> <span id="ix.vii.iv-Page_530"></span> to be a partaker of
life, when they do confess that they have life at the present moment? It
is just as if anybody were to take up a sponge full of water, or a torch
on fire, and to declare that the sponge could not possibly partake of
the water, or the torch of the fire. In this very manner do those men,
by alleging that they are alive and bear life about in their members,
contradict themselves afterwards, when they represent these members as
not being capable of \[receiving\] life. But if the present temporal
life, which is of such an inferior nature to eternal life, can
nevertheless effect so much as to quicken our mortal members, why should
not eternal life, being much more powerful than this, vivify the flesh,
which has already held converse with, and been accustomed to sustain,
life? For that the flesh can really partake of life, is shown from the
fact of its being alive; for it lives on, as long as it is God’s purpose
that it should do so. It is manifest, too, that God has the power to
confer life upon it, inasmuch as He grants life to us who are in
existence. And, therefore, since the Lord has power to infuse life into
what He has fashioned, and since the flesh is capable of being
quickened, what remains to prevent its participating in incorruption,
which is a blissful and never-ending life granted by God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4467"></span>[529:4468](0010841.htm#fr_4467) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p2"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="ix.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4468"></span>[529:4469](0010841.htm#fr_4468) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p3"></span> We have adopted here the explanation of
Massuet, who considers the preceding period as merely parenthetical.
Both Grabe and Harvey, however, would make conjectural emendations in
the text, which seem to us to be inadmissible.

<span id="fn_4469"></span>[529:4470](0010841.htm#fr_4469) <span
id="ix.vii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.iv-p5"></span> The ancients erroneously supposed that
the arteries were *air-vessels*, from the fact that these organs, after
death, appear quite empty, from all the blood stagnating in the veins
when death supervenes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.—Those persons are...](0010842)
