[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010622)  [Next](0010624.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xiii"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—History of the Septuagint.

<span id="viii.vi.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>But if any one says that the writings of
Moses and of the rest of the prophets were also written in the Greek
character, let him read profane histories, and know that Ptolemy, king
of Egypt, when he had built the library in Alexandria, and by gathering
books from every quarter had filled it, then learnt that very ancient
histories written in Hebrew happened to be carefully preserved; and
wishing to know their contents, he sent for seventy wise men from
Jerusalem, who were acquainted with both the Greek and Hebrew language,
and appointed them to translate the books; and that in freedom from all
disturbance <span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="viii.vi.xiii-Page_279"></span> they might the more speedily complete
the translation, he ordered that there should be constructed, not in the
city itself, but seven stadia off (where the Pharos was built), as many
little cots as there were translators, so that each by himself might
complete his own translation; and enjoined upon those officers who were
appointed to this duty, to afford them all attendance, but to prevent
communication with one another, in order that the accuracy of the
translation might be discernible even by their agreement. And when he
ascertained that the seventy men had not only given the same meaning,
but had employed the same words, and had failed in agreement with one
another not even to the extent of one word; but had written the same
things, and concerning the same things, he was struck with amazement,
and believed that the translation had been written by divine power, and
perceived that the men were worthy of all honour, as beloved of God; and
with many gifts ordered them to return to their own country. And having,
as was natural, marvelled at the books, and concluded them to be divine,
he consecrated them in that library. These things, ye men of Greece, are
no fable, nor do we narrate fictions; but we ourselves having been in
Alexandria, saw the remains of the little cots at the Pharos still
preserved, and having heard these things from the inhabitants, who had
received them as part of their country’s tradition, <span
id="fr_2541"></span>[2542](#fn_2541.md) we now tell to you what you can
also learn from others, and specially from those wise and esteemed men
who have written of these things, Philo and Josephus, and many others.
But if any of those who are wont to be forward in contradiction should
say that these books do not belong to us, but to the Jews, and should
assert that we in vain profess to have learnt our religion froth them,
let him know, as he may from those very things which are written in
these books, that not to them, but to us, does the doctrine of them
refer. That the books relating to our religion are to this day preserved
among the Jews, has been a work of Divine Providence on our behalf; for
lest, by producing them out of the Church, we should give occasion to
those who wish to slander us to charge us with fraud, we demand that
they be produced from the synagogue of the Jews, that from the very
books still preserved among them it might clearly and evidently appear,
that the laws which were written by holy men for instruction pertain to
us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2541"></span>[279:2542](0010623.htm#fr_2541.md) <span
id="viii.vi.xiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xiii-p2"></span> \[Doubtless Justin relates the
tradition as he received it. Consult Dr. Selwyn’s full account of the
fables concerning the LXX., in *Smith’s Dict. of the Bible*, iii. p.
1203 ff.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.—A warning appeal to the...](0010624.md)
