[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010776)  [Next](0010778.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xi"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.—Proofs of the foregoing, drawn from the Gospels of Mark and Luke.

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Luke
also, the follower and disciple of the apostles, referring to Zacharias
and Elisabeth, from whom, according to promise, John was born, says:
“And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.” <span
id="fr_3393"></span>[3394](#fn_3393.md) And again, speaking of Zacharias:
“And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest’s office before
God in the order of his course, according to the custom of the priest’s
office, his lot was to burn incense;” <span
id="fr_3394"></span>[3395](#fn_3394.md) and he came to sacrifice, “entering
into the temple of the Lord.” <span id="fr_3395"></span>[3396](#fn_3395.md)
Whose angel Gabriel, also, who stands prominently in the presence of the
Lord, simply, absolutely, and decidedly confessed in his own person as
God and Lord, Him who had chosen Jerusalem, and had instituted the
sacerdotal office. For he knew of none other above Him; since, if he had
been in possession of the knowledge of any other more perfect God and
Lord besides Him, he surely would never—as I have already shown —have
confessed Him, whom he knew to be the fruit of a defect, as absolutely
and altogether God and Lord. And then, speaking of John, he thus says:
“For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and many of the
children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go
before Him in the spirit and power of Elias, to make ready a people
prepared for the Lord.” <span id="fr_3396"></span>[3397](#fn_3396.md) For
whom, then, did he prepare the people, and in the sight of what Lord was
he made great? Truly of Him who said that John had something even “more
than a prophet,” <span id="fr_3397"></span>[3398](#fn_3397.md) and that
“among those born of women none is greater than John the Baptist;” who
did also make the people ready for the Lord’s advent, warning his
fellow-servants, and preaching to them repentance, that <span
id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span id="ix.iv.xi-Page_424"></span> they
might receive remission from the Lord when He should be present, having
been converted to Him, from whom they had been alienated because of sins
and transgressions. As also David says, “The alienated are sinners from
the womb: they go astray as soon as they are born.” <span
id="fr_3398"></span>[3399](#fn_3398.md) And it was on account of this that
he, turning them to their Lord, prepared, in the spirit and power of
Elias, a perfect people for the Lord.

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p8"></span>2. And again, speaking in reference to the
angel, he says: “But at that time the angel Gabriel was sent from God,
who did also say to the virgin, Fear not, Mary; for thou hast found
favour with God.” <span id="fr_3399"></span>[3400](#fn_3399.md) And he says
concerning the Lord: “He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of
the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of His
father David: and He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and
of His kingdom there shall be no end.” <span
id="fr_3400"></span>[3401](#fn_3400.md) For who else is there who can reign
uninterruptedly over the house of Jacob for ever, except Jesus Christ
our Lord, the Son of the Most High God, who promised by the law and the
prophets that He would make His salvation visible to all flesh; so that
He would become the Son of man for this purpose, that man also might
become the son of God? And Mary, exulting because of this, cried out,
prophesying on behalf of the Church, “My soul doth magnify the Lord, and
my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. For He hath taken up His
child Israel, in remembrance of His mercy, as He spake to our fathers,
Abraham, and his seed for ever.” <span
id="fr_3401"></span>[3402](#fn_3401.md) By these and such like \[passages\]
the Gospel points out that it was God who spake to the fathers; that it
was He who, by Moses, instituted the legal dispensation, by which giving
of the law we know that He spake to the fathers. This same God, after
His great goodness, poured His compassion upon us, through which
compassion “the Day-spring from on high hath looked upon us, and
appeared to those who sat in darkness and the shadow of death, and has
guided our feet into the way of peace;” <span
id="fr_3402"></span>[3403](#fn_3402.md) as Zacharias also, recovering from
the state of dumbness which he had suffered on account of unbelief,
having been filled with a new spirit, did bless God in a new manner. For
all things had entered upon a new phase, the Word arranging after a new
manner the advent in the flesh, that He might win back <span
id="fr_3403"></span>[3404](#fn_3403.md) to God that human nature
(*hominem*) which had departed from God; and therefore men were taught
to worship God after a new fashion, but not another god, because in
truth there is but “one God, who justifieth the circumcision by faith,
and the uncircumcision through faith.” <span
id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404.md) But Zacharias prophesying,
exclaimed, “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for He hath visited and
redeemed His people, and hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in
the house of His servant David; as He spake by the mouth of His holy
prophets, which have been since the world begun; salvation from our
enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us; to perform the mercy
\[promised\] to our fathers, and to remember His holy covenant, the oath
which He swore to our father Abraham, that He would grant unto us, that
we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve Him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before Him, all our
days.” <span id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405.md) Then he says to John:
“And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou
shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare His ways; to give
knowledge of salvation to His people, for the remission of their
sins.” <span id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406.md) For this is the
knowledge of salvation which was wanting to them, that of the Son of
God, which John made known, saying, “Behold the Lamb of God, who taketh
away the sin of the world. This is He of whom I said, After me cometh a
man who was made before me; <span id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407.md)
because He was prior to me: and of His fulness have all we
received.” <span id="fr_3408"></span>[3409](#fn_3408.md) This, therefore,
was the knowledge of salvation; but \[it did not consist in\] another
God, nor another Father, nor Bythus, nor the Pleroma of thirty Æons, nor
the Mother of the (lower) Ogdoad: but the knowledge of salvation was the
knowledge of the Son of God, who is both called and actually is,
salvation, and Saviour, and salutary. Salvation, indeed, as follows: “I
have waited for Thy salvation, O Lord.” <span
id="fr_3409"></span>[3410](#fn_3409.md) And then again, Saviour: “Behold my
God, my Saviour, I will put my trust in Him.” <span
id="fr_3410"></span>[3411](#fn_3410.md) But as bringing salvation, thus:
“God hath made known His salvation (*salutare*) in the sight of the
heathen.” <span id="fr_3411"></span>[3412](#fn_3411.md) For He is indeed
Saviour, as being the Son and Word of God; but salutary, since \[He is\]
Spirit; for he says: “The Spirit of our countenance, Christ the
Lord.” <span id="fr_3412"></span>[3413](#fn_3412.md) But salvation, as
being flesh: for “the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” <span
id="fr_3413"></span>[3414](#fn_3413.md) This knowledge of salvation,
therefore, John did impart to those repenting, and believing in the Lamb
of God, who taketh away the sin of the world.

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p24"></span>3. And the angel of the Lord, he says,
<span id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span id="ix.iv.xi-Page_425"></span>
appeared to the shepherds, proclaiming joy to them: “For <span
id="fr_3414"></span>[3415](#fn_3414.md) there is born in the house of
David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. Then \[appeared\] a
multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, Glory in the
highest to God, and on earth peace, to men of good will.” <span
id="fr_3415"></span>[3416](#fn_3415.md) The falsely-called Gnostics say
that these angels came from the Ogdoad, and made manifest the descent of
the superior Christ. But they are again in error, when saying that the
Christ and Saviour from above was not born, but that also, after the
baptism of the dispensational Jesus, he, \[the Christ of the Pleroma,\]
descended upon him as a dove. Therefore, according to these men, the
angels of the Ogdoad lied, when they said, “For unto you is born this
day a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord, in the city of David.” For
neither was Christ nor the Saviour born at that time, by their account;
but it was he, the dispensational Jesus, who is of the framer of the
world, the \[Demiurge\], and upon whom, after his baptism, that is,
after \[the lapse of\] thirty years, they maintain the Saviour from
above descended. But why did \[the angels\] add, “in the city of David,”
if they did not proclaim the glad tidings of the fulfilment of God’s
promise made to David, that from the fruit of his body there should be
an eternal King? For the Framer \[Demiurge\] of the entire universe made
promise to David, as David himself declares: “My help is from God, who
made heaven and earth;” <span id="fr_3416"></span>[3417](#fn_3416.md) and
again: “In His hand are the ends of the earth, and the heights of the
mountains are His. For the sea is His, and He did Himself make it; and
His hands founded the dry land. Come ye, let us worship and fall down
before Him, and weep in the presence of the Lord who made us; for He is
the Lord our God.” <span id="fr_3417"></span>[3418](#fn_3417.md) The Holy
Spirit evidently thus declares by David to those hearing him, that there
shall be those who despise Him who formed us, and who is God alone.
Wherefore he also uttered the foregoing words, meaning to say: See that
ye do not err; besides or above Him there is no other God, to whom ye
should rather stretch out \[your hands\], thus rendering us pious and
grateful towards Him who made, established, and \[still\] nourishes us.
What, then, shall happen to those who have been the authors of so much
blasphemy against their Creator? This identical truth was also what the
angels \[proclaimed\]. For when they exclaim, “Glory to God in the
highest, and in earth peace,” they have glorified with these words Him
who is the Creator of the highest, that is, of super-celestial things,
and the Founder of everything on earth: who has sent to His own
handiwork, that is, to men, the blessing of His salvation from heaven.
Wherefore he adds: “The shepherds returned, glorifying God for all which
they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them.” <span
id="fr_3418"></span>[3419](#fn_3418.md) For the Israelitish shepherds did
not glorify another god, but Him who had been announced by the law and
the prophets, the Maker of all things, whom also the angels glorified.
But if the angels who were from the Ogdoad were accustomed to glorify
any other, different from Him whom the shepherds \[adored\], these
angels from the Ogdoad brought to them error and not truth.

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p30"></span>4. And still further does Luke say in
reference to the Lord: “When the days of purification were accomplished,
they brought Him up to Jerusalem, to present Him before the Lord, as it
is written in the law of the Lord, That every male opening the womb
shall be called holy to the Lord; and that they should offer a
sacrifice, as it is said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves,
or two young pigeons:” <span id="fr_3419"></span>[3420](#fn_3419.md) in his
own person most clearly calling Him Lord, who appointed the legal
dispensation. But “Simeon,” he also says, “blessed God, and said, Lord,
now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen
Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared before the face of all people; a
light for the revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of Thy people
Israel.” <span id="fr_3420"></span>[3421](#fn_3420.md) And “Anna” <span
id="fr_3421"></span>[3422](#fn_3421.md) also, “the prophetess,” he says, in
like manner glorified God when she saw Christ, “and spake of Him to all
them who were looking for the redemption of Jerusalem.” <span
id="fr_3422"></span>[3423](#fn_3422.md) Now by all these one God is shown
forth, revealing to men the new dispensation of liberty, the covenant,
through the new advent of His Son.

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p35"></span>5. Wherefore also Mark, the interpreter
and follower of Peter, does thus commence his Gospel narrative: “The
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; as it is
written in the prophets, Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face,
which shall prepare Thy way. <span id="fr_3423"></span>[3424](#fn_3423.md)
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make the paths <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xi-Page_426"></span> straight before our God.” Plainly does
the commencement of the Gospel quote the words of the holy prophets, and
point out Him at once, whom they confessed as God and Lord; Him, the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who had also made promise to Him, that
He would send His messenger before His face, who was John, crying in the
wilderness, in “the spirit and power of Elias,” <span
id="fr_3424"></span>[3425](#fn_3424.md) “Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make straight paths before our God.” For the prophets did not announce
one and another God, but one and the same; under various aspects,
however, and many titles. For varied and rich in attribute is the
Father, as I have already shown in the book preceding <span
id="fr_3425"></span>[3426](#fn_3425.md) this; and I shall show \[the same
truth\] from the prophets themselves in the further course of this work.
Also, towards the conclusion of his Gospel, Mark says: “So then, after
the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, He was received up into heaven, and
sitteth on the right hand of God;” <span
id="fr_3426"></span>[3427](#fn_3426.md) confirming what had been spoken by
the prophet: “The <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iv.xi-p39.2"></span>Lord</span> said to my Lord, Sit Thou on My
right hand, until I make Thy foes Thy footstool.” <span
id="fr_3427"></span>[3428](#fn_3427.md) Thus God and the Father are truly
one and the same; He who was announced by the prophets, and handed down
by the true Gospel; whom we Christians worship and love with the whole
heart, as the Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things therein.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3393"></span>[423:3394](0010777.htm#fr_3393.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p2"></span> [Luke i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3394"></span>[423:3395](0010777.htm#fr_3394.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p3"></span> Literally, “that he should place the
incense.” The next clause is most likely an interpolation for the sake
of explanation.

<span id="fn_3395"></span>[423:3396](0010777.htm#fr_3395.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p4"></span> [Luke i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3396"></span>[423:3397](0010777.htm#fr_3396.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p5"></span> [Luke i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3397"></span>[423:3398](0010777.htm#fr_3397.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p6"></span> [Matt.
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3398"></span>[424:3399](0010777.htm#fr_3398.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p7"></span> [Ps. lviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3399"></span>[424:3400](0010777.htm#fr_3399.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p9"></span> [Luke i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p9.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3400"></span>[424:3401](0010777.htm#fr_3400.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p10"></span> [Luke
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032.md),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#033.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3401"></span>[424:3402](0010777.htm#fr_3401.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p11"></span> [Luke
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046.md),
[47](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#047.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3402"></span>[424:3403](0010777.htm#fr_3402.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p12"></span> [Luke i.
78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3403"></span>[424:3404](0010777.htm#fr_3403.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p13"></span> “Ascriberet Deo”—make the property of
God.

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[424:3405](0010777.htm#fr_3404.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p14"></span> [Rom. iii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[424:3406](0010777.htm#fr_3405.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p15"></span> [Luke i.
68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p15.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[424:3407](0010777.htm#fr_3406.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p16"></span> [Luke i.
76](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[424:3408](0010777.htm#fr_3407.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p17"></span> Harvey observes that the Syriac,
agreeing with the Latin here, expresses priority in point of time; but
our translation, without reason, makes it the precedence of honour,
viz., *was preferred before me*. The Greek is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iv.xi-p17.1"></span>πρῶτός μου</span>.

<span id="fn_3408"></span>[424:3409](0010777.htm#fr_3408.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p18"></span> [John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p18.1"></span>,
[John 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p18.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3409"></span>[424:3410](0010777.htm#fr_3409.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p19"></span> [Gen. xlix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3410"></span>[424:3411](0010777.htm#fr_3410.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p20"></span> [Isa. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3411"></span>[424:3412](0010777.htm#fr_3411.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p21"></span> [Ps. xcviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3412"></span>[424:3413](0010777.htm#fr_3412.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p22"></span> [Lam. iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p22.1"></span>,
after LXX.

<span id="fn_3413"></span>[424:3414](0010777.htm#fr_3413.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p23"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3414"></span>[425:3415](0010777.htm#fr_3414.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p25"></span> [Luke ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p25.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3415"></span>[425:3416](0010777.htm#fr_3415.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p26"></span> Thus found also in the Vulgate. Harvey
supposes that the original of Irenæus read according to our *textus
receptus*, and that the Vulgate rendering was adopted in this passage by
the transcribers of the Latin version of our author. \[No doubt a just
remark.\] There can be no doubt, however, that the reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xi-p26.1"></span>εὐδοκίας</span> is
supported by many and weighty ancient authorities. \[But on this point
see the facts as given by Burgon, in his refutation of the rendering
adopted by late revisers, *Revision Revised*, p. 41. London, Murray,
1883.\]

<span id="fn_3416"></span>[425:3417](0010777.htm#fr_3416.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p27"></span> [Ps. cxxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3417"></span>[425:3418](0010777.htm#fr_3417.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p28"></span> [Ps. xcv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3418"></span>[425:3419](0010777.htm#fr_3418.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p29"></span> [Luke ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3419"></span>[425:3420](0010777.htm#fr_3419.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p31"></span> [Luke ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3420"></span>[425:3421](0010777.htm#fr_3420.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p32"></span> [Luke ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p32.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3421"></span>[425:3422](0010777.htm#fr_3421.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p33"></span> [Luke ii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#038.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3422"></span>[425:3423](0010777.htm#fr_3422.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p34"></span> The text seems to be corrupt in the old
Latin translation. The rendering here follows Harvey’s conjectural
restoration of the original Greek of the passage.

<span id="fn_3423"></span>[425:3424](0010777.htm#fr_3423.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p36"></span> The Greek of this passage in St. [Mark
i. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p36.1"></span>
reads, <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xi-p36.2"></span>τὰς τρίβους
αὐτοῦ</span>, i.e., *His paths*, which varies from the Hebrew original,
to which the text of Irenæus seems to revert, unless indeed his copy of
the Gospels contained the reading of the Codex Bezæ. \[See book iii.
cap. xii. 3, 14, below; also, xiv. 2 and xxiii. 3. On this Codex, see
Burgon, *Revision Revised*, p. 12, etc., and references.\]

<span id="fn_3424"></span>[426:3425](0010777.htm#fr_3424.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p36.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p37"></span> [Luke i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3425"></span>[426:3426](0010777.htm#fr_3425.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p38"></span> See ii. 35, 3.

<span id="fn_3426"></span>[426:3427](0010777.htm#fr_3426.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p39"></span> [Mark xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3427"></span>[426:3428](0010777.htm#fr_3427.md) <span
id="ix.iv.xi-p39.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xi-p40"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.iv.xi-p40.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI—Proofs in continuation,...](0010778.md)
