[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010784)  [Next](0010786) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xix"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.—Continuation of the foregoing argument. Proofs from the writings of St. Paul, and from the words of Our Lord, that Christ and Jesus cannot be considered as distinct beings; neither can it be alleged that the Son of God became man merely in appearance, but that He did so truly and actually.

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p1"></span>1. <span
id="fr_3631"></span>[3632](#fn_3631) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p2.1"></span><span id="ix.iv.xix-p2.2"></span>As it has
been clearly demonstrated that <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xix-Page_446"></span> the Word, who existed in the beginning
with God, by whom all things were made, who was also always present with
mankind, was in these last days, according to the time appointed by the
Father, united to His own workmanship, inasmuch as He became a man
liable to suffering, \[it follows\] that every objection is set aside of
those who say, “If our Lord was born at that time, Christ had therefore
no previous existence.” For I have shown that the Son of God did not
then begin to exist, being with the Father from the beginning; but when
He became incarnate, and was made man, He commenced afresh <span
id="fr_3632"></span>[3633](#fn_3632) the long line of human beings, and
furnished us, in a brief, comprehensive manner, with salvation; so that
what we had lost in Adam—namely, to be according to the image and
likeness of God—that we might recover in Christ Jesus.

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p4"></span>2. For as it was not possible that the
man who had once for all been conquered, and who had been destroyed
through disobedience, could reform himself, and obtain the prize of
victory; and as it was also impossible that he could attain to salvation
who had fallen under the power of sin,—the Son effected both these
things, being the Word of God, descending from the Father, becoming
incarnate, stooping low, even to death, and consummating the arranged
plan of our salvation, upon whom \[Paul\], exhorting us unhesitatingly
to believe, again says, “Who shall ascend into heaven? that is, to bring
down Christ; or who shall descend into the deep? that is, to liberate
Christ again from the dead.” <span id="fr_3633"></span>[3634](#fn_3633)
Then he continues, “If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised Him from the dead,
thou shall be saved.” <span id="fr_3634"></span>[3635](#fn_3634) And he
renders the reason why the Son of God did these things, saying, “For to
this end Christ both lived, and died, and revived, that He might rule
over the living and the dead.” <span
id="fr_3635"></span>[3636](#fn_3635) And again, writing to the
Corinthians, he declares, “But we preach Christ Jesus crucified;” <span
id="fr_3636"></span>[3637](#fn_3636) and adds, “The cup of blessing
which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?” <span
id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637)

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p10"></span>3. But who is it that has had fellowship
with us in the matter of food? <span id="ix.iv.xix-p10.1"></span>Whether
is it he who is conceived of by them as the Christ above, who extended
himself through Horos, and imparted a form to their mother; or is it He
who is from the Virgin, Emmanuel, who did eat butter and honey, <span
id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638) of whom the prophet declared, “He
is also a man, and who shall know him?” <span
id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639) He was likewise preached by Paul:
“For I delivered,” he says, “unto you first of all, that Christ died for
our sins, according to the Scriptures; and that He was buried, and rose
again the third day, according to the Scriptures.” <span
id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640) It is plain, then, that Paul knew
no other Christ besides Him alone, who both suffered, and was buried,
and rose gain, who was also born, and whom he speaks of as man. For
after remarking, “But if Christ be preached, that He rose from the
dead,” <span id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641) he continues,
rendering the reason of His incarnation, “For since by man came death,
by man \[came\] also the resurrection of the dead.” And everywhere, when
\[referring to\] the passion of our Lord, and to His human nature, and
His subjection to death, he employs the name of Christ, as in that
passage: “Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died.” <span
id="fr_3642"></span>[3643](#fn_3642) And again: “But now, in Christ, ye
who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.” <span
id="fr_3643"></span>[3644](#fn_3643) And again: “Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written,
Cursed is every one that hangeth upon a tree.” <span
id="fr_3644"></span>[3645](#fn_3644) And again: “And through thy
knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died;” <span
id="fr_3645"></span>[3646](#fn_3645) indicating that the impassible
Christ did not descend upon Jesus, but that He Himself, because He was
Jesus Christ, suffered for us; He, who lay in the tomb, and rose again,
who descended and ascended,—the Son of God having been made the Son of
man, as the very name itself doth declare. For in the name of Christ is
implied, He that anoints, He that is anointed, and the unction itself
with which He is anointed. And it is the Father who anoints, but the Son
who is anointed by the Spirit, who is the unction, as the Word declares
by Isaiah, “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed
me,” <span id="fr_3646"></span>[3647](#fn_3646) —pointing out both the
anointing Father, the anointed Son, and the unction, which is the
Spirit.

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p20"></span>4. The Lord Himself, too, makes it
evident who it was that suffered; for when He asked the disciples, “Who
do men say that I, the Son of man, am?” <span
id="fr_3647"></span>[3648](#fn_3647) and when Peter had replied, “Thou
art the Christ, the Son of the living God;” and when he had been
commended by Him \[in these words\], “That flesh and blood had not
revealed it to him, but the Father who is in heaven,” He made it clear
that He, the Son of man, is Christ the Son of the living God. “For from
that time forth,” it is said, “He began to show to His disciples, how
that He must go unto Jerusalem, <span id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xix-Page_447"></span> and suffer many things of the priests,
and be rejected, and crucified, and rise again the third day.” <span
id="fr_3648"></span>[3649](#fn_3648) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p22.2"></span>He who was acknowledged by Peter as Christ,
who pronounced him blessed because the Father had revealed the Son of
the living God to him, said that He must Himself suffer many things, and
be crucified; and then He rebuked Peter, who imagined that He was the
Christ as the generality of men supposed <span
id="fr_3649"></span>[3650](#fn_3649) \[that the Christ should be\], and
was averse to the idea of His suffering, \[and\] said to the disciples,
“If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow Me. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it;
and whosoever will lose it for My sake shall save it.” <span
id="fr_3650"></span>[3651](#fn_3650) For these things Christ spoke
openly, He being Himself the Saviour of those who should be delivered
over to death for their confession of Him, and lose their lives.

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p25"></span>5. If, however, He was Himself not to
suffer, but should fly away from Jesus, why did He exhort His disciples
to take up the cross and follow Him,—that cross which these men
represent Him as not having taken up, but \[speak of Him\] as having
relinquished the dispensation of suffering? For that He did not say this
with reference to the acknowledging of the *Stauros* (cross) above, as
some among them venture to expound, but with respect to the suffering
which He should Himself undergo, and that His disciples should endure,
He implies when He says, “For whosoever will save his life, shall lose
it; and whosoever will lose, shall find it.” And that His disciples must
suffer for His sake, He \[implied when He\] said to the Jews, “Behold, I
send you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shall
kill and crucify.” <span id="fr_3651"></span>[3652](#fn_3651) And to the
disciples He was wont to say, “And ye shall stand before governors and
kings for My sake; and they shall scourge some of you, and slay you, and
persecute you from city to city.” <span
id="fr_3652"></span>[3653](#fn_3652) He knew, therefore, both those who
should suffer persecution, and He knew those who should have to be
scourged and slain because of Him; and He did not speak of any other
cross, but of the suffering which He should Himself undergo first, and
His disciples afterwards. For this purpose did He give them this
exhortation: “Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul; but rather fear Him who is able to send both soul and
body into hell;” <span id="fr_3653"></span>[3654](#fn_3653) \[thus
exhorting them\] to hold fast those professions of faith which they had
made in reference to Him. For He promised to confess before His Father
those who should confess His name before men; but declared that He would
deny those who should deny Him, and would be ashamed of those who should
be ashamed to confess Him. And although these things are so, some of
these men have proceeded to such a degree of temerity, that they even
pour contempt upon the martyrs, and vituperate those who are slain on
account of the confession of the Lord, and who suffer all things
predicted by the Lord, and who in this respect strive to follow the
footprints of the Lord’s passion, having become martyrs of the suffering
One; these we do also enrol with the martyrs themselves. For, when
inquisition shall be made for their blood, <span
id="fr_3654"></span>[3655](#fn_3654) and they shall attain to glory,
then all shall be confounded by Christ, who have cast a slur upon their
martyrdom. And from this fact, that He exclaimed upon the cross,
“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do,” <span
id="fr_3655"></span>[3656](#fn_3655) the long-suffering, patience,
compassion, and goodness of Christ are exhibited, since He both
suffered, and did Himself exculpate those who had maltreated Him. For
the Word of God, who said to us, “Love your enemies, and pray for those
that hate you,” <span id="fr_3656"></span>[3657](#fn_3656) Himself did
this very thing upon the cross; loving the human race to such a degree,
that He even prayed for those putting Him to death. If, however, any
one, going upon the supposition that there are two \[Christs\], forms a
judgment in regard to them, that \[Christ\] shall be found much the
better one, and more patient, and the truly good one, who, in the midst
of His own wounds and stripes, and the other \[cruelties\] inflicted
upon Him, was beneficent, and unmindful of the wrongs perpetrated upon
Him, than he who flew away, and sustained neither injury nor insult.

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p32"></span>6. <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p32.1"></span><span id="ix.iv.xix-p32.2"></span>This also
does likewise meet \[the case\] of those who maintain that He suffered
only in appearance. For if He did not truly suffer, no thanks to Him,
since there was no suffering at all; and when we shall actually begin to
suffer, He will seem as leading us astray, exhorting us to endure
buffering, and to turn the other <span
id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657) cheek, if He did not Himself before
us in reality suffer the same; and as He misled them by seeming to them
what He was not, so does He also mislead us, by exhorting us to endure
what He did not endure Himself. \[In that case\] we shall be even above
the Master, because we suffer and sustain what our Master never bore or
endured. But as our Lord is alone truly Master, so the Son of God is
truly good and patient, the Word of God the Father having been made the
Son of man. For He fought and conquered; for He was man contending for
the fathers, <span id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658) and <span
id="page_448">p. 448</span> <span id="ix.iv.xix-Page_448"></span>
through obedience doing away with disobedience completely: for He bound
the strong man, <span id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659) and set free
the weak, and endowed His own handiwork with salvation, by destroying
sin. For He is a most holy and merciful Lord, and loves the human race.

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p36"></span>7. Therefore, as I have already said, He
caused man (human nature) to cleave to and to become, one with God. For
unless man had overcome the enemy of man, the enemy would not have been
legitimately vanquished. And again: unless it had been God who had
freely given salvation, we could never have possessed it securely. And
unless man had been joined to God, he could never have become a partaker
of incorruptibility. For it was incumbent upon the Mediator between God
and men, by His relationship to both, to bring both to friendship and
concord, and present man to God, while He revealed God to man. <span
id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660) For, in what way could we be
partaken of the adoption of sons, unless we had received from Him
through the Son that fellowship which refers to Himself, unless His
Word, having been made flesh, had entered into communion with us?
Wherefore also He passed through every stage of life, restoring to all
communion with God. Those, therefore, who assert that He appeared
putatively, and was neither born in the flesh nor truly made man, are as
yet under the old condemnation, holding out patronage to sin; for, by
their showing, death has not been vanquished, which “reigned from Adam
to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of
Adam’s transgression.” <span id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661) But
the law coming, which was given by Moses, and testifying of sin that it
is a sinner, did truly take away his (death’s) kingdom, showing that he
was no king, but a robber; and it revealed him as a murderer. It laid,
however, a weighty burden upon man, who had sin in himself, showing that
he was liable to death. For as the law was spiritual, it merely made sin
to stand out in relief, but did not destroy it. For sin had no dominion
over the spirit, but over man. For it behoved Him who was to destroy
sin, and redeem man under the power of death, that He should Himself be
made that very same thing which he was, that is, man; who had been drawn
by sin into bondage, but was held by death, so that sin should be
destroyed by man, and man should go forth from death. For as by the
disobedience of the one man who was originally moulded from virgin soil,
the many were made sinners, <span id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662)
and forfeited life; so was it necessary that, by the obedience of one
man, who was originally born from a virgin, many should be justified and
receive salvation. Thus, then, was the Word of God made man, as also
Moses says: “God, true are His works.” <span
id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663) But if, not having been made flesh,
He did appear as if flesh, His work was not a true one. But what He did
appear, that He also was: God recapitulated in Himself the ancient
formation of man, that He might kill sin, deprive death of its power,
and vivify man; and therefore His works are true.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3631"></span>[445:3632](0010785.htm#fr_3631) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p2"></span> Again a Syriac fragment supplies some
important words. See Harvey, vol. ii. p. 440.

<span id="fn_3632"></span>[446:3633](0010785.htm#fr_3632) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p3"></span> So the Syriac. The Latin has, “in seipso
recapitulavit,” *He summed up in Himself*. \[As the Second Adam, [1 Cor.
xv. 47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span
id="ix.iv.xix-p3.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3633"></span>[446:3634](0010785.htm#fr_3633) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p5"></span> [Rom.
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#007)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3634"></span>[446:3635](0010785.htm#fr_3634) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p6"></span> [Rom. x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3635"></span>[446:3636](0010785.htm#fr_3635) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p7"></span> [Rom. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3636"></span>[446:3637](0010785.htm#fr_3636) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p8"></span> [1 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[446:3638](0010785.htm#fr_3637) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p9"></span> [1 Cor. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#016)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[446:3639](0010785.htm#fr_3638) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p11"></span> [Isa. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[446:3640](0010785.htm#fr_3639) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p12"></span> [Jer. xvii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[446:3641](0010785.htm#fr_3640) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#004)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[446:3642](0010785.htm#fr_3641) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3642"></span>[446:3643](0010785.htm#fr_3642) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p15"></span> [Rom. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#015)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3643"></span>[446:3644](0010785.htm#fr_3643) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p16"></span> [Eph. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3644"></span>[446:3645](0010785.htm#fr_3644) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p17"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p17.1"></span>;
[Deut. xxi. 23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span
id="ix.iv.xix-p17.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3645"></span>[446:3646](0010785.htm#fr_3645) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p18"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3646"></span>[446:3647](0010785.htm#fr_3646) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p19"></span> [Isa. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3647"></span>[446:3648](0010785.htm#fr_3647) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p21"></span> [Matt. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3648"></span>[447:3649](0010785.htm#fr_3648) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p22"></span> [Matt. xvi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3649"></span>[447:3650](0010785.htm#fr_3649) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p23"></span> Literally, “supposing Him to be Christ
according to the idea of men.”

<span id="fn_3650"></span>[447:3651](0010785.htm#fr_3650) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p24"></span> [Matt.
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#025)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3651"></span>[447:3652](0010785.htm#fr_3651) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p26"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3652"></span>[447:3653](0010785.htm#fr_3652) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p27"></span> [Matt.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3653"></span>[447:3654](0010785.htm#fr_3653) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p28"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3654"></span>[447:3655](0010785.htm#fr_3654) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p29"></span> [Ps. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#012)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3655"></span>[447:3656](0010785.htm#fr_3655) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p30"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3656"></span>[447:3657](0010785.htm#fr_3656) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p31"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[447:3658](0010785.htm#fr_3657) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p33"></span> [Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[447:3659](0010785.htm#fr_3658) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p34"></span> “*Pro patribus*, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xix-p34.1"></span>ἀντὶ τῶν πατρῶν</span>.
The reader will here observe the clear statement of the doctrine of
atonement, whereby alone sin is done away.”—<span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iv.xix-p34.2"></span>Harvey</span>.

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[448:3660](0010785.htm#fr_3659) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p35"></span> [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[448:3661](0010785.htm#fr_3660) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p37"></span> The Latin text, “et facere, ut et Deus
assumeret hominem, et homo se dederet Deo,” here differs widely from the
Greek preserved by Theodoret. We have followed the latter, which is
preferred by all the editors.

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[448:3662](0010785.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p38"></span> [Rom. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[448:3663](0010785.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p39"></span> [Rom. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[448:3664](0010785.htm#fr_3663) <span
id="ix.iv.xix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xix-p40"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004)<span id="ix.iv.xix-p40.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX.—Jesus Christ was not a...](0010786)
