[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010537)  [Next](0010539.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.lxxvii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter LXXVII.—He returns to explain the prophecy of Isaiah.

<span id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p1"></span>Then Trypho said, “I admit that such
and so great arguments are sufficient to persuade one; but I wish
\[you\] to know that I ask you for the proof which you have frequently
proposed to give me. Proceed then to make this plain to us, that we may
see how you prove that that \[passage\] refers to this Christ of yours.
For we assert that the prophecy relates to Hezekiah.” And I replied, “I
shall do as you wish. <span id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p1.3"></span>But show me yourselves first of all how
it is said of Hezekiah, that before he knew how to call father or
mother, he received the power of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria in
the presence of the king of Assyria. For it will not be conceded to you,
as you wish to explain it, that Hezekiah waged war with the inhabitants
of Damascus and Samaria in presence of the king of Assyria. ‘For before
the child knows how to call father or mother,’ the prophetic word said,
‘He shall take the power of Damascus and spoils of Samaria in presence
of the king of Assyria.’ For if the Spirit of prophecy had not made the
statement with an addition, ‘Before the child knows how to call father
or mother, he shall take the power of Damascus and spoils of Samaria,’
but had only said, ‘And shall bear a son, and he shall take the power of
Damascus and spoils of Samaria,’ then you might say that God foretold
that he would take these things, since He foreknew it. But now the
prophecy has stated it with this addition: ‘Before the child knows how
to call father or mother, he shall take the power of Damascus and spoils
of Samaria.’ And you cannot prove that such a thing ever happened to any
one among the Jews. But we are able to prove that it happened in the
case of our Christ. <span id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p1.4"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p1.5"></span>For at the time of His birth, Magi who
came from Arabia worshipped Him, coming first to Herod, who then was
sovereign in your land, and whom the Scripture calls king of Assyria on
account of his ungodly and sinful character. For you know,” continued I,
“that the Holy Spirit oftentimes announces such events by parables and
similitudes; just as He did towards all the people in Jerusalem,
frequently saying to them, ‘Thy father is an Amorite, and thy mother a
Hittite.’ <span id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[237:2242](0010538.htm#fr_2241.md) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p1.6"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p2"></span> [Ezek. xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003.md)<span
id="viii.iv.lxxvii-p2.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVIII.—He proves that this...](0010539.md)
