[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010752)  [Next](0010754.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxiv"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—The woman who suffered from an issue of blood was no type of the suffering Æon.

<span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p1.2"></span>
Moreover, their ignorance comes out in a clear light with respect to the
case of that woman who, suffering from an issue of blood, touched the
hem of the Lord’s garment, and so was made whole; for they maintain that
through her was shown forth that twelfth power who suffered passion, and
flowed out towards immensity, that is, the twelfth Æon. \[This ignorance
of theirs appears\] first, because, as I have shown, according to their
own system, that was not the twelfth Æon. But even granting them this
point \[in the meantime\], there being twelve Æons, eleven of these are
said to have continued impassible, while the twelfth suffered passion;
but the woman, on the other hand, being healed in the twelfth year, it
is manifest that she had continued to suffer during eleven years, and
was healed in the twelfth. If indeed they were to say that eleven Æons
were involved in passion, but the twelfth one was healed, it would then
be a plausible thing to say that the woman was a type of these. But
since she suffered during eleven years, and \[all that time\] obtained
no cure, but was healed in the twelfth year, in what way can she be a
type of the twelfth of the Æons, eleven of whom, \[according to
hypothesis,\] did not suffer at all, but the twelfth alone participated
in suffering? For a type and emblem is, no doubt, sometimes diverse from
the truth \[signified\] as to matter and substance; but it ought, as to
the general form and features, to maintain <span id="page_393">p.
393</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxiv-Page_393"></span> a likeness \[to what
is typified\], and in this way to shadow forth by means of things
present those which are yet to come.

<span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>2. And not only in the case of this
woman have the years of her infirmity (which they affirm to fit in with
their figment) been mentioned, but, lo! another woman was also healed,
after suffering in like manner for eighteen years; concerning whom the
Lord said, “And ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound
during eighteen years, to be set free on the Sabbath-day?” <span
id="fr_3147"></span>[3148](#fn_3147.md) If, then, the former was a type of
the twelfth Æon that suffered, the latter should also be a type of the
eighteenth Æon in suffering. But they cannot maintain this; otherwise
their primary and original Ogdoad will be included in the number of Æons
who suffered together. Moreover, there was also a certain other
person <span id="fr_3148"></span>[3149](#fn_3148.md) healed by the Lord,
after he had suffered for eight-and-thirty years: they ought therefore
to affirm that the Æon who occupies the thirty-eighth place suffered.
For if they assert that the things which were done by the Lord were
types of what took place in the Pleroma, the type ought to be preserved
throughout. But they can neither adapt to their fictitious system the
case of her who was cured after eighteen years, nor of him who was cured
after thirty-eight years. Now, it is in every way absurd and
inconsistent to declare that the Saviour preserved the type in certain
cases, while He did not do so in others. The type of the woman,
therefore, \[with the issue of blood\] is shown to have no analogy to
their system of Æons. <span id="fr_3149"></span>[3150](#fn_3149.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3147"></span>[393:3148](0010753.htm#fr_3147.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p3"></span> [Luke xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3148"></span>[393:3149](0010753.htm#fr_3148.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p4"></span> [John v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#005.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3149"></span>[393:3150](0010753.htm#fr_3149.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxiv-p5"></span> The text of this sentence is very
uncertain. We follow Massuet’s reading, “negotio Æonum,” in preference
to that suggested by Harvey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV.—Folly of the arguments...](0010754.md)
