[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010464)  [Next](0010466.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.iv"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—The soul of itself cannot see God.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p1"></span>“ ‘Is there then,’ says he, ‘such and so
great power in our mind? Or can a man not perceive by sense sooner? Will
the mind of man see God at any time, if it is uninstructed by the Holy
Spirit?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p2"></span>“ ‘Plato indeed says,’ replied I, ‘that
the mind’s eye is of such a nature, and has been given for this end,
that we may see that very Being when the mind is pure itself, who is the
cause of all discerned by the mind, having no colour, no form, no
greatness—nothing, indeed, which the bodily eye looks upon; but It is
something of this sort, he goes on to say, that is beyond all essence,
unutterable and inexplicable, but alone honourable and good, coming
suddenly into souls well-dispositioned, on account of their affinity to
and desire of seeing Him.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p3"></span>“ ‘What affinity, then,’ replied he, ‘is
there between us and God? <span id="viii.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>Is the soul
also divine and immortal, and a part of that very regal mind? And even
as that sees God, so also is it attainable by us to conceive of the
Deity in our mind, and thence to become happy?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p4"></span>“ ‘Assuredly,’ I said.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p5"></span>“ ‘And do all the souls of all living
beings comprehend Him?’ he asked; ‘or are the souls of men of one kind
and the souls of horses and of asses of another kind?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p6"></span>“ ‘No; but the souls which are in all
are similar,’ I answered.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p7"></span>“ ‘Then,’ says he, ‘shall both horses
and asses see, or have they seen at some time or other, God?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p8"></span>“ ‘No,’ I said; ‘for the majority of men
will not, saving such as shall live justly, purified by righteousness,
and by every other virtue.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p9"></span>“ ‘It is not, therefore,’ said he, ‘on
account of his affinity, that a man sees God, nor because he has a mind,
but because he is temperate and righteous?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p10"></span>“ ‘Yes,’ said I; ‘and because he has
that whereby he perceives God.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p11"></span>“ ‘What then? Do goats or sheep injure
any one?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p12"></span>“ ‘No one in any respect,’ I said.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p13"></span>“ ‘Therefore these animals will see
\[God\] according to your account,’ says he.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p14"></span> <span id="page_197">p. 197</span>
<span id="viii.iv.iv-Page_197"></span> “ ‘No; for their body being of
such a nature, is an obstacle to them.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p15"></span>“He rejoined, ‘If these animals could
assume speech, be well assured that they would with greater reason
ridicule our body; but let us now dismiss this subject, and let it be
conceded to you as you say. Tell me, however, this: Does the soul see
\[God\] so long as it is in the body, or after it has been removed from
it?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p16"></span>“ ‘So long as it is in the form of a
man, it is possible for it,’ I continue, ‘to attain to this by means of
the mind; but especially when it has been set free from the body, and
being apart by itself, it gets possession of that which it was wont
continually and wholly to love.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p17"></span>“ ‘Does it remember this, then \[the
sight of God\], when it is again in the man?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p18"></span>“ ‘It does not appear to me so,’ I
said.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p19"></span>“ ‘What, then, is the advantage to
those who have seen \[God\]? or what has he who has seen more than he
who has not seen, unless he remember this fact, that he has seen?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p20"></span>“ ‘I cannot tell,’ I answered.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p21"></span>“ ‘And what do those suffer who are
judged to be unworthy of this spectacle?’ said he.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p22"></span>“ ‘They are imprisoned in the bodies of
certain wild beasts, and this is their punishment.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p23"></span>“ ‘Do they know, then, that it is for
this reason they are in such forms, and that they have committed some
sin?’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p24"></span>“ ‘I do not think so.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p25"></span>“ ‘Then these reap no advantage from
their punishment, as it seems: moreover, I would say that they are not
punished unless they are conscious of the punishment.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p26"></span>“ ‘No indeed.’

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p27"></span>“ ‘Therefore souls neither see God nor
transmigrate into other bodies; for they would know that so they are
punished, and they would be afraid to commit even the most trivial sin
afterwards. But that they can perceive that God exists, and that
righteousness and piety are honourable, I also quite agree with you,’
said he.

<span id="viii.iv.iv-p28"></span>“ ‘You are right,’ I replied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—The soul is not in its...](0010466.md)
