[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010849)  [Next](0010851) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.xiii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Of the difference between life and death; of the breath of life and the vivifying Spirit: also how it is that the substance of flesh revives which once was dead.

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.vii.xiii-p1.2"></span>For as
the flesh is capable of corruption, so is it also of incorruption; and
as it is of death, so is it also of life. These two do mutually give way
to each other; and both cannot remain in the same place, but one is
driven out by the other, and the presence of the one destroys that of
the other. If, then, when death takes possession of a man, it drives
life away from him, and proves him to be dead, much more does life, when
it has obtained power over the man, drive out death, and restore him as
living unto God. For if death brings mortality, why should not life,
when it comes, vivify man? Just as Esaias the prophet says, “Death
devoured when it had prevailed.” <span
id="fr_4530"></span>[4531](#fn_4530) And again, “God has wiped away
every tear from every face.” Thus that former life is expelled, because
it was not given by the Spirit, but by the breath.

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p3"></span>2. <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p3.1"></span>For the breath of life, which also rendered
man an animated being, is one thing, and the vivifying Spirit another,
which also caused him to become spiritual. And for this reason Isaiah
said, “Thus saith the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p3.2"></span>Lord</span>, who made heaven and
established it, who founded the earth and the things therein, and gave
breath to the people <span id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-Page_538"></span> upon it, and Spirit to those walking
upon it;” <span id="fr_4531"></span>[4532](#fn_4531) thus telling us
that breath is indeed given in common to all people upon earth, but that
the Spirit is theirs alone who tread down earthly desires. And therefore
Isaiah himself, distinguishing the things already mentioned, again
exclaims, “For the Spirit shall go forth from Me, and I have made every
breath.” <span id="fr_4532"></span>[4533](#fn_4532) Thus does he
attribute the Spirit as peculiar to God which in the last times He pours
forth upon the human race by the adoption of sons; but \[he shows\] that
breath was common throughout the creation, and points it out as
something created. Now what has been made is a different thing from him
who makes it. The breath, then, is temporal, but the Spirit eternal. The
breath, too, increases \[in strength\] for a short period, and continues
for a certain time; after that it takes its departure, leaving its
former abode destitute of breath. But when the Spirit pervades the man
within and without, inasmuch as it continues there, it never leaves him.
“But that is not first which is spiritual,” says the apostle, speaking
this as if with reference to us human beings; “but that is first which
is animal, afterwards that which is spiritual,” <span
id="fr_4533"></span>[4534](#fn_4533) in accordance with reason. For
there had been a necessity that, in the first place, a human being
should be fashioned, and that what was fashioned should receive the
soul; afterwards that it should thus receive the communion of the
Spirit. Wherefore also “the first Adam was made” by the Lord “a living
soul, the second Adam a quickening spirit.” <span
id="fr_4534"></span>[4535](#fn_4534) As, then, he who was made a living
soul forfeited life when he turned aside to what was evil, so, on the
other hand, the same individual, when he reverts to what is good, and
receives the quickening Spirit, shall find life.

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p8"></span>3. <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p8.1"></span>For it is not one thing which dies and
another which is quickened, as neither is it one thing which is lost and
another which is found, but the Lord came seeking for that same sheep
which had been lost. What was it, then, which was dead? Undoubtedly it
was the substance of the flesh; the same, too, which had lost the breath
of life, and had become breathless and dead. This same, therefore, was
what the Lord came to quicken, that as in Adam we do all die, as being
of an animal nature, in Christ we may all live, as being spiritual, not
laying aside God’s handiwork, but the lusts of the flesh, and receiving
the Holy Spirit; as the apostle says in the Epistle to the Colossians:
“Mortify, therefore, your members which are upon the earth.” And what
these are he himself explains: “Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence; and covetousness, which is
idolatry.” <span id="fr_4535"></span>[4536](#fn_4535) The laying aside
of these is what the apostle preaches; and he declares that those who do
such things, as being merely flesh and blood, cannot inherit the kingdom
of heaven. For their soul, tending towards what is worse, and descending
to earthly lusts, has become a partaker in the same designation which
belongs to these \[lusts, viz., “earthly”\], which, when the apostle
commands us to lay aside, he says in the same Epistle, “Cast ye off the
old man with his deeds.” <span id="fr_4536"></span>[4537](#fn_4536) But
when he said this, he does not remove away the ancient formation \[of
man\]; for in that case it would be incumbent on us to rid ourselves of
its company by committing suicide.

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p11"></span>4. But the apostle himself also, being
one who had been formed in a womb, and had issued thence, wrote to us,
and confessed in his Epistle to the Philippians that “to live in the
flesh was the fruit of \[his\] work;” <span
id="fr_4537"></span>[4538](#fn_4537) thus expressing himself. Now the
final result of the work of the Spirit is the salvation of the
flesh. <span id="fr_4538"></span>[4539](#fn_4538) For what other visible
fruit is there of the invisible Spirit, than the rendering of the flesh
mature and capable of incorruption? If then \[he says\], “To live in the
flesh, this is the result of labour to me,” he did not surely contemn
the substance of flesh in that passage where he said, “Put ye off the
old man with his works;” <span id="fr_4539"></span>[4540](#fn_4539) but
he points out that we should lay aside our former conversation, that
which waxes old and becomes corrupt; and for this reason he goes on to
say, “And put ye on the new man, that which is renewed in knowledge,
after the image of Him who created him.” In this, therefore, that he
says, “which is renewed in knowledge,” he demonstrates that he, the
selfsame man who was in ignorance in times past, that is, in ignorance
of God, is renewed by that knowledge which has respect to Him. For the
knowledge of God renews man. And when he says, “after the image of the
Creator,” he sets forth the recapitulation of the same man, who was at
the beginning made after the likeness of God.

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p15"></span>5. And that he, the apostle, was the
very same person who had been born from the womb, that is, of the
ancient substance of flesh, he does himself declare in the Epistle to
the Galatians: “But when it pleased God, who separated me from my
mother’s womb, and called me by His grace, to reveal His Son in me, that
I might preach Him among the Gentiles,” <span
id="fr_4540"></span>[4541](#fn_4540) it was not, as I have already
observed, one person who had <span id="page_539">p. 539</span> <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-Page_539"></span> been born from the womb, and another
who preached the Gospel of the Son of God; but that same individual who
formerly was ignorant, and used to persecute the Church, when the
revelation was made to him from heaven, and the Lord conferred with him,
as I have pointed out in the third book, <span
id="fr_4541"></span>[4542](#fn_4541) preached the Gospel of Jesus Christ
the Son of God, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, his former
ignorance being driven out by his subsequent knowledge: just as the
blind men whom the Lord healed did certainly lose their blindness, but
received the substance of their eyes perfect, and obtained the power of
vision in the very same eyes with which they formerly did not see; the
darkness being merely driven away by the power of vision, while the
substance of the eyes was retained, in order that, by means of those
eyes through which they had not seen, exercising again the visual power,
they might give thanks to Him who had restored them again to sight. And
thus, also, he whose withered hand was healed, and all who were healed
generally, did not change those parts of their bodies which had at their
birth come forth from the womb, but simply obtained these anew in a
healthy condition.

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p18"></span>6. For the Maker of all things, the
Word of God, who did also from the beginning form man, when He found His
handiwork impaired by wickedness, performed upon it all kinds of
healing. At one time \[He did so\], as regards each separate member, as
it is found in His own handiwork; and at another time He did once for
all restore man sound and whole in all points, preparing him perfect for
Himself unto the resurrection. For what was His object in healing
\[different\] portions of the flesh, and restoring them to their
original condition, if those parts which had been healed by Him were not
in a position to obtain salvation? For if it was \[merely\] a temporary
benefit which He conferred, He granted nothing of importance to those
who were the subjects of His healing. Or how can they maintain that the
flesh is incapable of receiving the life which flows from Him, when it
received healing from Him? For life is brought about through healing,
and incorruption through life. He, therefore, who confers healing, the
same does also confer life; and He \[who gives\] life, also surrounds
His own handiwork with incorruption.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4530"></span>[537:4531](0010850.htm#fr_4530) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p2"></span> [Isa. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008)<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p2.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_4531"></span>[538:4532](0010850.htm#fr_4531) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p4"></span> [Isa. xlii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005)<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4532"></span>[538:4533](0010850.htm#fr_4532) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p5"></span> [Isa. lvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#016)<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4533"></span>[538:4534](0010850.htm#fr_4533) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#046)<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4534"></span>[538:4535](0010850.htm#fr_4534) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
45](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#045)<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4535"></span>[538:4536](0010850.htm#fr_4535) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p9"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4536"></span>[538:4537](0010850.htm#fr_4536) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p10"></span> [Col. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4537"></span>[538:4538](0010850.htm#fr_4537) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p12"></span> [Phil. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022)<span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4538"></span>[538:4539](0010850.htm#fr_4538) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p13"></span> Following Harvey’s explanation of a
somewhat obscure passage.

<span id="fn_4539"></span>[538:4540](0010850.htm#fr_4539) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p14"></span> [Col. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4540"></span>[538:4541](0010850.htm#fr_4540) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p16"></span> [Gal.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)<span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4541"></span>[539:4542](0010850.htm#fr_4541) <span
id="ix.vii.xiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xiii-p17"></span> Vol. i. pp. 306, 321.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.—In the dead who were...](0010851)
