[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010571)  [Next](0010573) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.cxi"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.cxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter CXI.—The two advents were signified by the two goats. Other figures of the first advent, in which the Gentiles are freed by the blood of Christ.

<span id="viii.iv.cxi-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxi-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.cxi-p1.2"></span>“And
that it was declared by symbol, even in the time of Moses, that there
would be two advents of this Christ, as I have mentioned previously,
\[is manifest\] from the symbol of the goats presented for sacrifice
during the fast. And again, by what Moses and Joshua did, the same thing
was symbolically announced and told beforehand. For the one of them,
stretching out his hands, remained till evening on the hill, his hands
being supported; and this reveals a type of no other thing than of the
cross: and the other, whose name was altered to Jesus (Joshua), led the
fight, and Israel conquered. Now this took place in the case of both
those holy men and prophets of God, that you may perceive how one of
them could not bear up both the mysteries: I mean, the type of the cross
and the type of the name. For this is, was, and shall be the strength of
Him alone, whose name every power dreads, being very much tormented
because they shall be destroyed by Him. Therefore our suffering and
crucified Christ was not cursed by the law, but made it manifest that He
alone would save those who do not depart from His faith. And the blood
of the passover, sprinkled on each man’s door-posts and lintel,
delivered those who were saved in Egypt, when the first-born of the
Egyptians were destroyed. For the passover was Christ, who was
afterwards sacrificed, as also Isaiah said, ‘He was led as a sheep to
the slaughter.’ <span id="fr_2369"></span>[2370](#fn_2369) And it is
written, that on the day of the passover you seized Him, and that also
during the passover you crucified Him. And as the blood of the passover
saved those who were in Egypt, so also the blood of Christ will deliver
from death those who have believed. Would God, then, have been deceived
if this sign had not been above the doors? I do not say that; but I
affirm that He announced beforehand the future salvation for the human
race through the blood of Christ. For the sign of the scarlet thread,
which the spies, sent to Jericho by Joshua, son of Nave (Nun), gave to
Rahab the harlot, telling her to bind it to the window through which she
let them down to escape from their enemies, also manifested the symbol
of the blood of Christ, by which those who were at one time harlots and
unrighteous persons out of all nations are saved, receiving remission of
sins, and continuing no longer in sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2369"></span>[254:2370](0010572.htm#fr_2369) <span
id="viii.iv.cxi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.cxi-p2"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="viii.iv.cxi-p2.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter CXII.—The Jews expound these...](0010573)
