[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010824)  [Next](0010826) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.—Refutation of another argument adduced by the Marcionites, that God directed the Hebrews to spoil the Egyptians.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p1.2"></span>Those,
again, who cavil and find fault because the people did, by God’s
command, upon the eve of their departure, take vessels of all kinds and
raiment from the Egyptians, <span id="fr_4213"></span>[4214](#fn_4213)
and so went away, from which \[spoils\], too, the tabernacle was
constructed in the wilderness, prove themselves ignorant of the
righteous dealings of God, and of His dispensations; as also the
presbyter remarked: For if God had not accorded this in the typical
exodus, no one could now be saved in our true exodus; that is, in the
faith in which we have been established, and by which we have been
brought forth from among the number of the Gentiles. For in some cases
there follows us a small, and in others a large <span id="page_503">p.
503</span> <span id="ix.vi.xxxi-Page_503"></span> amount of property,
which we have acquired from the mammon of unrighteousness. For from what
source do we derive the houses in which we dwell, the garments in which
we are clothed, the vessels which we use, and everything else
ministering to our every-day life, unless it be from those things which,
when we were Gentiles, we acquired by avarice, or received them from our
heathen parents, relations, or friends who unrighteously obtained
them?—not to mention that even now we acquire such things when we are in
the faith. For who is there that sells, and does not wish to make a
profit from him who buys? Or who purchases anything, and does not wish
to obtain good value from the seller? Or who is there that carries on a
trade, and does not do so that he may obtain a livelihood thereby? And
as to those believing ones who are in the royal palace, do they not
derive the utensils they employ from the property which belongs to
Cæsar; and to those who have not, does not each one of these
\[Christians\] give according to his ability? The Egyptians were debtors
to the \[Jewish\] people, not alone as to property, but as their very
lives, because of the kindness of the patriarch Joseph in former times;
but in what way are the heathen debtors to us, from whom we receive both
gain and profit? Whatsoever they amass with labour, these things do we
make use of without labour, although we are in the faith.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p3"></span>2. Up to that time the people served the
Egyptians in the most abject slavery, as saith the Scripture: “And the
Egyptians exercised their power rigorously upon the children of Israel;
and they made life bitter to them by severe labours, in mortar and in
brick, and in all manner of service in the field which they did, by all
the works in which they oppressed them with rigour.” <span
id="fr_4214"></span>[4215](#fn_4214) And with immense labour they built
for them fenced cities, increasing the substance of these men throughout
a long course of years, and by means of every species of slavery; while
these \[masters\] were not only ungrateful towards them, but had in
contemplation their utter annihilation. In what way, then, did \[the
Israelites\] act unjustly, if out of many things they took a few, they
who might have possessed much property had they not served them, and
might have gone forth wealthy, while, in fact, by receiving only a very
insignificant recompense for their heavy servitude, they went away poor?
It is just as if any free man, being forcibly carried away by another,
and serving him for many years, and increasing his substance, should be
thought, when he ultimately obtains some support, to possess some small
portion of his \[master’s\] property, but should in reality depart,
having obtained only a little as the result of his own great labours,
and out of vast possessions which have been acquired, and this should be
made by any one a subject of accusation against him, as if he had not
acted properly. <span id="fr_4215"></span>[4216](#fn_4215) He (the
accuser) will rather appear as an unjust judge against him who had been
forcibly carried away into slavery. Of this kind, then, are these men
also, who charge the people with blame, because they appropriated a few
things out of many, but who bring no charge against those who did not
render them the recompense due to their fathers’ services; nay, but even
reducing them to the most irksome slavery, obtained the highest profit
from them. And \[these objectors\] allege that \[the Israelites\] acted
dishonestly, because, forsooth, they took away for the recompense of
their labours, as I have observed, unstamped gold and silver in a few
vessels; while they say that they themselves (for let truth be spoken,
although to some it may seem ridiculous) do act honestly, when they
carry away in their girdles from the labours of others, coined gold, and
silver, and brass, with Cæsar’s inscription and image upon it.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p6"></span>3. If, however, a comparison be
instituted between us and them, \[I would ask\] which party shall seem
to have received \[their worldly goods\] in the fairer manner? Will it
be the \[Jewish\] people, \[who took\] from the Egyptians, who were at
all points their debtors; or we, \[who receive property\] from the
Romans and other nations, who are under no similar obligation to us?
Yea, moreover, through their instrumentality the world is at peace, and
we walk on the highways without fear, and sail where we will. <span
id="fr_4216"></span>[4217](#fn_4216) Therefore, against men of this kind
(namely, the heretics) the word of the Lord applies, which says: “Thou
hypocrite, first cast the beam out of thine eye, and then shalt thou see
clearly to pull out the mote out of thy brother’s eye.” <span
id="fr_4217"></span>[4218](#fn_4217) For if he who lays these things to
thy charge, and glories in his own wisdom, has been separated from the
company of the Gentiles, and possesses nothing \[derived from\] other
people’s goods, but is literally naked, and barefoot, and dwells
homeless among the mountains, as any of those animals do which feed on
grass, he will stand excused \[in using such language\], as being
ignorant of the necessities of our mode of life. But if he do partake of
what, in the opinion of men, is the property of others, and if \[at the
same time\] he runs down their type, <span
id="fr_4218"></span>[4219](#fn_4218) he proves himself <span
id="page_504">p. 504</span> <span id="ix.vi.xxxi-Page_504"></span> most
unjust, turning this kind of accusation against himself. For he will be
found carrying about property not belonging to him, and coveting goods
which are not his. And therefore has the Lord said: “Judge not, that ye
be not judged: for with what judgment ye shall judge, ye shall be
judged.” <span id="fr_4219"></span>[4220](#fn_4219) \[The meaning is\]
not certainly that we should not find fault with sinners, nor that we
should consent to those who act wickedly; but that we should not
pronounce an unfair judgment on the dispensations of God, inasmuch as He
has Himself made provision that all things shall turn out for good, in a
way consistent with justice. For, because He knew that we would make a
good use of our substance which we should possess by receiving it from
another, He says, “He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that
hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise.” <span
id="fr_4220"></span>[4221](#fn_4220) And, “For I was an hungered, and ye
gave Me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave Me drink; I was naked and ye
clothed Me.” <span id="fr_4221"></span>[4222](#fn_4221) And, “When thou
doest thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
doeth.” <span id="fr_4222"></span>[4223](#fn_4222) And we are proved to
be righteous by whatsoever else we do well, redeeming, as it were, our
property from strange hands. But thus do I say, “from strange hands,”
not as if the world were not God’s possession, but that we have gifts of
this sort, and receive them from others, in the same way as these men
had them from the Egyptians who knew not God; and by means of these same
do we erect in ourselves the tabernacle of God: for God dwells in those
who act uprightly, as the Lord says: “Make to yourselves friends of the
mammon of unrighteousness, that they, when ye shall be put to
flight, <span id="fr_4223"></span>[4224](#fn_4223) may receive you into
eternal tabernacles.” <span id="fr_4224"></span>[4225](#fn_4224) For
whatsoever we acquired from unrighteousness when we were heathen, we are
proved righteous, when we have become believers, by applying it to the
Lord’s advantage.

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p16"></span>4. As a matter of course, therefore,
these things were done beforehand in a type, and from them was the
tabernacle of God constructed; those persons justly receiving them, as I
have shown, while we were pointed out beforehand in them,—\[we\] who
should afterwards serve God by the things of others. For the whole
exodus of the people out of Egypt, which took place under divine
guidance, <span id="fr_4225"></span>[4226](#fn_4225) was a type and
image of the exodus of the Church which should take place from among the
Gentiles; <span id="fr_4226"></span>[4227](#fn_4226) and for this cause
He leads it out at last from this world into His own inheritance, which
Moses the servant of God did not \[bestow\], but which Jesus the Son of
God shall give for an inheritance. And if any one will devote a close
attention to those things which are stated by the prophets with regard
to the \[time of the\] end, and those which John the disciple of the
Lord saw in the Apocalypse, <span id="fr_4227"></span>[4228](#fn_4227)
he will find that the nations \[are to\] receive the same plagues
universally, as Egypt then did particularly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4213"></span>[502:4214](0010825.htm#fr_4213) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p2"></span> [Ex. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022)<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p2.1"></span>,
[Ex. xi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#002)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p2.2"></span>. \[Our English translation “borrow” is a
gratuitous injury to the text. As “King of kings” the Lord enjoins a
just tax, which any earthly sovereign might have imposed uprightly. Our
author argues well.\]

<span id="fn_4214"></span>[503:4215](0010825.htm#fr_4214) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p4"></span> [Exod.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014)<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4215"></span>[503:4216](0010825.htm#fr_4215) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p5"></span> This perplexed sentence is pointed by
Harvey interrogatively, but we prefer the above.

<span id="fn_4216"></span>[503:4217](0010825.htm#fr_4216) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p7"></span> \[A touching tribute to the imperial
law, at a moment when Christians were “dying daily” and “as sheep for
the slaughter.” So powerfully worked the divine command, [Luke vi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#029)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p7.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_4217"></span>[503:4218](0010825.htm#fr_4217) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p8"></span> [Matt. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005)<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4218"></span>[503:4219](0010825.htm#fr_4218) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p9"></span> This is, if he inveighs against the
Israelites for spoiling the Egyptians; the former being a type of the
Christian Church in relation to the Gentiles.

<span id="fn_4219"></span>[504:4220](0010825.htm#fr_4219) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p10"></span> [Matt.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4220"></span>[504:4221](0010825.htm#fr_4220) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p11"></span> [Luke iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#011)<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4221"></span>[504:4222](0010825.htm#fr_4221) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p12"></span> [Matt.
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4222"></span>[504:4223](0010825.htm#fr_4222) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p13"></span> [Matt. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4223"></span>[504:4224](0010825.htm#fr_4223) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p14"></span> As Harvey remarks, this is “a strange
translation for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p14.1"></span>ἐκλίπητε</span>” of the *text. rec.*, and
he adds that “possibly the translator read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p14.2"></span>ἐκτράπητε</span>.”

<span id="fn_4224"></span>[504:4225](0010825.htm#fr_4224) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p15"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4225"></span>[504:4226](0010825.htm#fr_4225) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p17"></span> We here follow the punctuation of
Massuet in preference to that of Harvey.

<span id="fn_4226"></span>[504:4227](0010825.htm#fr_4226) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p18"></span> \[The Fathers regarded the whole
Mosaic system, and the history of the faithful under it, as one great
allegory. In everything they saw “similitudes,” as we do in the *Faery
Queen* of Spenser, or the *Pilgrim’s Progress*. The ancients may have
carried this principle too far, but as a principle it receives
countenance from our Lord Himself and His apostles. To us there is often
a barren bush, where the Fathers saw a bush that burned with fire.\]

<span id="fn_4227"></span>[504:4228](0010825.htm#fr_4227) <span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxxi-p19"></span> See [Rev.
xv.](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#000)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p19.1"></span>, [Rev.
xvi.](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#000)<span
id="ix.vi.xxxi-p19.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI.—We should not hastily...](0010826)
