[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010726)  [Next](0010728.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.—Doctrines of the Ophites and Sethians.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p1.3"></span>Others, again, portentously declare that
there exists, in the power of Bythus, a certain primary light, blessed,
incorruptible, and infinite: this is the Father of all, and is styled
the first man. <span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p1.4"></span>They also maintain that
his Ennœa, going forth from him, produced a son, and that this is the
son of man—the second man. Below these, again, is the Holy Spirit, and
under this superior spirit the elements were separated from each other,
viz., water, darkness, the abyss, chaos, above which they declare the
Spirit was borne, calling him the first woman. <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p1.5"></span>Afterwards, they maintain, the first man,
with his son, delighting over the beauty of the Spirit—that is, of the
woman—and shedding light upon her, begat by her an incorruptible light,
the third male, whom they call Christ,—the son of the first and second
man, and of the Holy Spirit, the first woman.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p2"></span>2. The father and son thus both had
intercourse with the woman (whom they also call the mother of the
living). When, however, <span id="fr_2967"></span>[2968](#fn_2967.md) she
could not bear nor receive into herself the greatness of the lights,
they declare that she was filled to repletion, and became ebullient on
the left side; and that thus their only son Christ, as belonging to the
right side, and ever tending to what was higher, was immediately caught
up with his mother to form an incorruptible Æon. This constitutes the
true and holy Church, which has become the appellation, the meeting
together, and the union of the father of all, of the first man, of the
son, of the second man, of Christ their son, and of the woman who has
been mentioned.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p4"></span>3. They teach, however, that the power
which proceeded from the woman by ebullition, being besprinkled with
light, fell downward from the place occupied by its progenitors, yet
possessing <span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-Page_355"></span> by its own will that besprinkling of
light; and it they call Sinistra, Prunicus, and Sophia, as well as
masculo-feminine. This being, in its simplicity, descended into the
waters while they were yet in a state of immobility, and imparted motion
to them also, wantonly acting upon them even to their lowest depths, and
assumed from them a body. For they affirm that all things rushed towards
and clung to that sprinkling of light, and begin it all round. Unless it
had possessed that, it would perhaps have been totally absorbed in, and
overwhelmed by, material substance. Being therefore bound down by a body
which was composed of matter, and greatly burdened by it, this power
regretted the course it had followed, and made an attempt to escape from
the waters and ascend to its mother: it could not effect this, however,
on account of the weight of the body lying over and around it. But
feeling very ill at ease, it endeavoured at least to conceal that light
which came from above, fearing lest it too might be injured by the
inferior elements, as had happened to itself. And when it had received
power from that besprinkling of light which it possessed, it sprang back
again, and was borne aloft; and being on high, it extended itself,
covered \[a portion of space\], and formed this visible heaven out of
its body; yet remained under the heaven which it made, as still
possessing the form of a watery body. But when it had conceived a desire
for the light above, and had received power by all things, it laid down
this body, and was freed from it. This body which they speak of that
power as having thrown off, they call a female from a female.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p5"></span>4. They declare, moreover, that her son
had also himself a certain breath of incorruption left him by his
mother, and that through means of it he works; and becoming powerful, he
himself, as they affirm, also sent forth from the waters a son without a
mother; for they do not allow him either to have known a mother. His
son, again, after the example of his father, sent forth another son.
This third one, too, generated a fourth; the fourth also generated a
son: they maintain that again a son was generated by the fifth; and the
sixth, too, generated a seventh. Thus was the Hebdomad, according to
them, completed, the mother possessing the eighth place; and as in the
case of their generations, so also in regard to dignities and powers,
they precede each other in turn.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p6"></span>5. <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p6.1"></span>They have also given names to \[the several
persons\] in their system of falsehood, such as the following: he who
was the first descendant of the mother is called Ialdabaoth; <span
id="fr_2968"></span>[2969](#fn_2968.md) he, again, descended from him, is
named Iao; he, from this one, is called Sabaoth; the fourth is named
Adoneus; the fifth, Eloeus; the sixth, Oreus; and the seventh and last
of all, Astanphæus. Moreover, they represent these heavens, potentates,
powers, angels, and creators, as sitting in their proper order in
heaven, according to their generation, and as invisibly ruling over
things celestial and terrestrial. The first of them, namely Ialdabaoth,
holds his mother in contempt, inasmuch as he produced sons and grandsons
without the permission of any one, yea, even angels, archangels, powers,
potentates, and dominions. After these things had been done, his sons
turned to strive and quarrel with him about the supreme power,—conduct
which deeply grieved Ialdabaoth, and drove him to despair. In these
circumstances, he cast his eyes upon the subjacent dregs of matter, and
fixed his desire upon it, to which they declare his son owes his origin.
<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p7.1"></span>This son is Nous himself, twisted into
the form of a serpent; <span id="fr_2969"></span>[2970](#fn_2969.md) and
hence were derived the spirit, the soul, and all mundane things: from
this too were generated all oblivion, wickedness, emulation, envy, and
death. They declare that the father imparted <span
id="fr_2970"></span>[2971](#fn_2970.md) still greater crookedness to this
serpent-like and contorted Nous of theirs, when he was with their father
in heaven and Paradise.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p10"></span>6. On this account, Ialdabaoth,
becoming uplifted in spirit, boasted himself over all those things that
were below him, and exclaimed, “I am father, and God, and above me there
is no one.” <span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p10.1"></span>But his mother, hearing
him speak thus, cried out against him, “Do not lie, Ialdabaoth: for the
father of all, the first Anthropos (man), is above thee; and so is
Anthropos the son of Anthropos.” Then, as all were disturbed by this new
voice, and by the unexpected proclamation, and as they were inquiring
whence the noise proceeded, in order to lead them away and attract them
to himself, they affirm that Ialdabaoth exclaimed, “Come, let us make
man after our image.” <span id="fr_2971"></span>[2972](#fn_2971.md) The six
powers, on hearing this, and their mother furnishing them with the idea
of a man (in order that by means of him she might empty them of their
original power), jointly formed a man of immense size, both in regard to
breadth and length. But as he could merely writhe along the ground, they
carried him to their father; Sophia so labouring in this matter, that
she might empty him (Ialdabaoth) of the light with which he had been
sprinkled, so that he might no longer, though still powerful, be able to
lift up himself against the powers above. They declare, then, that by
breathing <span id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-Page_356"></span> into man the spirit of life, he was
secretly emptied of his power; that hence man became a possessor of nous
(intelligence) and enthymesis (thought); and they affirm that these are
the faculties which partake in salvation. He \[they further assert\] at
once gave thanks to the first Anthropos (man), forsaking those who had
created him.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p12"></span>7. <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p12.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p12.2"></span>But
Ialdabaoth, feeling envious at this, was pleased to form the design of
again emptying man by means of woman, and produced a woman from his own
enthymesis, whom that <span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p12.3"></span>Prunicus
\[above mentioned\] laying hold of, imperceptibly emptied her of power.
But the others coming and admiring her beauty, named her Eve, and
falling in love with her, begat sons by her, whom they also declare to
be the angels. But their mother (Sophia) cunningly devised a scheme to
seduce Eve and Adam, by means of the serpent, to transgress the command
of Ialdabaoth. Eve listened to this as if it had proceeded from a son of
God, and yielded an easy belief. She also persuaded Adam to eat of the
tree regarding which God had said that they should not eat of it. They
then declare that, on their thus eating, they attained to the knowledge
of that power which is above all, and departed from those who had
created them. <span id="fr_2972"></span>[2973](#fn_2972.md) When Prunicus
perceived that the powers were thus baffled by their own creature, she
greatly rejoiced, and again cried out, that since the father was
incorruptible, he (Ialdabaoth) who formerly called himself the father
was a liar; and that, while Anthropos and the first woman (the Spirit)
existed previously, this one (Eve) sinned by committing adultery.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p14"></span>8. Ialdabaoth, however, through that
oblivion in which he was involved, and not paying any regard to these
things, cast Adam and Eve out of Paradise, because they had transgressed
his commandment. For he had a desire to beget sons by Eve, but did not
accomplish his wish, because his mother opposed him in every point, and
secretly emptied Adam and Eve of the light with which they had been
sprinkled, in order that that spirit which proceeded from the supreme
power might participate neither in the curse nor opprobrium \[caused by
transgression\]. They also teach that, thus being emptied of the divine
substance, they were cursed by him, and cast down from heaven to this
world. <span id="fr_2973"></span>[2974](#fn_2973.md) But the serpent also,
who was acting against the father, was cast down by him into this lower
world; he reduced, however, under his power the angels here, and begat
six sons, he himself forming the seventh person, after the example of
that Hebdomad which surrounds the father. They further declare that
these are the seven mundane demons, who always oppose and resist the
human race, because it was on their account that their father was cast
down to this lower world.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p16"></span>9. Adam and Eve previously had light,
and clear, and as it were spiritual bodies, such as they were at their
creation; but when they came to this world, these changed into bodies
more opaque, and gross, and sluggish. Their soul also was feeble and
languid, inasmuch as they had received from their creator a merely
mundane inspiration. This continued until Prunicus, moved with
compassion towards them, restored to them the sweet savour of the
besprinkling of light, by means of which they came to a remembrance of
themselves, and knew that they were naked, as well as that the body was
a material substance, and thus recognised that they bore death about
with them. They thereupon became patient, knowing that only for a time
they would be enveloped in the body. They also found out food, through
the guidance of Sophia; and when they were satisfied, they had carnal
knowledge of each other, and begat Cain, whom the serpent, that had been
cast down along with his sons, immediately laid hold of and destroyed by
filling him with mundane oblivion, and urging into folly and audacity,
so that, by slaying his brother Abel, he was the first to bring to light
envy and death. After these, they affirm that, by the forethought of
Prunicus, Seth was begotten, and then Norea, <span
id="fr_2974"></span>[2975](#fn_2974.md) from whom they represent all the
rest of mankind as being descended. They were urged on to all kinds of
wickedness by the inferior Hebdomad, and to apostasy, idolatry, and a
general contempt for everything by the superior holy Hebdomad, <span
id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975.md) since the mother was always
secretly opposed to them, and carefully preserved what was peculiarly
her own, that is, the besprinkling of light. They maintain, moreover,
that the holy Hebdomad is the seven stars which they call planets; and
they affirm that the serpent cast down has two names, Michael and
Samael.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p19"></span>10. Ialdabaoth, again, being incensed
with men, because they did not worship or honour him as father and God,
sent forth a deluge upon them, that he might at once destroy them all.
But Sophia opposed him in this point also, and Noah and his family were
saved in the ark by means of the besprinkling of that light which
proceeded from her, and through it the world was again filled with
mankind. Ialdabaoth himself chose a certain man named Abraham from among
these, and made a covenant with him, to the effect that, if his seed
continued to serve him, he would give to them the earth for an
inheritance. Afterwards, by means of Moses, he <span id="page_357">p.
357</span> <span id="ix.ii.xxxi-Page_357"></span> brought forth
Abraham’s descendants from Egypt, and gave them the law, and made them
the Jews. Among that people he chose seven days, <span
id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976.md) which they also call the holy
Hebdomad. Each of these receives his own herald for the purpose of
glorifying and proclaiming God; so that, when the rest hear these
praises, they too may serve those who are announced as gods by the
prophets.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p21"></span>11. Moreover, they distribute the
prophets in the following manner: Moses, and Joshua the son of Nun, and
Amos, and Habakkuk, belonged to Ialdabaoth; Samuel, and Nathan, and
Jonah, and Micah, to Iao; Elijah, Joel, and Zechariah to Sabaoth;
Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and Daniel, to Adonai; Tobias and Haggai to
Eloi; Michaiah and Nahum to Oreus; Esdras and Zephaniah to Astanphæus.
Each one of these, then, glorifies his own father and God, and they
maintain that Sophia, herself has also spoken many things through them
regarding the first Anthropos (man), <span
id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977.md) and concerning that Christ who is
above, thus admonishing and reminding men of the incorruptible light,
the first Anthropos, and of the descent of Christ. The \[other\] powers
being terrified by these things, and marvelling at the novelty of those
things which were announced by the prophets, Prunicus brought it about
by means of Ialdabaoth (who knew not what he did), that emissions of two
men took place, the one from the barren Elizabeth, and the other from
the Virgin Mary.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p23"></span>12. <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p23.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p23.2"></span>And
since she herself had no rest either in heaven or on earth, she invoked
her mother to assist her in her distress. Upon this, her mother, the
first woman, was moved with compassion towards her daughter, on her
repentance, and begged from the first man that Christ should be sent to
her assistance, who, being sent forth, descended to his sister, and to
the besprinkling of light. When he recognised her (that is, the Sophia
below), her brother descended to her, and announced his advent through
means of John, and prepared the baptism of repentance, and adopted Jesus
beforehand, in order that on Christ descending he might find a pure
vessel, and that by the son of that Ialdabaoth the woman might be
announced by Christ. They further declare that he descended through the
seven heavens, having assumed the likeness of their sons, and gradually
emptied them of their power. For they maintain that the whole
besprinkling of light rushed to him, and that Christ, descending to this
world, first clothed his sister Sophia \[with it\], and that then both
exulted in the mutual refreshment they felt in each other’s society:
this scene they describe as relating to bridegroom and bride. But Jesus,
inasmuch as he was begotten of the Virgin through the agency of God, was
wiser, purer, and more righteous than all other men: Christ united to
Sophia descended into him, and thus Jesus Christ was produced.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p24"></span>13. They affirm that many of his
disciples were not aware of the descent of Christ into him; but that,
when Christ did descend on Jesus, he then began to work miracles, and
heal, and announce the unknown Father, and openly to confess himself the
son of the first man. The powers and the father of Jesus were angry at
these proceedings, and laboured to destroy him; and when he was being
led away for this purpose, they say that Christ himself, along with
Sophia, departed from him into the state of an incorruptible Æon, while
Jesus was crucified. Christ, however, was not forgetful of his Jesus,
but sent down a certain energy into him from above, which raised him up
again in the body, which they call both animal and spiritual; for he
sent the mundane parts back again into the world. When his disciples saw
that he had risen, they did not recognise him—no, not even Jesus
himself, by whom he rose again from the dead. And they assert that this
very great error prevailed among his disciples, that they imagined he
had risen in a mundane body, not knowing that “flesh <span
id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978.md) and blood do not attain to the
kingdom of God.”

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p26"></span>14. They strove to establish the
descent and ascent of Christ, by the fact that neither before his
baptism, nor after his resurrection from the dead, do his disciples
state that he did any mighty works, not being aware that Jesus was
united to Christ, and the incorruptible Æon to the Hebdomad; and they
declare his mundane body to be of the same nature as that of animals.
But after his resurrection he tarried \[on earth\] eighteen months; and
knowledge descending into him from above, he taught what was clear. He
instructed a few of his disciples, whom he knew to be capable of
understanding so great mysteries, in these things, and was then received
up into heaven, Christ sitting down at the right hand of his father
Ialdabaoth, that he may receive to himself the souls of those who have
known them, <span id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979.md) after they have
laid aside their mundane flesh, thus enriching himself without the
knowledge or perception of his father; so that, in proportion as Jesus
enriches himself with holy souls, to such an extent does his father
suffer loss and is diminished, being emptied of his own power by these
souls. For he will not now possess holy souls to send them down again
into <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-Page_358"></span> the world, except those only which are
of his substance, that is, those into which he has breathed. But the
consummation \[of all things\] will take place, when the whole
besprinkling of the spirit of light is gathered together, and is carried
off to form an incorruptible Æon.

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p28"></span>15. Such are the opinions which prevail
among these persons, by whom, like the Lernæan hydra, a many-headed
beast has been generated from the school of Valentinus. For some of them
assert that Sophia herself became the serpent; on which account she was
hostile to the creator of Adam, and implanted knowledge in men, for
which reason the serpent was called wiser than all others. Moreover, by
the position of our intestines, through which the food is conveyed, and
by the fact that they possess such a figure, our internal
configuration <span id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980.md) in the form of
a serpent reveals our hidden generatrix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2967"></span>[354:2968](0010727.htm#fr_2967.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p3"></span> The punctuation is here difficult and
doubtful.

<span id="fn_2968"></span>[355:2969](0010727.htm#fr_2968.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p7"></span> The probable meaning of this and the
following names is thus given by Harvey: Ialdabaoth, *Lord God of the
Fathers*; Iao, *Jehovah*; Oreus, *Light*; Astanphæus, *Crown*; Sabaoth,
of course, means *Hosts*; Adoneus, *Lord*; and Eloeus, *God*. All the
names are derived from the cabbalistic theology of the Jews.

<span id="fn_2969"></span>[355:2970](0010727.htm#fr_2969.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p8"></span> Hence their name of Ophites, from <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p8.1"></span>ὄφις</span>, *a
serpent*.

<span id="fn_2970"></span>[355:2971](0010727.htm#fr_2970.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p9"></span> The Latin has *evertisse*, implying
that thus Nous was more degraded.

<span id="fn_2971"></span>[355:2972](0010727.htm#fr_2971.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p11"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2972"></span>[356:2973](0010727.htm#fr_2972.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p13"></span> That is, from Ialdabaoth, etc.
\[*Philastr.* (*ut supra*), Oehler, i. p. 38.\]

<span id="fn_2973"></span>[356:2974](0010727.htm#fr_2973.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p15"></span> There is constant reference in this
section to rabbinical conceits and follies.

<span id="fn_2974"></span>[356:2975](0010727.htm#fr_2974.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p17"></span> A name probably derived from the
Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p17.1"></span>נערה</span>, *girl*, but of the person
referred to we know nothing.

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[356:2976](0010727.htm#fr_2975.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p18"></span> We here follow the emendation of
Grabe: the defection of Prunicus is intended.

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[357:2977](0010727.htm#fr_2976.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p20"></span> The Latin here is “ex quibus,” and the
meaning is exceedingly obscure. Harvey thinks it is the representative
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p20.1"></span>ἐξ ὦν</span>
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p20.2"></span>χρόνων</span>)
in the Greek, but we prefer to refer it to “Judæos,” as above. The next
sentence seems unintelligible: but, according to Harvey, “each deified
day of the week had his ministering prophets.”

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[357:2978](0010727.htm#fr_2977.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p22"></span> The common text inserts “et
incorruptibili Æone,” but this seems better rejected as a glossarial
interpolation.

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[357:2979](0010727.htm#fr_2978.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p25"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050.md)<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p25.1"></span>.
The Latin text reads “apprehendunt,” which can scarcely be the
translation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p25.2"></span>κληρονομῆσαι</span> in the Greek text of
the New Testament.

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[357:2980](0010727.htm#fr_2979.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p27"></span> That is, Christ and Jesus.

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[358:2981](0010727.htm#fr_2980.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxxi-p29"></span> The text of this sentence is
hopelessly corrupt, but the meaning is as given above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI.—Doctrines of the...](0010728.md)
