[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010841)  [Next](0010843.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.v"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—Those persons are deceived who feign another God the Father besides the Creator of the world; for he must have been feeble and useless, or else malignant and full of envy, if he be either unable or unwilling to extend external life to our bodies.

<span id="ix.vii.v-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vii.v-p1.1"></span>Those
persons who feign the existence of another Father beyond the Creator,
and who term him the good God, do deceive themselves; for they introduce
him as a feeble, worthless, and negligent being, not to say malign and
full of envy, inasmuch as they affirm that our bodies are not quickened
by him. For when they say of things which it is manifest to all do
remain immortal, such as the spirit and the soul, and such other things,
that they are quickened by the Father, but that another thing \[viz. the
body\] which is quickened in no different manner than by God granting
\[life\] to it, is abandoned by life,—\[they must either confess\] that
this proves their Father to be weak and powerless, or else envious and
malignant. For since the Creator does even here quicken our mortal
bodies, and promises them resurrection by the prophets, as I have
pointed out; who \[in that case\] is shown to be more powerful,
stronger, or truly good? Whether is it the Creator who vivifies the
whole man, or is it their Father, falsely so called? He feigns to be the
quickener of those things which are immortal by nature, to which things
life is always present by their very nature; but he does not
benevolently quicken those things which required his assistance, that
they might live, but leaves them carelessly to fall under the power of
death. Whether is it the case, then, that their Father does not bestow
life upon them when he has the power of so doing, or is it that he does
not possess the power? If, on the one hand, it is because he cannot, he
is, upon that supposition, not a powerful being, nor is he more perfect
than the Creator; for the Creator grants, as we must perceive, what *He*
is unable to afford. But if, on the other hand, \[it be that he does not
grant this\] when he has the power of so doing, then he is proved to be
not a good, but an envious and malignant Father.

<span id="ix.vii.v-p2"></span>2. <span id="ix.vii.v-p2.1"></span>If,
again, they refer to any cause on account of which their Father does not
impart life to bodies, then that cause must necessarily appear superior
to the Father, since it restrains Him from the exercise of His
benevolence; and His benevolence will thus be proved weak, on account of
that cause which they bring forward. Now every one must perceive that
bodies are capable of receiving life. For they live to the extent that
God pleases that they should live; and that being so, the \[heretics\]
cannot maintain that \[these bodies\] are utterly incapable of receiving
life. If, therefore, on account of necessity and any other cause, those
\[bodies\] which are capable of participating in life are not vivified,
their Father shall be the slave of necessity and that cause, and not
therefore a free agent, having His will under His own control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—The prolonged life of the...](0010843.md)
