[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010705)  [Next](0010707) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.x"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Refutation of the impious interpretations of these heretics.

<span id="ix.ii.x-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.ii.x-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.x-p1.2"></span>You see, my friend, the method which these men
employ to deceive themselves, while they abuse the Scriptures by
endeavouring to support their own system out of them. For this reason, I
have brought forward their modes of expressing themselves, that thus
thou mightest understand the deceitfulness of their procedure, and the
wickedness of their error. For, in the first place, if it had been
John’s intention to set forth that Ogdoad above, he would surely have
preserved the order of its production, and would doubtless have placed
the primary Tetrad first as being, according to them, most venerable and
would then have annexed the second, that, by the sequence of the names,
the order of the Ogdoad might be exhibited, and not after so long an
interval, as if forgetful for the moment and then again calling the
matter to mind, he, last of all, made mention of the primary Tetrad. In
the next place, if he had meant to indicate their conjunctions, he
certainly would not have omitted the name of Ecclesia; while, with
respect to the other conjunctions, he either would have been satisfied
with the mention of the male \[Æons\] (since the others \[like
Ecclesia\] might be understood), so as to preserve a uniformity
throughout; or if he enumerated the conjunctions of the rest, he would
also have announced the spouse of Anthropos, and would not have left us
to find out her name by divination.

<span id="ix.ii.x-p2"></span>2. The fallacy, then, of this exposition is
manifest. For when John, proclaiming one God, the Almighty, and one
Jesus Christ, the Only-begotten, by whom all things were made, declares
that this was the Son of God, this the Only-begotten, this the Former of
all things, this the true Light who enlighteneth every man, this the
Creator of the world, this He that came to His own, this He that became
flesh and dwelt among us,—these men, by a plausible kind of exposition,
perverting these statements, maintain that there was another Monogenes,
according to production, whom they also style Arche. They also maintain
that there was another Saviour, and another Logos, the son of Monogenes,
and another Christ produced for the re-establishment of the Pleroma.
Thus it is that, wresting from the truth every one of the expressions
which have been cited, and taking a bad advantage of the names, they
have transferred them to their own system; so that, according to them,
in all these terms John makes no mention of the Lord Jesus Christ. For
if he has named the Father, and Charis, and Monogenes, and Aletheia, and
Logos, and Zoe, and Anthropos, and Ecclesia, according to their
hypothesis, he has, by thus speaking, referred to the primary Ogdoad, in
which there was as yet no Jesus, and no Christ, the teacher of John. But
that the apostle did not speak concerning their conjunctions, but
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, whom he also acknowledges as the Word
of God, he himself has made evident. For, summing up his statements
respecting the Word previously mentioned by him, he further declares,
“And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” But, according to
their hypothesis, the Word did not become flesh at all, inasmuch as He
never went outside of the Pleroma, but that Saviour \[became flesh\] who
was formed by a special dispensation \[out of all the Æons\], and was of
later date than the Word.

<span id="ix.ii.x-p3"></span>3. Learn then, ye foolish men, that Jesus
who suffered for us, and who dwelt among us, is Himself the Word of God.
For if any other of the Æons had become flesh for our salvation, it
would have been probable that the apostle spoke of another. But if the
Word of the Father who descended is the same also that ascended, He,
namely, the Only-begotten Son of the only God, who, according to the
good pleasure of the Father, became flesh for the sake of men, the
apostle certainly does not speak regarding any other, or concerning any
Ogdoad, but respecting our Lord Jesus Christ. For, according to them,
the Word did not originally become flesh. For they maintain that the
Saviour assumed an animal body, formed in accordance with a special
dispensation by an unspeakable providence, so as to become visible and
palpable. But *flesh* is that which was of old formed for Adam by God
out of the dust, and it is this that John has declared the Word of God
became. Thus is their primary and first-begotten Ogdoad brought to
nought. For, since Logos, and Monogenes, and Zoe, and Phōs, and Soter,
and Christus, and the Son of God, and He who became incarnate for us,
have been proved to be one and the same, the Ogdoad which they have
built up at once falls to pieces. And when this is destroyed, <span
id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span id="ix.ii.x-Page_330"></span> their
whole system sinks into ruin,—a system which they falsely dream into
existence, and thus inflict injury on the Scriptures, while they build
up their own hypothesis.

<span id="ix.ii.x-p4"></span>4. Then, again, collecting a set of
expressions and names scattered here and there \[in Scripture\], they
twist them, as we have already said, from a natural to a non-natural
sense. <span id="ix.ii.x-p4.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.x-p4.2"></span>In
so doing, they act like those who bring forward any kind of hypothesis
they fancy, and then endeavour to support <span
id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780) them out of the poems of Homer, so
that the ignorant imagine that Homer actually composed the verses
bearing upon that hypothesis, which has, in fact, been but newly
constructed; and many others are led so far by the regularly-formed
sequence of the verses, as to doubt whether Homer may not have composed
them. Of this kind <span id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781) is the
following passage, where one, describing Hercules as having been sent by
Eurystheus to the dog in the infernal regions, does so by means of these
Homeric verses,—for there can be no objection to our citing these by way
of illustration, since the same sort of attempt appears in both:—

<span id="ix.ii.x-p7"></span>“Thus saying, there sent forth from his
house deeply groaning.”—*Od.*, x. 76. “The hero Hercules conversant with
mighty deeds.”—*Od.*, xxi. 26. “Eurystheus, the son of Sthenelus,
descended from Perseus.”—*Il.*, xix. 123. “That he might bring from
Erebus the dog of gloomy Pluto.”—*Il.*, viii. 368. “And he advanced like
a mountain-bred lion confident of strength.”—*Od.*, vi. 130. “Rapidly
through the city, while all his friends followed.” —*Il.*, xxiv. 327.
“Both maidens, and youths, and much-enduring old men.”—*Od.*, xi. 38.
“Mourning for him bitterly as one going forward to death.” —*Il.*, xxiv.
328. “But Mercury and the blue-eyed Minerva conducted him.”—*Od.*, xi.
626. “For she knew the mind of her brother, how it laboured with
grief.”—*Il.*, ii. 409.

<span id="ix.ii.x-p8"></span>Now, what simple-minded man, I ask, would
not be led away by such verses as these to think that Homer actually
framed them so with reference to the subject indicated? But he who is
acquainted with the Homeric writings will recognise the verses indeed,
but not the subject to which they are applied, as knowing that some of
them were spoken of Ulysses, others of Hercules himself, others still of
Priam, and others again of Menelaus and Agamemnon. But if he takes them
and restores each of them to its proper position, he at once destroys
the narrative in question. In like manner he also who retains
unchangeable <span id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782) in his heart the
rule of the truth which he received by means of baptism, will doubtless
recognise the names, the expressions, and the parables taken from the
Scriptures, but will by no means acknowledge the blasphemous use which
these men make of them. For, though he will acknowledge the gems, he
will certainly not receive the fox instead of the likeness of the king.
But when he has restored every one of the expressions quoted to its
proper position, and has fitted it to the body of the truth, he will lay
bare, and prove to be without any foundation, the figment of these
heretics.

<span id="ix.ii.x-p10"></span>5. But since what may prove a
finishing-stroke <span id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783) to this
exhibition is wanting, so that any one, on following out their farce to
the end, may then at once append an argument which shall overthrow it,
we have judged it well to point out, first of all, in what respects the
very fathers of this fable differ among themselves, as if they were
inspired by different spirits of error. For this very fact forms an *a
priori* proof that the truth proclaimed by the Church is
immoveable, <span id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784) and that the
theories of these men are but a tissue of falsehoods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[330:2781](0010706.htm#fr_2780) <span
id="ix.ii.x-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.x-p5"></span> It is difficult to give an exact rendering
of <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.x-p5.1"></span>μελετᾶν</span> in
this passage; the old Lat. version translates it by *meditari*, which
Massuet proposes to render “skilfully to fit.”

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[330:2782](0010706.htm#fr_2781) <span
id="ix.ii.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.x-p6"></span> Tertullian refers (*Præscrip. Hær.*) to
those Homeric centos of which a specimen follows. We have given each
line as it stands in the original: the text followed by Irenæus differs
slightly from the received text.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[330:2783](0010706.htm#fr_2782) <span
id="ix.ii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.x-p9"></span> Literally, “immoveable in himself,” the
word <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.x-p9.1"></span>ἀκλινῆ</span>
being used with an apparent reference to the original meaning of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.x-p9.2"></span>κανόνα</span>, *a builder’s
rule*.

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[330:2784](0010706.htm#fr_2783) <span
id="ix.ii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.x-p11"></span> The meaning of the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.x-p11.1"></span>ἀπολύτρωσις</span> here is
not easily determined; but it is probably a scenic term equivalent to
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.x-p11.2"></span>ἀπόλυσις</span>, and
may be rendered as above.

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[330:2785](0010706.htm#fr_2784) <span
id="ix.ii.x-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.x-p12"></span> \[The Creed, in the sublime simplicity of
its fundamental articles, is established; that is, by the impossibility
of framing anything to take their place.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.—Unity of the faith of the...](0010707)
