[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010929)  [Next](0010931) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.viii.lv"></span>

### <span id="ix.viii.lv-p0.1"></span>LV.

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p1"></span>“Then <span
id="fr_4913"></span>[4914](#fn_4913) drew near unto Him the mother of
Zebedee’s children, with her sons, worshipping, and seeking a certain
thing from Him.” <span id="fr_4914"></span>[4915](#fn_4914) These people
are certainly not void of understanding, nor are the words set forth in
that passage of no signification: being stated beforehand like a
preface, they have some agreement with those points formerly expounded.

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p4"></span>“Then drew near.” Sometimes virtue
excites our admiration, not merely on account of the display which is
given of it, but also of the occasion when it was manifested. I may
refer, for example, to the premature fruit of the grape, or of the fig,
or to any fruit whatsoever, from which, during its process \[of
growth\], no man expects maturity or full development; yet, although any
one may perceive that it is still somewhat imperfect, he does not for
that reason despise as useless the immature grape when plucked, but he
gathers it with pleasure as appearing early in the season; nor does he
consider whether the grape is possessed of perfect sweetness; nay, he at
once experiences satisfaction from the thought that this one has
appeared before the rest. Just in the same way does God also, when He
perceives the faithful possessing wisdom though still imperfect, and but
a small degree of faith, overlook their defect in this respect, and
therefore does not reject them; nay, but on the contrary, He kindly
welcomes and accepts them as premature fruits, and honours the mind,
whatsoever it may be, which is stamped with virtue, although not yet
perfect. He makes allowance for it, as being among the harbingers of the
vintage, <span id="fr_4915"></span>[4916](#fn_4915) and esteems it
highly, inasmuch as, being of a readier disposition than the rest, it
has forestalled, as it were, the blessing to itself.

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p6"></span> <span id="page_578">p. 578</span> <span
id="ix.viii.lv-Page_578"></span> Abraham therefore, Isaac, and Jacob,
our fathers, are to be esteemed before all, since they did indeed afford
us such early examples of virtue. How many martyrs can be compared to
Daniel? How many martyrs, I ask, can rival the three youths in Babylon,
although the memory of the former has not been brought before us so
conspicuously as that of the latter? These were truly first-fruits, and
indications of the \[succeeding\] fructification. Hence God has directed
their life to be recorded, as a model for those who should come after.

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p7"></span>And that their virtue was thus accepted
by God, as the first-fruits of the produce, hear what He has Himself
declared: “As a grape,” He says, “I have found Israel in the wilderness,
and as first-ripe figs your fathers.” <span
id="fr_4916"></span>[4917](#fn_4916) Call not therefore the faith of
Abraham merely blessed because he believed. Do you wish to look upon
Abraham with admiration? Then behold how that one man alone professed
piety when in the world six hundred had been contaminated with error.
Dost thou wish Daniel to carry thee away to amazement? Behold that
\[city\] Babylon, haughty in the flower and pride of impiousness, and
its inhabitants completely given over to sin of every description. But
he, emerging from the depth, spat out the brine of sins, and rejoiced to
plunge into the sweet waters of piety. And now, in like manner, with
regard to that mother of Zebedee’s children, do not admire merely what
she said, but also the time at which she uttered these words. For when
was it that she drew near to the Redeemer? Not after the resurrection,
nor after the preaching of His name, nor after the establishment of His
kingdom; but it was when the Lord said, “Behold, we go up to Jerusalem,
and the Son of man shall be delivered to the chief priests and the
scribes; and they shall kill Him, and on the third day He shall rise
again.” <span id="fr_4917"></span>[4918](#fn_4917)

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p10"></span>These things the Saviour told in
reference to His sufferings and cross; to these persons He predicted His
passion. Nor did He conceal the fact that it should be of a most
ignominious kind, at the hands of the chief priests. This woman,
however, had attached another meaning to the dispensation of His
sufferings. The Saviour was foretelling death; and she asked for the
glory of immortality. The Lord was asserting that He must stand
arraigned before impious judges; but she, taking no note of that
judgment, requested as of the judge: “Grant,” she said, “that these my
two sons may sit, one on the right hand, and the other on the left, in
Thy glory.” In the one case the passion is referred to, in the other the
kingdom is understood. The Saviour was speaking of the cross, while she
had in view the glory which admits no suffering. This woman, therefore,
as I have already said, is worthy of our admiration, not merely for what
she sought, but also for the occasion of her making the request.

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p11"></span>She did indeed suffer, not merely as a
pious person, but also as a woman. For, having been instructed by His
words, she considered and believed that it would come to pass, that the
kingdom of Christ should flourish in glory, and walk in its vastness
throughout the world, and be increased by the preaching of piety. She
understood, as was \[in fact\] the case, that He who appeared in a lowly
guise had delivered and received every promise. I will inquire upon
another occasion, when I come to treat upon this humility, whether the
Lord rejected her petition concerning His kingdom. But she thought that
the same confidence would not be possessed by her, when, at the
appearance of the angels, He should be ministered to by the angels, and
receive service from the entire heavenly host. Taking the Saviour,
therefore, apart in a retired place, she earnestly desired of Him those
things which transcend every human nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4913"></span>[577:4914](0010930.htm#fr_4913) <span
id="ix.viii.lv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p2"></span> From an Armenian <span
class="upper"><span id="ix.viii.lv-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> in the
Library of the Mechitarist Convent at Vienna, edited by M. Pitra, who
considers this fragment as of very doubtful authority. It commences with
this heading: “From the second series of Homilies of Saint Irenæus,
follower of the Apostles; a Homily upon the Sons of Zebedee.”

<span id="fn_4914"></span>[577:4915](0010930.htm#fr_4914) <span
id="ix.viii.lv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p3"></span> [Matt. xx.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)<span id="ix.viii.lv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4915"></span>[577:4916](0010930.htm#fr_4915) <span
id="ix.viii.lv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p5"></span> That is, the wine which flows from the
grapes before they are trodden out.

<span id="fn_4916"></span>[578:4917](0010930.htm#fr_4916) <span
id="ix.viii.lv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p8"></span> [Hos. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)<span id="ix.viii.lv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4917"></span>[578:4918](0010930.htm#fr_4917) <span
id="ix.viii.lv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.viii.lv-p9"></span> [Matt.
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019)<span id="ix.viii.lv-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](0010931)
