[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010811)  [Next](0010813) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xviii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—Proof that God did not appoint the Levitical dispensation for His own sake, or as requiring such service; for He does, in fact, need nothing from men.

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.vi.xviii-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p1.3"></span>Moreover, the prophets indicate in the
fullest manner that God stood in no need of their slavish obedience, but
that it was upon their own account that He enjoined certain observances
in the law. And again, that God needed not their oblation, but \[merely
demanded it\], on account of man himself who offers it, the Lord taught
distinctly, as I have pointed out. For when He perceived them neglecting
righteousness, and abstaining from the love of God, and imagining that
God was to be propitiated by sacrifices and the other typical
observances, Samuel did even thus speak to them: “God does not desire
whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices, but He will have His voice to be
hearkened to. Behold, a ready obedience is better than sacrifice, and to
hearken than the fat of rams.” <span
id="fr_4006"></span>[4007](#fn_4006) David also says: “Sacrifice and
oblation Thou didst not desire, but mine ears hast Thou perfected; <span
id="fr_4007"></span>[4008](#fn_4007) burnt-offerings also for sin Thou
hast not required.” <span id="fr_4008"></span>[4009](#fn_4008) He thus
teaches them that God desires obedience, which renders them secure,
rather than sacrifices and holocausts, which avail them nothing towards
righteousness; and \[by this declaration\] he prophesies the new
covenant at the same time. Still clearer, too, does he speak of these
things in the fiftieth Psalm: “For if Thou hadst desired sacrifice, then
would I have given it: Thou wilt not delight in burnt-offerings. The
sacrifice of God is a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart the
Lord will not despise.” <span id="fr_4009"></span>[4010](#fn_4009)
Because, therefore, God stands in need of nothing, He declares in the
preceding Psalm: “I will take no calves out of thine house, nor he-goats
out of thy fold. For Mine are all the beasts of the earth, the herds and
the oxen on the mountains: I know all the fowls of heaven, and the
various tribes <span id="fr_4010"></span>[4011](#fn_4010) of the field
are Mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is
Mine, and the fulness thereof. Shall I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink
the blood of goats?” <span id="fr_4011"></span>[4012](#fn_4011) Then,
lest it might be supposed that He refused these things in His anger, He
continues, giving him (man) counsel: “Offer unto God the sacrifice of
praise, and pay thy vows to the Most High; and call upon Me in the day
of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify
Me;” <span id="fr_4012"></span>[4013](#fn_4012) rejecting, indeed, those
things by which sinners imagined they could propitiate God, and showing
that He does Himself stand in need of nothing; but He exhorts and
advises them to those <span id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-Page_483"></span> things by which man is justified and
draws nigh to God. This same declaration does Esaias make: “To what
purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto Me? saith the Lord. I
am full.” <span id="fr_4013"></span>[4014](#fn_4013) And when He had
repudiated holocausts, and sacrifices, and oblations, as likewise the
new moons, and the sabbaths, and the festivals, and all the rest of the
services accompanying these, He continues, exhorting them to what
pertained to salvation: “Wash you, make you clean, take away wickedness
from your hearts from before mine eyes: cease from your evil ways, learn
to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow; and come, let us reason together, saith the <span
class="upper"><span id="ix.vi.xviii-p9.2"></span>Lord</span>.”

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p10"></span>2. For it was not because He was
angry, like a man, as many venture to say, that He rejected their
sacrifices; but out of compassion to their blindness, and with the view
of suggesting to them the true sacrifice, by offering which they shall
appease God, that they may receive life from Him. As He elsewhere
declares: “The sacrifice to God is an afflicted heart: a sweet savour to
God is a heart glorifying Him who formed it.” <span
id="fr_4014"></span>[4015](#fn_4014) For if, when angry, He had
repudiated these sacrifices of theirs, as if they were persons unworthy
to obtain His compassion, He would not certainly have urged these same
things upon them as those by which they might be saved. But inasmuch as
God is merciful, He did not cut them off from good counsel. For after He
had said by Jeremiah, “To what purpose bring ye Me incense from Saba,
and cinnamon from a far country? Your whole burnt-offerings and
sacrifices are not acceptable to Me;” <span
id="fr_4015"></span>[4016](#fn_4015) He proceeds: “Hear the word of the
Lord, all Judah. These things saith the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p12.2"></span>Lord</span>, the God of Israel, Make
straight your ways and your doings, and I will establish you in this
place. Put not your trust in lying words, for they will not at all
profit you, saying, The temple of the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p12.3"></span>Lord</span>, The temple of the <span
class="upper"><span id="ix.vi.xviii-p12.4"></span>Lord</span>, it is
\[here\].” <span id="fr_4016"></span>[4017](#fn_4016)

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p14"></span>3. And again, when He points out that
it was not for this that He led them out of Egypt, that they might offer
sacrifice to Him, but that, forgetting the idolatry of the Egyptians,
they should be able to hear the voice of the Lord, which was to them
salvation and glory, He declares by this same Jeremiah: “Thus saith the
<span class="upper"><span id="ix.vi.xviii-p14.1"></span>Lord</span>;
Collect together your burnt-offerings with your sacrifices and eat
flesh. For I spake not unto your fathers nor commanded them in the day
that I brought them out of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or
sacrifices: but this word I commanded them, saying, Hear My voice, and I
will be your God, and ye shall be My people; and walk in all My ways
whatsoever I have commanded you, that it may be well with you. But they
obeyed not, nor hearkened; but walked in the imaginations of their own
evil heart, and went backwards, and not forwards.” <span
id="fr_4017"></span>[4018](#fn_4017) And again, when He declares by the
same man, “But let him that glorieth, glory in this, to understand and
know that I am the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p15.2"></span>Lord</span>, who doth exercise
loving-kindness, and righteousness, and judgment in the earth;” <span
id="fr_4018"></span>[4019](#fn_4018) He adds, “For in these things I
delight, says the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p16.2"></span>Lord</span>,” but not in sacrifices, nor
in holocausts, nor in oblations. For the people did not receive these
precepts as of primary importance (*principaliter*), but as secondary,
and for the reason already alleged, as Isaiah again says: “Thou hast not
\[brought to\] Me the sheep of thy holocaust, nor in thy sacrifices hast
thou glorified Me: thou hast not served Me in sacrifices, nor in \[the
matter of\] frankincense hast thou done anything laboriously; neither
hast thou bought for Me incense with money, nor have I desired the fat
of thy sacrifices; but thou hast stood before Me in thy sins and in
thine iniquities.” <span id="fr_4019"></span>[4020](#fn_4019) He says,
therefore, “Upon this man will I look, even upon him that is humble, and
meek, and who trembles at My words.” <span
id="fr_4020"></span>[4021](#fn_4020) “For the fat and the fat flesh
shall not take away from thee thine unrighteousness.” <span
id="fr_4021"></span>[4022](#fn_4021) “This is the fast which I have
chosen, saith the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p19.2"></span>Lord</span>. Loose every band of
wickedness, dissolve the connections of violent agreements, give rest to
those that are shaken, and cancel every unjust document. Deal thy bread
to the hungry willingly, and lead into thy house the roofless stranger.
If thou hast seen the naked, cover him, and thou shalt not despise those
of thine own flesh and blood (*domesticos seminis tui*). Then shall thy
morning light break forth, and thy health shall spring forth more
speedily; and righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the
<span class="upper"><span id="ix.vi.xviii-p19.3"></span>Lord</span>
shall surround thee: and whilst thou art yet speaking, I will say,
Behold, here I am.” <span id="fr_4022"></span>[4023](#fn_4022) And
Zechariah also, among the twelve prophets, pointing out to the people
the will of God, says: “These things does the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p20.2"></span>Lord</span> Omnipotent declare: Execute
true judgment, and show mercy and compassion each one to his brother.
And oppress not the widow, and the orphan, and the proselyte, and the
poor; and let none imagine evil against your brother in his
heart.” <span id="fr_4023"></span>[4024](#fn_4023) And again, he says:
“These are the words which ye <span id="page_484">p. 484</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-Page_484"></span> shall utter. Speak ye the truth every
man to his neighbour, and execute peaceful judgment in your gates, and
let none of you imagine evil in his heart against his brother, and ye
shall not love false swearing: for all these things I hate, saith the
<span class="upper"><span id="ix.vi.xviii-p21.2"></span>Lord</span>
Almighty.” <span id="fr_4024"></span>[4025](#fn_4024) Moreover, David
also says in like manner: “What man is there who desireth life, and
would fain see good days? Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that
they speak no guile. Shun evil, and do good: seek peace, and pursue
it.” <span id="fr_4025"></span>[4026](#fn_4025)

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p24"></span>4. <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p24.1"></span>From all these it is evident that God did
not seek sacrifices and holocausts from them, but faith, and obedience,
and righteousness, because of their salvation. As God, when teaching
them His will in Hosea the prophet, said, “I desire mercy rather than
sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings.” <span
id="fr_4026"></span>[4027](#fn_4026) Besides, our Lord also exhorted
them to the same effect, when He said, “But if ye had known what
\[this\] meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not
have condemned the guiltless.” <span
id="fr_4027"></span>[4028](#fn_4027) Thus does He bear witness to the
prophets, that they preached the truth; but accuses these men (His
hearers) of being foolish through their own fault.

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p27"></span>5. Again, giving directions to His
disciples to offer to God the first-fruits <span
id="fr_4028"></span>[4029](#fn_4028) of His own, created things—not as
if He stood in need of them, but that they might be themselves neither
unfruitful nor ungrateful—He took that created thing, bread, and gave
thanks, and said, “This is My body.” <span
id="fr_4029"></span>[4030](#fn_4029) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p29.2"></span>And the cup likewise, which is part of
that creation to which we belong, He confessed to be His blood, and
taught the new oblation of the new covenant; which the Church receiving
from the apostles, offers to God throughout all the world, to Him who
gives us as the means of subsistence the first-fruits of His own gifts
in the New Testament, concerning which Malachi, among the twelve
prophets, thus spoke beforehand: “I have no pleasure in you, saith the
<span class="upper"><span id="ix.vi.xviii-p29.3"></span>Lord</span>
Omnipotent, and I will not accept sacrifice at your hands. For from the
rising of the sun, unto the going down \[of the same\], My name is
glorified among the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered to
My name, and a pure sacrifice; for great is My name among the Gentiles,
saith the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p29.4"></span>Lord</span> Omnipotent;” <span
id="fr_4030"></span>[4031](#fn_4030) —indicating in the plainest manner,
by these words, that the former people \[the Jews\] shall indeed cease
to make offerings to God, but that in every place sacrifice shall be
offered to Him, and that a pure one; and His name is glorified among the
Gentiles. <span id="fr_4031"></span>[4032](#fn_4031)

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p32"></span>6. But what other name is there which
is glorified among the Gentiles than that of our Lord, by whom the
Father is glorified, and man also? And because it is \[the name\] of His
own Son, who was made man by Him, He calls it His own. Just as a king,
if he himself paints a likeness of his son, is right in calling this
likeness his own, for both these reasons, because it is \[the likeness\]
of his son, and because it is his own production; so also does the
Father confess the name of Jesus Christ, which is throughout all the
world glorified in the Church, to be His own, both because it is that of
His Son, and because He who thus describes it gave Him for the salvation
of men. Since, therefore, the name of the Son belongs to the Father, and
since in the omnipotent God the Church makes offerings through Jesus
Christ, He says well on both these grounds, “And in every place incense
is offered to My name, and a pure sacrifice.” Now John, in the
Apocalypse, declares that the “incense” is “the prayers of the
saints.” <span id="fr_4032"></span>[4033](#fn_4032)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4006"></span>[482:4007](0010812.htm#fr_4006) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p2"></span> [1 Sam. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4007"></span>[482:4008](0010812.htm#fr_4007) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p3"></span> Latin, “aures autem perfecisti mihi;”
a reading agreeable to neither the Hebrew nor Septuagint version, as
quoted by St. Paul in [Heb. x. 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#009)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>. Harvey, however, is of opinion that the
text of the old Latin translation was originally “perforasti;”
indicating thus an entire concurrence with the Hebrew, as now read in
this passage. \[Both readings illustrated by their apparent reference to
[Ex. xxi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p3.2"></span>, compared with [Heb. v.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p3.3"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_4008"></span>[482:4009](0010812.htm#fr_4008) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p4"></span> [Ps. xl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4009"></span>[482:4010](0010812.htm#fr_4009) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p5"></span> [Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4010"></span>[482:4011](0010812.htm#fr_4010) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p6"></span> Or, “the beauty,” *species*.

<span id="fn_4011"></span>[482:4012](0010812.htm#fr_4011) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p7"></span> [Ps. l.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4012"></span>[482:4013](0010812.htm#fr_4012) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p8"></span> [Ps.
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4013"></span>[483:4014](0010812.htm#fr_4013) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p9"></span> [Isa. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4014"></span>[483:4015](0010812.htm#fr_4014) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p11"></span> This passage is not now found in holy
Scripture. Harvey conjectures that it may have been taken from the
apocryphal Gospel according to the Egyptians. It is remarkable that we
find the same words quoted also by Clement of Alexandria. \[But he
(possibly with this place in view) merely quotes it as a *saying*, in
close connection with [Ps. li. 19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p11.1"></span>, which is here partially cited. See
Clement, *Pædagogue*, b. iii. cap. xii.\]

<span id="fn_4015"></span>[483:4016](0010812.htm#fr_4015) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p12"></span> [Jer. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4016"></span>[483:4017](0010812.htm#fr_4016) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p13"></span> [Jer.
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#003)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4017"></span>[483:4018](0010812.htm#fr_4017) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p15"></span> [Jer. vii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4018"></span>[483:4019](0010812.htm#fr_4018) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p16"></span> [Jer. ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4019"></span>[483:4020](0010812.htm#fr_4019) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p17"></span> [Isa.
43:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4020"></span>[483:4021](0010812.htm#fr_4020) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p18"></span> [Isa. xlvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4021"></span>[483:4022](0010812.htm#fr_4021) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p19"></span> [Jer. xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#015)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4022"></span>[483:4023](0010812.htm#fr_4022) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p20"></span> [Isa. lviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p20.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4023"></span>[483:4024](0010812.htm#fr_4023) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p21"></span> [Zech.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4024"></span>[484:4025](0010812.htm#fr_4024) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p22"></span> [Zech.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#017)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4025"></span>[484:4026](0010812.htm#fr_4025) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p23"></span> [Ps.
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#014)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4026"></span>[484:4027](0010812.htm#fr_4026) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p25"></span> [Hos. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4027"></span>[484:4028](0010812.htm#fr_4027) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p26"></span> [Matt. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4028"></span>[484:4029](0010812.htm#fr_4028) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p28"></span> Grabe has a long and important note
on this passage and what follows, which may be seen in Harvey, *in loc*.
See, on the other side, and in connection with the whole of the
following chapter, Massuet’s third dissertation on the doctrine of
Irenæus, art. vii., reprinted in Migne’s edition.

<span id="fn_4029"></span>[484:4030](0010812.htm#fr_4029) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p29"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p29.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4030"></span>[484:4031](0010812.htm#fr_4030) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p29.5"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p30"></span> [Mal.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4031"></span>[484:4032](0010812.htm#fr_4031) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p31"></span> \[One marvels that there should be
any critical difficulty here as to our author’s teaching. Creatures of
bread and wine are the body and the blood; materially one thing,
mystically another. See cap. xviii. 5 below.\]

<span id="fn_4032"></span>[484:4033](0010812.htm#fr_4032) <span
id="ix.vi.xviii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p33"></span> [Rev. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008)<span id="ix.vi.xviii-p33.1"></span>.
\[Material incense seems to be always disclaimed by the primitive
writers.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.—Concerning sacrifices...](0010813)
