[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010813)  [Next](0010815.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xx"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—Earthly things may be the type of heavenly, but the latter cannot be the types of others still superior and unknown; nor can we, without absolute madness, maintain that God is known to us only as the type of a still unknown and superior being.

<span id="ix.vi.xx-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vi.xx-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.vi.xx-p1.2"></span>Now the gifts, oblations, and all the
sacrifices, did the people receive in a figure, as was shown to Moses in
the mount, from one and the same God, whose name is now glorified in the
Church among all nations. But it is congruous that those earthly things,
indeed, which are spread all around us, should be types of the
celestial, being \[both\], however, created by the same God. For in no
other way could He assimilate an image of spiritual things \[to suit our
comprehension\]. But to allege that those things which are
super-celestial and spiritual, and, as far as we are concerned,
invisible and ineffable, are in their turn the types of celestial <span
id="page_487">p. 487</span> <span id="ix.vi.xx-Page_487"></span> things
and of another Pleroma, and \[to say\] that God is the image of another
Father, is to play the part both of wanderers from the truth, and of
absolutely foolish and stupid persons. For, as I have repeatedly shown,
such persons will find it necessary to be continually finding out types
of types, and images of images, and will never \[be able to\] fix their
minds on one and the true God. For their imaginations range beyond God,
they having in their hearts surpassed the Master Himself, being indeed
in idea elated and exalted above \[Him\], but in reality turning away
from the true God.

<span id="ix.vi.xx-p2"></span>2. To these persons one may with justice
say (as Scripture itself suggests), To what distance above God do ye
lift up your imaginations, O ye rashly elated men? Ye have heard “that
the heavens are meted out in the palm of \[His\] hand:” <span
id="fr_4058"></span>[4059](#fn_4058.md) tell me the measure, and recount
the endless multitude of cubits, explain to me the fulness, the breadth,
the length, the height, the beginning and end of the measurement,—things
which the heart of man understands not, neither does it comprehend them.
For the heavenly treasuries are indeed great: God cannot be measured in
the heart, and incomprehensible is He in the mind; He who holds the
earth in the hollow of His hand. Who perceives the measure of His right
hand? Who knoweth His finger? Or who doth understand His hand,—that hand
which measures immensity; that hand which, by its own measure, spreads
out the measure of the heavens, and which comprises in its hollow the
earth with the abysses; which contains in itself the breadth, and
length, and the deep below, and the height above of the whole creation;
which is seen, which is heard and understood, and which is invisible?
And for this reason God is “above all principality, and power, and
dominion, and every name that is named,” <span
id="fr_4059"></span>[4060](#fn_4059.md) of all things which have been
created and established. He it is who fills the heavens, and views the
abysses, who is also present with every one of us. For he says, “Am I a
God at hand, and not a God afar off? If any man is hid in secret places,
shall I not see him?” <span id="fr_4060"></span>[4061](#fn_4060.md) For His
hand lays hold of all things, and that it is which illumines the
heavens, and lightens also the things which are under the heavens, and
trieth the reins and the hearts, is also present in hidden things, and
in our secret \[thoughts\], and does openly nourish and preserve us.

<span id="ix.vi.xx-p6"></span>3. But if man comprehends not the fulness
and the greatness of His hand, how shall any one be able to understand
or know in his heart so great a God? Yet, as if they had now measured
and thoroughly investigated Him, and explored Him on every side, <span
id="fr_4061"></span>[4062](#fn_4061.md) they feign that beyond Him there
exists another Pleroma of Æons, and another Father; certainly not
looking up to celestial things, but truly descending into a profound
abyss (Bythus) of madness; maintaining that their Father extends only to
the border of those things which are beyond the Pleroma, but that, on
the other hand, the Demiurge does not reach so far as the Pleroma; and
thus they represent neither of them as being perfect and comprehending
all things. For the former will be defective in regard to the whole
world formed outside of the Pleroma, and the latter in respect of that
\[ideal\] world which was formed within the Pleroma; and \[therefore\]
neither of these can be the God of all. But that no one can fully
declare the goodness of God from the things made by Him, is a point
evident to all. And that His greatness is not defective, but contains
all things, and extends even to us, and is with us, every one will
confess who entertains worthy conceptions of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4058"></span>[487:4059](0010814.htm#fr_4058.md) <span
id="ix.vi.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xx-p3"></span> [Isa. xl.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.vi.xx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4059"></span>[487:4060](0010814.htm#fr_4059.md) <span
id="ix.vi.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xx-p4"></span> [Eph. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021.md)<span id="ix.vi.xx-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4060"></span>[487:4061](0010814.htm#fr_4060.md) <span
id="ix.vi.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xx-p5"></span> [Jer. xxiii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023.md)<span id="ix.vi.xx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4061"></span>[487:4062](0010814.htm#fr_4061.md) <span
id="ix.vi.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xx-p7"></span> The Latin is, “et universum eum
decurrerint.” Harvey imagines that this last word corresponds to <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vi.xx-p7.1"></span>κατατρέχωσι</span> but it
is difficult to fit such a meaning into the context.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.—That one God formed all...](0010815.md)
