[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010833)  [Next](0010835) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xl"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xl-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.—Man is endowed with the faculty of distinguishing good and evil; so that, without compulsion, he has the power, by his own will and choice, to perform God’s commandments, by doing which he avoids the evils prepared for the rebellious.

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vi.xl-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.vi.xl-p1.2"></span><span id="ix.vi.xl-p1.3"></span>Man has
received the knowledge of good and evil. It is good to obey God, and to
believe in Him, and to keep His commandment, and this is the life of
man; as not to obey God is evil, and this is his death. Since God,
therefore, gave \[to man\] such mental power (*magnanimitatem*) man knew
both the good of obedience and the evil of disobedience, that the eye of
the mind, receiving experience of both, may with judgment make choice of
the better things; and that he may never become indolent or neglectful
of God’s command; and learning by experience that it is an evil thing
which deprives him of life, that is, disobedience to God, may never
attempt it at all, but that, knowing that what preserves his life,
namely, obedience to God, is good, he may diligently keep it with all
earnestness. Wherefore he has also had a twofold experience, possessing
knowledge of both kinds, that with discipline he may make choice of the
better things. But how, if he had no knowledge of the contrary, could he
have had instruction in that which is good? For there is thus a surer
and an undoubted comprehension of matters submitted to us than the mere
surmise arising from an opinion regarding them. For just as the tongue
receives experience of sweet and bitter by means of tasting, and the eye
discriminates between black and white by means of vision, and the ear
recognises the distinctions of sounds by hearing; so also does the mind,
receiving through the experience of both the knowledge of what is good,
become more tenacious of its preservation, by acting in obedience to
God: in the first place, casting away, by means of repentance,
disobedience, as being something disagreeable and nauseous; and
afterwards coming to understand what it really is, that it is contrary
to goodness and sweetness, so that the mind may never even attempt to
taste disobedience to God. But if any one do shun the knowledge of both
these kinds of things, and the twofold perception of knowledge, he
unawares divests himself of the character of a human being.

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p2"></span>2. How, then, shall he be a God, who has
not as yet been made a man? Or how can he be perfect who was but lately
created? How, again, can he be immortal, who in his mortal nature <span
id="page_523">p. 523</span> <span id="ix.vi.xl-Page_523"></span> did not
obey his Maker? For it must be that thou, at the outset, shouldest hold
the rank of a man, and then afterwards partake of the glory of God. For
thou dost not make God, but God thee. If, then, thou art God’s
workmanship, await the hand of thy Maker which creates everything in due
time; in due time as far as thou art concerned, whose creation is being
carried out. <span id="fr_4420"></span>[4421](#fn_4420) Offer to Him thy
heart in a soft and tractable state, and preserve the form in which the
Creator has fashioned thee, having moisture in thyself, lest, by
becoming hardened, thou lose the impressions of His fingers. But by
preserving the framework thou shalt ascend to that which is perfect, for
the moist clay which is in thee is hidden \[there\] by the workmanship
of God. His hand fashioned thy substance; He will cover thee over
\[too\] within and without with pure gold and silver, and He will adorn
thee to such a degree, that even “the King Himself shall have pleasure
in thy beauty.” <span id="fr_4421"></span>[4422](#fn_4421) But if thou,
being obstinately hardened, dost reject the operation of His skill, and
show thyself ungrateful towards Him, because thou wert created a
\[mere\] man, by becoming thus ungrateful to God, thou hast at once lost
both His workmanship and life. For creation is an attribute of the
goodness of God but to be created is that of human nature. If then, thou
shalt deliver up to Him what is thine, that is, faith towards Him and
subjection, thou shalt receive His handiwork, and shall be a perfect
work of God.

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p5"></span>3. <span id="ix.vi.xl-p5.1"></span>If,
however, thou wilt not believe in Him, and wilt flee from His hands, the
cause of imperfection shall be in thee who didst not obey, but not in
Him who called \[thee\]. For He commissioned \[messengers\] to call
people to the marriage, but they who did not obey Him deprived
themselves of the royal supper. <span
id="fr_4422"></span>[4423](#fn_4422) The skill of God, therefore, is not
defective, for He has power of the stones to raise up children to
Abraham; <span id="fr_4423"></span>[4424](#fn_4423) but the man who does
not obtain it is the cause to himself of his own imperfection. Nor, \[in
like manner\], does the light fail because of those who have blinded
themselves; but while it remains the same as ever, those who are
\[thus\] blinded are involved in darkness through their own fault. The
light does never enslave any one by necessity; nor, again, does God
exercise compulsion upon any one unwilling to accept the exercise of His
skill. Those persons, therefore, who have apostatized from the light
given by the Father, and transgressed the law of liberty, have done so
through their own fault, since they have been created free agents, and
possessed of power over themselves.

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p8"></span>4. But God, foreknowing all things,
prepared fit habitations for both, kindly conferring that light which
they desire on those who seek after the light of incorruption, and
resort to it; but for the despisers and mockers who avoid and turn
themselves away from this light, and who do, as it were, blind
themselves, He has prepared darkness suitable to persons who oppose the
light, and He has inflicted an appropriate punishment upon those who try
to avoid being subject to Him. Submission to God is eternal rest, so
that they who shun the light have a place worthy of their flight; and
those who fly from eternal rest, have a habitation in accordance with
their fleeing. Now, since all good things are with God, they who by
their own determination fly from God, do defraud themselves of all good
things; and having been \[thus\] defrauded of all good things with
respect to God, they shall consequently fall under the just judgment of
God. For those persons who shun rest shall justly incur punishment, and
those who avoid the light shall justly dwell in darkness. For as in the
case of this temporal light, those who shun it do deliver themselves
over to darkness, so that they do themselves become the cause to
themselves that they are destitute of light, and do inhabit darkness;
and, as I have already observed, the light is not the cause of such an
\[unhappy\] condition of existence to them; so those who fly from the
eternal light of God, which contains in itself all good things, are
themselves the cause to themselves of their inhabiting eternal darkness,
destitute of all good things, having become to themselves the cause of
\[their consignment to\] an abode of that nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4420"></span>[523:4421](0010834.htm#fr_4420) <span
id="ix.vi.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p3"></span> Efficeris.

<span id="fn_4421"></span>[523:4422](0010834.htm#fr_4421) <span
id="ix.vi.xl-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p4"></span> [Ps. xlv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011)<span id="ix.vi.xl-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4422"></span>[523:4423](0010834.htm#fr_4422) <span
id="ix.vi.xl-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p6"></span> [Matt. xxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#003)<span id="ix.vi.xl-p6.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4423"></span>[523:4424](0010834.htm#fr_4423) <span
id="ix.vi.xl-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xl-p7"></span> [Matt. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span id="ix.vi.xl-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL.—One and the same God the...](0010835)
