[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010001)  [Next](0010003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="i.ii"></span> <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="i.ii-Page_vii"></span>

## <span id="i.ii-p0.1"></span>Introductory Notice

<span id="i.ii-p1"></span>\[<span class="upper"><span
id="i.ii-p1.1"></span>a.d.</span> 100–200.\] <span class="upper"><span
id="i.ii-p1.2"></span>The Apostolic Fathers</span> are here understood
as filling up the second century of our era. Irenæus, it is true, is
rather of the sub-apostolic period; but, as the disciple of Polycarp, he
ought not to be dissociated from that Father’s company. We thus find
ourselves conducted, by this goodly fellowship of witnesses, from the
times of the apostles to those of Tertullian, from the martyrs of the
second persecution to those of the sixth. Those were times of heroism,
not of words; an age, not of writers, but of soldiers; not of talkers,
but of sufferers. Curiosity is baffled, but faith and love are fed by
these scanty relics of primitive antiquity. Yet may we well be grateful
for what we have. These writings come down to us as the earliest
response of converted nations to the testimony of Jesus. They are
primary evidences of the Canon and the credibility of the New Testament.
Disappointment may be the first emotion of the student who comes down
from the mount where he has dwelt in the tabernacles of evangelists and
apostles: for these disciples are confessedly inferior to the masters;
they speak with the voices of infirm and fallible men, and not like the
New Testament writers, with the fiery tongues of the Holy Ghost. Yet the
thoughtful and loving spirit soon learns their exceeding value. For who
does not close the records of St. Luke with longing; to get at least a
glimpse of the further history of the progress of the Gospel? What of
the Church when its founders were fallen asleep? Was the Good Shepherd
“always” with His little flock, according to His promise? Was the
Blessed Comforter felt in His presence amid the fires of persecution?
Was the Spirit of Truth really able to guide the faithful into all
truth, and to keep them in the truth?

<span id="i.ii-p2"></span>And what had become of the disciples who were
the first-fruits of the apostolic ministry? St. Paul had said, “The same
commit thou to faithful men, who shall be *able to teach others also.*”
How was this injunction realized? St. Peter’s touching words come to
mind, “I will endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have
these things always in remembrance.” Was this endeavour successfully
carried out? To these natural and pious inquiries, the Apostolic
Fathers, though we have a few specimens only of their fidelity, give an
emphatic reply. If the cold-hearted and critical find no charm in the
simple, childlike faith which they exhibit, ennobled though it be by
heroic devotion to the Master, we need not marvel. Such would probably
object: “They teach me nothing; I do not relish their multiplied
citations from Scripture.” The answer is, “If you are familiar with
Scripture, you owe it largely to these primitive witnesses to its Canon
and its spirit. By their testimony we detect what is spurious, and we
identify what is real. Is it nothing to find that your Bible is their
Bible, your faith their faith, your Saviour their Saviour, your God
their God?” Let us reflect also, that, when copies of the entire
Scriptures were rare and costly, these citations were “words fitly
spoken,—apples of gold in pictures of silver.” We are taught by them
also that they obeyed the apostles precept, “Let the word of Christ
dwell in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing,” etc. Thus
they reflect the apostolic care that men should be raised up able to
teach others also.

<span id="i.ii-p3"></span>Their very mistakes enable us to attach a
higher value to the superiority of inspired writers. They were not wiser
than the naturalists of their day who taught them the history of the
Phœnix and other fables; but nothing of this sort is found in Scripture.
The Fathers are inferior in kind as well as in degree; yet their words
are lingering echoes of those whose words were spoken “as the Spirit
gave them utterance.” They are monuments of the power of the Gospel.
They were made out of such material as St. Paul describes when he says,
“Such were some of you.” But for Christ, they would have been
worshippers of personified Lust and Hate, and of every crime. They would
have lived for “bread and circus-shows.” Yet to the contemporaries of a
Juvenal they taught the Decalogue and the Sermon on the Mount. Among
such beasts in human form they reared the sacred home; they created the
Christian family; they gave new and holy meanings to the names of wife
and mother; they imparted ideas unknown before of the dignity of man as
man; they infused an atmosphere of benevolence and love; they bestowed
the elements of liberty chastened by law; they sanctified human society
by proclaiming the universal brotherhood of redeemed man. As we read the
Apostolic Fathers, we comprehend, in short, the meaning of St. Paul when
he said prophetically, what men were slow to believe, “The foolishness
of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men …
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things which are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which
are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring
to nought things that are.”

<span id="i.ii-p4"></span>A. C. C.

<span id="i.ii-p5"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="i.ii-p5.1"></span>December</span>, 1884.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CLEMENT OF ROME](0010003.md)
