[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010770)  [Next](0010772) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.v"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.—The truth is to be found nowhere else but in the Catholic Church, the sole depository of apostolical doctrine. Heresies are of recent formation, and cannot trace their origin up to the apostles.

<span id="ix.iv.v-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iv.v-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.iv.v-p1.2"></span>Since therefore we have such proofs, it is not
necessary to seek the truth among others which it is easy to obtain from
the Church; since the apostles, like a rich man \[depositing his money\]
in a bank, lodged in her hands most copiously all things pertaining to
the truth: so that every man, whosoever will, can draw from her the
<span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span id="ix.iv.v-Page_417"></span>
water of life. <span id="fr_3317"></span>[3318](#fn_3317) For she is the
entrance to life; all others are thieves and robbers. On this account
are we bound to avoid *them*, but to make choice of the thing pertaining
to the Church with the utmost diligence, and to lay hold of the
tradition of the truth. For how stands the case? Suppose there arise a
dispute relative to some important question <span
id="fr_3318"></span>[3319](#fn_3318) among us, should we not have
recourse to the most ancient Churches with which the apostles held
constant intercourse, and learn from them what is certain and clear in
regard to the present question? For how should it be if the apostles
themselves had not left us writings? Would it not be necessary, \[in
that case,\] to follow the course of the tradition which they handed
down to those to whom they did commit the Churches?

<span id="ix.iv.v-p4"></span>2. To which course many nations of those
barbarians who believe in Christ do assent, having salvation written in
their hearts by the Spirit, without paper or ink, and, carefully
preserving the ancient tradition, <span
id="fr_3319"></span>[3320](#fn_3319) believing in one God, the Creator
of heaven and earth, and all things therein, by means of Christ Jesus,
the Son of God; who, because of His surpassing love towards His
creation, condescended to be born of the virgin, He Himself uniting man
through Himself to God, and having suffered under Pontius Pilate, and
rising again, and having been received up in splendour, shall come in
glory, the Saviour of those who are saved, and the Judge of those who
are judged, and sending into eternal fire those who transform the truth,
and despise His Father and His advent. Those who, in the absence of
written documents, <span id="fr_3320"></span>[3321](#fn_3320) have
believed this faith, are barbarians, so far as regards our language; but
as regards doctrine, manner, and tenor of life, they are, because of
faith, very wise indeed; and they do please God, ordering their
conversation in all righteousness, chastity, and wisdom. If any one were
to preach to these men the inventions of the heretics, speaking to them
in their own language, they would at once stop their ears, and flee as
far off as possible, not enduring even to listen to the blasphemous
address. Thus, by means of that ancient tradition of the apostles, they
do not suffer their mind to conceive anything of the \[doctrines
suggested by the\] portentous language of these teachers, among whom
neither Church nor doctrine has ever been established.

<span id="ix.iv.v-p7"></span>3. <span id="ix.iv.v-p7.1"></span>For,
prior to Valentinus, those who follow Valentinus had no existence; nor
did those from Marcion exist before Marcion; nor, in short, had any of
those malignant-minded people, whom I have above enumerated, any being
previous to the initiators and inventors of their perversity. For
Valentinus came to Rome in the time of Hyginus, flourished under Pius,
and remained until Anicetus. Cerdon, too, Marcion’s predecessor, himself
arrived in the time of Hyginus, who was the ninth bishop. <span
id="fr_3321"></span>[3322](#fn_3321) Coming frequently into the Church,
and making public confession, he thus remained, one time teaching in
secret, and then again making public confession; but at last, having
been denounced for corrupt teaching, he was excommunicated <span
id="fr_3322"></span>[3323](#fn_3322) from the assembly of the brethren.
Marcion, then, succeeding him, flourished under Anicetus, who held the
tenth place of the episcopate. But the rest, who are called Gnostics,
take rise from Menander, Simon’s disciple, as I have shown; and each one
of them appeared to be both the father and the high priest of that
doctrine into which he has been initiated. But all these (the
Marcosians) broke out into their apostasy much later, even during the
intermediate period of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3317"></span>[417:3318](0010771.htm#fr_3317) <span
id="ix.iv.v-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.v-p2"></span> [Rev. xxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)<span id="ix.iv.v-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3318"></span>[417:3319](0010771.htm#fr_3318) <span
id="ix.iv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.v-p3"></span> Latin, “modica quæstione.”

<span id="fn_3319"></span>[417:3320](0010771.htm#fr_3319) <span
id="ix.iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.v-p5"></span> \[The uneducated barbarians must receive
the Gospel on testimony. Irenæus puts *apostolic* traditions, genuine
and uncorrupt, in this relation to the primary authority of the written
word. [2 Thess. ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#015)<span
id="ix.iv.v-p5.1"></span>, [2 Thess. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv.v-p5.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_3320"></span>[417:3321](0010771.htm#fr_3320) <span
id="ix.iv.v-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.v-p6"></span> Literally, “without letters;” equivalent
to, “without paper and ink,” a few lines previously.

<span id="fn_3321"></span>[417:3322](0010771.htm#fr_3321) <span
id="ix.iv.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.v-p8"></span> The old Latin translation says the *eighth
bishop*; but there is no discrepancy. Eusebius, who has preserved the
Greek of this passage, probably counted the apostles as the *first step*
in the episcopal succession. As Irenæus tells us in the preceding
chapter, Linus is to be counted as the first bishop.

<span id="fn_3322"></span>[417:3323](0010771.htm#fr_3322) <span
id="ix.iv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.v-p9"></span> It is thought that this does not mean
excommunication properly so called, but a species of
*self-excommunication*, i.e., anticipating the sentence of the Church,
by quitting it altogether. See Valesius’s note in his edition of
Eusebius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V.—Christ and His apostles,...](0010772)
