[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010698)  [Next](0010700) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.iii"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Propator was known to Monogenes alone. Ambition, disturbance, and danger into which Sophia fell; her shapeless offspring: she is restored by Horos. The production of Christ and of the Holy Spirit, in order to the completion of the Æons. Manner of the production of Jesus.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p1"></span>1. They proceed to tell us that the
Propator of their scheme was known only to <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.iii-p1.2"></span>Monogenes,
who sprang from him; in other words, only to Nous, while to all the
others he was invisible and incomprehensible. And, according to them,
Nous alone took pleasure in contemplating the Father, and exulting in
considering his immeasurable greatness; while he also meditated how he
might communicate to the rest of the Æons the greatness of the Father,
revealing to them how vast and mighty he was, and how he was without
beginning,—beyond comprehension, and altogether incapable of being seen.
But, in accordance with the will of the Father, <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p1.3"></span>Sige restrained him, because it was his
design to lead them all to an acquaintance with the aforesaid Propator,
and to create within them a desire of investigating his nature. In like
manner, the rest of the Æons also, in a kind of quiet way, had a wish to
behold the Author of their being, and to contemplate that First Cause
which had no beginning.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p2"></span>2. <span id="ix.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>But
there rushed forth in advance of the rest that Æon who was much the
latest of them, and was the youngest of the Duodecad which sprang from
Anthropos and Ecclesia, namely Sophia, and suffered passion apart from
the embrace of her consort Theletos. This passion, indeed, first arose
among those who were connected with Nous and <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>Aletheia, but passed as by contagion to this
degenerate Æon, who acted under a pretence of love, but was in reality
influenced by temerity, because she had not, like Nous, enjoyed
communion with the perfect Father. This passion, they say, consisted in
a desire to search into the nature of the Father; for she wished,
according to them, to comprehend his greatness. When she could not
attain her end, inasmuch as she aimed at an impossibility, and thus
became involved in an extreme agony of mind, while both on account of
the vast profundity as well as the unsearchable nature of the Father,
and on account of the love she bore him, she was ever stretching herself
forward, there was danger lest she should at last have been absorbed by
his sweetness, and resolved into his absolute essence, unless she had
met with that Power which supports all things, and preserves them
outside of the unspeakable greatness. This power they term Horos; by
whom, they say, she was restrained and supported; and that then, having
with difficulty been brought back to herself, she was convinced that the
Father is incomprehensible, and so laid aside her original design, along
with that passion which had arisen within her from the overwhelming
influence of her admiration.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p3"></span>3. But others of them fabulously describe
the passion and restoration of Sophia as follows: They say that she,
having engaged in an impossible and impracticable attempt, brought forth
an amorphous substance, such as her female nature enabled her to
produce. <span id="fr_2669"></span>[2670](#fn_2669) When she looked upon
it, her first feeling was one of grief, on account of the imperfection
of its generation, and then of fear lest this should end <span
id="fr_2670"></span>[2671](#fn_2670) her own existence. Next she lost,
as it were, all command <span id="page_318">p. 318</span> <span
id="ix.ii.iii-Page_318"></span> of herself, and was in the greatest
perplexity while endeavouring to discover the cause of all this, and in
what way she might conceal what had happened. Being greatly harassed by
these passions, she at last changed her mind, and endeavoured to return
anew to the Father. When, however, she in some measure made the attempt,
strength failed her, and she became a suppliant of the Father. The other
Æons, Nous in particular, presented their supplications along with her.
And hence they declare material substance <span
id="fr_2671"></span>[2672](#fn_2671) had its beginning from ignorance
and grief, and fear and bewilderment.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p7"></span>4. <span id="ix.ii.iii-p7.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.iii-p7.2"></span>The Father afterwards produces, in his own
image, by means of Monogenes, the above-mentioned Horos, without
conjunction, <span id="fr_2672"></span>[2673](#fn_2672)
masculo-feminine. For they maintain that sometimes the Father acts in
conjunction with Sige, but that at other times he shows himself
independent both of male and female. They term this Horos both Stauros
and Lytrotes, and Carpistes, and Horothetes, and Metagoges. <span
id="fr_2673"></span>[2674](#fn_2673) And by this Horos they declare that
Sophia was purified and established, while she was also restored to her
proper conjunction. <span id="ix.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>For her enthymesis
(or inborn idea) having been taken away from her, along with its
supervening passion, she herself certainly remained within the Pleroma;
but her enthymesis, with its passion, was separated from her by Horos,
fenced <span id="fr_2674"></span>[2675](#fn_2674) off, and expelled from
that circle. This enthymesis was, no doubt, a spiritual substance,
possessing some of the natural tendencies of an Æon, but at the same
time shapeless and without form, because it had received nothing. <span
id="fr_2675"></span>[2676](#fn_2675) And on this account they say that
it was an imbecile and feminine production. <span
id="fr_2676"></span>[2677](#fn_2676)

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p13"></span>5. After this substance had been placed
outside of the Pleroma of the Æons, and its mother restored to her
proper conjunction, they tell us that Monogenes, acting in accordance
with the prudent forethought of the Father, gave origin to another
conjugal pair, namely Christ and the Holy Spirit (lest any of the Æons
should fall into a calamity similar to that of Sophia), for the purpose
of fortifying and strengthening the Pleroma, and who at the same time
completed the number of the Æons. Christ then instructed them as to the
nature of their conjunction, and taught them that those who possessed a
comprehension of the Unbegotten were sufficient for themselves. <span
id="fr_2677"></span>[2678](#fn_2677) He also announced among them what
related to the knowledge of the Father,—namely, that he cannot be
understood or comprehended, nor so much as seen or heard, except in so
far as he is known by Monogenes only. And the reason why the rest of the
Æons possess perpetual existence is found in that part of the Father’s
nature which is incomprehensible; but the reason of their origin and
formation was situated in that which may be comprehended regarding him,
that is, in the Son. <span id="fr_2678"></span>[2679](#fn_2678) Christ,
then, who had just been produced, effected these things among them.

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p16"></span>6. But the Holy Spirit <span
id="fr_2679"></span>[2680](#fn_2679) taught them to give thanks on being
all rendered equal among themselves, and led them to a state of true
repose. Thus, then, they tell us that the Æons were constituted equal to
each other in form and sentiment, so that all became as Nous, and Logos,
and Anthropos, and Christus. The female Æons, too, became all as
Aletheia, and Zoe, and Spiritus, and Ecclesia. Everything, then, being
thus established, and brought into a state of perfect rest, they next
tell us that these beings sang praises with great joy to the Propator,
who himself shared in the abounding exaltation. Then, out of gratitude
for the great benefit which had been conferred on them, the whole
Pleroma of the Æons, with one design and desire, and with the
concurrence of Christ and the Holy Spirit, their Father also setting the
seal of His approval on their conduct, brought together whatever each
one had in himself of the greatest beauty and preciousness; and uniting
all these contributions so as skilfully to blend the whole, they
produced, to the honour and glory of Bythus, a being of most perfect
beauty, the very star of the Pleroma, and the perfect fruit \[of it\],
namely Jesus. Him they also speak of under the name of Saviour, and
Christ, and patronymically, Logos, and Everything, because He was formed
from the contributions of all. And then we are told that, by way of
honour, angels of the same nature as Himself were simultaneously
produced, to act as His body-guard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2669"></span>[317:2670](0010699.htm#fr_2669) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p4"></span> Alluding to the Gnostic notion that, in
generation, the male gives form, the female substance. Sophia,
therefore, being a female Æon, gave to her enthymesis substance alone,
without form. Comp. Hippol., *Philosop.*, vi. 30.

<span id="fn_2670"></span>[317:2671](0010699.htm#fr_2670) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p5"></span> Some render this obscure clause, “lest
it should never attain perfection,” but the above seems preferable. See
Hippol., vi. 31, where the fear referred to is extended to the whole
Pleroma.

<span id="fn_2671"></span>[318:2672](0010699.htm#fr_2671) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p6"></span> “The reader will observe the parallel;
as the enthymesis of Bythus produced intelligent substance, so the
enthymesis of Sophia resulted in the formation of material
substance.”—<span class="upper"><span
id="ix.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>Harvey</span>.

<span id="fn_2672"></span>[318:2673](0010699.htm#fr_2672) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p8"></span> Some propose reading these words in the
dative rather than the accusative, and thus to make them refer to the
*image of the Father*.

<span id="fn_2673"></span>[318:2674](0010699.htm#fr_2673) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p9"></span> The meaning of these terms is as
follows: Stauros means primarily *a stake*, and then *a cross*; Lytrotes
is *a Redeemer*; Carpistes, according to Grabe, means *an Emancipator*,
according to Neander *a Reaper*; Horothetes is *one that fixes
boundaries*; and Metagoges is explained by Neander as being *one that
brings back*, from the supposed function of Horos, to bring back all
that sought to wander from the special grade of being assigned them.

<span id="fn_2674"></span>[318:2675](0010699.htm#fr_2674) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p10"></span> The common text has <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>ἀποστερηθῆναι</span>,
*was deprived*; but Billius proposes to read <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.iii-p10.2"></span>ἀποσταυρωθῆναι</span>, in conformity with
the ancient Latin version, “crucifixam.”

<span id="fn_2675"></span>[318:2676](0010699.htm#fr_2675) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p11"></span> That is, had not shared in any male
influence, but was a purely female production.

<span id="fn_2676"></span>[318:2677](0010699.htm#fr_2676) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p12"></span> Literally, “fruit.” Harvey remarks on
this expression, “that what we understand by *emanations*, the Gnostic
described as spiritual *fructification*; and as the seed of a tree is in
itself, even in the embryo state, so these various Æons, as existing
always in the divine nature, were co-eternal with it.”

<span id="fn_2677"></span>[318:2678](0010699.htm#fr_2677) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p14"></span> This is an exceedingly obscure and
difficult passage. Harvey’s rendering is: “For, say they, Christ taught
them the nature of their copulæ, (namely,) that being cognisant of their
(limited) perception of the Unbegotten they needed no higher knowledge,
and that He enounced,” etc. the words seem scarcely capable of yielding
this sense: we have followed the interpretation of Billius.

<span id="fn_2678"></span>[318:2679](0010699.htm#fr_2678) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p15"></span> Both the text and meaning are here very
doubtful. Some think that the import of the sentence is, that the
knowledge that the Father is incomprehensible secured the continued
safety of the Æons, while the same knowledge conferred upon Monogenes
his origin and form.

<span id="fn_2679"></span>[318:2680](0010699.htm#fr_2679) <span
id="ix.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.iii-p17"></span> The Greek text inserts <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>ἕν</span>, *one*, before
“Holy Spirit.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—Texts of Holy Scripture...](0010700)
