[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010717)  [Next](0010719) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xxii"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—The views of redemption entertained by these heretics.

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxii-p1.2"></span>It happens
that their tradition respecting *redemption* <span
id="fr_2920"></span>[2921](#fn_2920) is invisible and incomprehensible,
as being the mother of things which are incomprehensible and invisible;
and on this account, since it is fluctuating, it is impossible simply
and all at once to make known its nature, for every one of them hands it
down just as his own inclination prompts. Thus there are as many schemes
of “redemption” as there are teachers of these mystical opinions. And
when we come to refute them, we shall show in its fitting-place, that
this class of men have been instigated by Satan to a denial of that
baptism which is regeneration to God, and thus to a renunciation of the
whole \[Christian\] faith.

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p3"></span>2. They maintain that those who have
attained to perfect knowledge must of necessity be regenerated into that
power which is above all. For it is otherwise impossible to find
admittance within the Pleroma, since this \[regeneration\] it is which
leads them down into the depths of Bythus. For the baptism instituted by
the visible Jesus was for the remission of sins, but the redemption
brought in by that Christ who descended upon Him, was for perfection;
and they allege that the former is animal, but the latter spiritual. And
the baptism of John was proclaimed with a view to repentance, but the
redemption by Jesus <span id="fr_2921"></span>[2922](#fn_2921) was
brought in for the sake of perfection. And to this He refers when He
says, “And I have another baptism to be baptized with, and I hasten
eagerly towards it.” <span id="fr_2922"></span>[2923](#fn_2922)
Moreover, they affirm that the Lord added this redemption to the sons of
Zebedee, when their mother asked that they might sit, the one on His
right hand, and the other on His left, in His kingdom, saying, “Can ye
be baptized with the baptism which I shall be baptized with?” <span
id="fr_2923"></span>[2924](#fn_2923) Paul, too, they declare, has often
set forth, in express terms, the redemption which is in Christ <span
id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span id="ix.ii.xxii-Page_346"></span>
Jesus; and this was the same which is handed down by them in so varied
and discordant forms.

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p7"></span>3. <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p7.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxii-p7.2"></span>For some
of them prepare a nuptial couch, and perform a sort of mystic rite
(pronouncing certain expressions) with those who are being initiated,
and affirm that it is a spiritual marriage which is celebrated by them,
after the likeness of the conjunctions above. Others, again, lead them
to a place where water is, and baptize them, with the utterance of these
words, “Into the name of the unknown Father of the universe— into truth,
the mother of all things—into Him who descended on Jesus—into union, and
redemption, and communion with the powers.” Others still repeat certain
Hebrew words, in order the more thoroughly to bewilder those who are
being initiated, as follows: “Basema, Chamosse, Baœnaora, Mistadia,
Ruada, Kousta, Babaphor, Kalachthei.” <span
id="fr_2924"></span>[2925](#fn_2924) The interpretation of these terms
runs thus: “I invoke that which is above every power of the Father,
which is called light, and good Spirit, and life, because Thou hast
reigned in the body.” Others, again, set forth the redemption thus: The
name which is hidden from every deity, and dominion, and truth which
Jesus of Nazareth was clothed with in the lives <span
id="fr_2925"></span>[2926](#fn_2925) of the light of Christ—of Christ,
who lives by the Holy Ghost, for the angelic redemption. The name of
restitution stands thus: Messia, Uphareg, Namempsœman, Chaldœaur,
Mosomedœa, Acphranœ, Psaua, Jesus Nazaria. <span
id="fr_2926"></span>[2927](#fn_2926) The interpretation of these words
is as follows: “I do not divide the Spirit of Christ, neither the heart
nor the supercelestial power which is merciful; may I enjoy Thy name, O
Saviour of truth!” Such are words of the initiators; but he who is
initiated, replies, “I am established, and I am redeemed; I redeem my
soul from this age (world), and from all things connected with it in the
name of Iao, who redeemed his own soul into redemption in Christ who
liveth.” Then the bystanders add these words, “Peace be to all on whom
this name rests.” After this they anoint the initiated person with
balsam; for they assert that this unguent is a type of that sweet odour
which is above all things.

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p11"></span>4. But there are some of them who
assert that it is superfluous to bring persons to the water, but mixing
oil and water together, they place this mixture on the heads of those
who are to be initiated, with the use of some such expressions as we
have already mentioned. And this they maintain to be the redemption.
They, too, are accustomed to anoint with balsam. Others, however, reject
all these practices, and maintain that the mystery of the unspeakable
and invisible power ought not to be performed by visible and corruptible
creatures, nor should that of those \[beings\] who are inconceivable,
and incorporeal, and beyond the reach of sense, \[be performed\] by such
as are the objects of sense, and possessed of a body. These hold that
the knowledge of the unspeakable Greatness is itself perfect redemption.
For since both defect and passion flowed from ignorance, the whole
substance of what was thus formed is destroyed by knowledge; and
therefore knowledge is the redemption of the inner man. This, however,
is not of a corporeal nature, for the body is corruptible; nor is it
animal, since the animal soul is the fruit of a defect, and is, as it
were, the abode of the spirit. The redemption must therefore be of a
spiritual nature; for they affirm that the inner and spiritual man is
redeemed by means of knowledge, and that they, having acquired the
knowledge of all things, stand thenceforth in need of nothing else.
This, then, is the true redemption.

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p12"></span>5. Others still there are who continue
to redeem persons even up to the moment of death, by placing on their
heads oil and water, or the pre-mentioned ointment with water, using at
the same time the above-named invocations, that the persons referred to
may become incapable of being seized or seen by the principalities and
powers, and that their inner man may ascend on high in an invisible
manner, as if their body were left among created things in this world,
while their soul is sent forward to the Demiurge. And they instruct
them, on their reaching the principalities and powers, to make use of
these words: “I am a son from the Father—the Father who had a
pre-existence, and a son in Him who is pre-existent. I have come to
behold all things, both those which belong to myself and others,
although, strictly speaking, they do not belong to others, but to
Achamoth, who is female in nature, and made these things for herself.
For I derive being from Him who is pre-existent, and I come again to my
own place whence I went forth.” And they affirm that, by saying these
things, he escapes from the powers. He then advances to the companions
of the Demiurge, and thus addresses them:—“I am a vessel more precious
than the female who formed you. If your mother is ignorant of her own
descent, I know myself, and am aware whence I am, and I call upon the
incorruptible Sophia, who is in the Father, and is the mother of your
mother, who has no father, nor any male consort; but a female springing
from a female formed you, while ignorant of her own mother, and
imagining that she alone existed; but I call upon her mother.” And they
declare, that when the companions of the Demiurge hear these words, they
are greatly agitated, and upbraid their origin and the race of their
mother. But he goes into his own place, having <span id="page_347">p.
347</span> <span id="ix.ii.xxii-Page_347"></span> thrown \[off\] his
chain, that is, his animal nature. These, then, are the particulars
which have reached us respecting “redemption.” <span
id="fr_2927"></span>[2928](#fn_2927) But since they differ so widely
among themselves both as respects doctrine and tradition, and since
those of them who are recognised as being most modern make it their
effort daily to invent some new opinion, and to bring out what no one
ever before thought of, it is a difficult matter to describe all their
opinions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2920"></span>[345:2921](0010718.htm#fr_2920) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p2"></span> Comp. chap. xiii. 6.

<span id="fn_2921"></span>[345:2922](0010718.htm#fr_2921) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p4"></span> The Latin reads “Christ.”

<span id="fn_2922"></span>[345:2923](0010718.htm#fr_2922) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p5"></span> [Luke xii.
50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050)<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p5.1"></span>.
The text was probably thus corrupted by the heretics.

<span id="fn_2923"></span>[345:2924](0010718.htm#fr_2923) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p6"></span> [Mark x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#038)<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2924"></span>[346:2925](0010718.htm#fr_2924) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p8"></span> We have given these words as they stand
in the Greek text: a very different list, but equally unmeaning, is
found in the Latin.

<span id="fn_2925"></span>[346:2926](0010718.htm#fr_2925) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p9"></span> The Latin reads *zonis*, “zones,”
instead of “lives,” as in the Greek.

<span id="fn_2926"></span>[346:2927](0010718.htm#fr_2926) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p10"></span> Here, again, are many variations.

<span id="fn_2927"></span>[347:2928](0010718.htm#fr_2927) <span
id="ix.ii.xxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxii-p13"></span> The Greek text, which has hitherto
been preserved almost entire, ends at this point. With only brief
extracts from the original, now and then, we are henceforth exclusively
dependent on the old Latin version, with some Syriac and Armenian
fragments recently discovered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.—Deviations of heretics...](0010719)
