[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010404)  [Next](0010406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.xxxii"></span>

### <span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXII.—Christ predicted by Moses.

<span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p1.3"></span>Moses then, who was the first of the
prophets, spoke in these very words: “The sceptre shall not depart from
Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until He come for whom it
is reserved; and He shall be the desire of the nations, binding His foal
to the vine, washing His robe in the blood of the grape.” <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826) It is yours to make accurate
inquiry, and ascertain up to whose time the Jews had a lawgiver and king
of their own. Up to the time of Jesus Christ, who taught us, and
interpreted the prophecies which were not yet understood, \[they had a
lawgiver\] as was foretold by the holy and divine Spirit of prophecy
through Moses, “that a ruler would not fail the Jews until He should
come for whom the kingdom was reserved” (for Judah was the forefather of
the Jews, from whom also they have their name of Jews); and after He
(i.e., Christ) appeared, you began to rule the Jews, and gained
possession of all their territory. And the prophecy, “He shall be the
expectation of the nations,” signified that there would be some of all
nations who should look for Him to come again. And this indeed you can
see for yourselves, and be convinced of by fact. For of all races of men
there are some who look for Him who was crucified in Judæa, and after
whose crucifixion the land was straightway surrendered to you as spoil
of war. And the prophecy, “binding His foal to the vine, and washing His
robe in the blood of the grape,” was a significant symbol of the things
that were to happen to Christ, and of what He was to do. For the foal of
an ass stood bound to a vine at the entrance of a village, and He
ordered His acquaintances to bring it to Him then; and when it was
brought, He mounted and sat upon it, and entered Jerusalem, where was
the vast temple of the Jews which was afterwards destroyed by you. And
after this He was crucified, that the rest of the prophecy might be
fulfilled. <span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p2.2"></span>For this “washing His
robe in the blood of the grape” was predictive of the passion He was to
endure, cleansing by His blood those who believe on Him. For what is
called by the Divine Spirit through the prophet “His robe,” are those
men who believe in Him in whom abideth the seed <span
id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827) of God, the Word. And what is
spoken of as “the blood of the grape,” signifies that He who should
appear would have blood, though not of the seed of man, but of the power
of God. <span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p3.3"></span>And the first power after
God the Father and Lord of all is the Word, who is also the Son; and of
Him we will, in what follows, relate how He took flesh and became man.
For as man did not make the blood of the vine, but God, so it was hereby
intimated that the blood should not be of human seed, but of divine
<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-Page_174"></span> power, as we have said above. And
Isaiah, another prophet, foretelling the same things in other words,
spoke thus: “A star shall rise out of Jacob, and a flower shall spring
from the root of Jesse; and His arm shall the nations trust. <span
id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828) And a star of light has arisen, and
a flower has sprung from the root of Jesse—this Christ. For by the power
of God He was conceived by a virgin of the seed of Jacob, who was the
father of Judah, who, as we have shown, was the father of the Jews; and
Jesse was His forefather according to the oracle, and He was the son of
Jacob and Judah according to lineal descent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[173:1827](0010405.htm#fr_1826) <span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p2"></span> [Gen. xlix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[173:1828](0010405.htm#fr_1827) <span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p3"></span> Grabe would here read, not <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>σπέρμα</span>, but
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p3.2"></span>πνεῦμα</span>,
the spirit; but the Benedictine, Otto, and Trollope all think that no
change should be made.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[174:1829](0010405.htm#fr_1828) <span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.xxxii-p4"></span> [Isa. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span
id="viii.ii.xxxii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII.—Manner of Christ’s...](0010406)
