[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010446)  [Next](0010448.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.ii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.—Urbicus condemns the Christians to death.

<span id="viii.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>A
certain woman lived with an intemperate <span
id="fr_1924"></span>[1925](#fn_1924.md) husband; she herself, too, having
formerly been intemperate. But when she came to the knowledge of the
teachings of Christ she became sober-minded, and endeavoured to persuade
her husband likewise to be temperate, citing the teaching of Christ, and
assuring him that there shall be punishment in eternal fire inflicted
upon those who do not live temperately and conformably to right reason.
But he, continuing in the same excesses, alienated his wife from him by
his actions. For she, considering it wicked to live any longer as a wife
with a husband who sought in every way means of indulging in pleasure
contrary to the law of nature, and in violation of what is right, wished
to be divorced from him. And when she was overpersuaded by her friends,
who advised her still to continue with him, in the idea that some time
or other her husband might give hope of amendment, she did violence to
her own feeling and remained with him. But when her husband had gone
into Alexandria, and was reported to be conducting himself worse than
ever, she—that she might not, by continuing in matrimonial connection
with him, and by sharing his table and his bed, become a partaker also
in his wickednesses and impieties—gave him what you call a bill of
divorce, <span id="fr_1925"></span>[1926](#fn_1925.md) and was separated
from him. But this noble husband of hers,—while he ought to have been
rejoicing that those actions which formerly she unhesitatingly committed
with the servants and hirelings, when she delighted in drunkenness and
every vice, she had now given up, and desired that he too should give up
the same,—when she had gone from him without his desire, brought an
accusation against her, affirming that she was a Christian. And she
presented a paper to thee, the Emperor, <span
id="fr_1926"></span>[1927](#fn_1926.md) requesting that first she be
permitted to arrange her affairs, and afterwards to make her defence
against the accusation, when her affairs were set in order. And this you
granted. And <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="viii.iii.ii-Page_189"></span> her quondam husband, since he was now
no longer able to prosecute her, directed his assaults against a man,
Ptolemæus, whom Urbicus punished, and who had been her teacher in the
Christian doctrines. And this he did in the following way. He persuaded
a centurion —who had cast Ptolemæus into prison, and who was friendly to
himself—to take Ptolemæus and interrogate him on this sole point:
whether he were a Christian? And Ptolemæus, being a lover of truth, and
not of a deceitful or false disposition, when he confessed himself to be
a Christian, was bound by the centurion, and for a long time punished in
the prison And, at last, when the man <span
id="fr_1927"></span>[1928](#fn_1927.md) came to Urbicus, he was asked this
one question only: whether he was a Christian? And again, being
conscious of his duty, and the nobility of it through the teaching of
Christ, he confessed his discipleship in the divine virtue. For he who
denies anything either denies it because he condemns the thing itself,
or he shrinks from confession because he is conscious of his own
unworthiness or alienation from it, neither of which cases is that of
the true Christian. And when Urbicus ordered him to be led away to
punishment, one Lucius, who was also himself a Christian, seeing the
unreasonable judgment that had thus been given, said to Urbicus: “What
is the ground of this judgment? Why have you punished this man, not as
an adulterer, nor fornicator, nor murderer, nor thief, nor robber, nor
convicted of any crime at all, but who has only confessed that he is
called by the name of Christian? This judgment of yours, O Urbicus, does
not become the Emperor Pius, nor the philosopher, the son of Cæsar, nor
the sacred senate.” <span id="fr_1928"></span>[1929](#fn_1928.md) And he
said nothing else in answer to Lucius than this: “You also seem to me to
be such an one.” And when Lucius answered, “Most certainly I am,” he
again ordered him also to be led away. And he professed his thanks,
knowing that he was delivered from such wicked rulers, and was going to
the Father and King of the heavens. And still a third having come
forward, was condemned to be punished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1924"></span>[188:1925](0010447.htm#fr_1924.md) <span
id="viii.iii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.ii-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>ἀκολασταίνοντι</span>, which word includes
unchastity, as well as the other forms of intemperance. \[As we say,
dissolute.\]

<span id="fn_1925"></span>[188:1926](0010447.htm#fr_1925.md) <span
id="viii.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.ii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>ῥεπούδιον</span>, i.e., “repudium,” a bill
of repudiation.

<span id="fn_1926"></span>[188:1927](0010447.htm#fr_1926.md) <span
id="viii.iii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.ii-p4"></span> \[Rather, “to thee, autocrat:” a very
bold apostrophe, like that of Huss to the Emperor Sigismund, which
crimsoned his forehead with a blush of shame.\]

<span id="fn_1927"></span>[189:1928](0010447.htm#fr_1927.md) <span
id="viii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.ii-p5"></span> i.e., Ptolemæus.

<span id="fn_1928"></span>[189:1929](0010447.htm#fr_1928.md) <span
id="viii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.ii-p6"></span> On this passage, see Donaldson’s
*Critical History*, etc., vol. ii. p. 79.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.—Justin accuses Crescens...](0010448.md)
