[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010548)  [Next](0010550) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter LXXXVIII.—Christ has not received the Holy Spirit on account of poverty.

<span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p1.1"></span>“Now, it is possible to see amongst us
women and men who possess gifts of the Spirit of God; so that it was
prophesied that the powers enumerated by Isaiah would come upon Him, not
because He needed power, but because these would not continue after Him.
And let this be a proof to you, namely, what I told you was done by the
Magi from Arabia, who as soon as the Child was born came to worship Him,
for even at His birth He was in possession of His power; and as He grew
up like all other men, by using the fitting means, He assigned its own
\[requirements\] to each development, and was sustained by all kinds of
nourishment, and waited for thirty years, more or less, until John
appeared before Him as the herald of His approach, and preceded Him in
the way of baptism, as I have already shown. And then, when Jesus had
gone to the river Jordan, where John was baptizing, and when He had
stepped into the water, a fire <span
id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296) was kindled in the Jordan; and when
He came out of the water, the Holy Ghost lighted on Him like a dove,
\[as\] the apostles of this very Christ of ours wrote. Now, we know that
he did not go to the river because He stood in need of baptism, or of
the descent of the Spirit like a dove; even as He submitted to be born
and to be crucified, not because He needed such things, but because of
the human race, which from Adam had fallen under the power of death and
the guile of the serpent, and each one of which had committed personal
transgression. For God, wishing both angels and men, who were endowed
with free-will, and at their own disposal, to do whatever He had
strengthened each to do, made them so, that if they chose the things
acceptable to Himself, He would keep them free from death and from
punishment; but that if they did evil, He would punish each as He sees
fit. For it was not His entrance into Jerusalem sitting on an ass, which
we have showed was prophesied, that empowered Him to be Christ, but it
furnished men with a proof that He is the Christ; just as it was
necessary in the time of John that men have <span id="page_244">p.
244</span> <span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-Page_244"></span> proof, that they
might know who is Christ. For when John remained <span
id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297) by the Jordan, and preached the
baptism of repentance, wearing only a leathern girdle and a vesture made
of camels’ hair, eating nothing but locusts and wild honey, men supposed
him to be Christ; but he cried to them, ‘I am not the Christ, but the
voice of one crying; for He that is stronger than I shall come, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear.’ <span
id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298) And when Jesus came to the Jordan,
He was considered to be the son of Joseph the carpenter; and He appeared
without comeliness, as the Scriptures declared; and He was deemed a
carpenter (for He was in the habit of working as a carpenter when among
men, making ploughs and yokes; by which He taught the symbols of
righteousness and an active life); but then the Holy Ghost, and for
man’s sake, as I formerly stated, lighted on Him in the form of a dove,
and there came at the same instant from the heavens a voice, which was
uttered also by David when he spoke, personating Christ, what the Father
would say to Him: ‘Thou art My Son: this day have I begotten
Thee;’ <span id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299) \[the Father\] saying
that His generation would take place for men, at the time when they
would become acquainted with Him: ‘Thou art My Son; this day have I
begotten thee.’ ” <span id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[243:2297](0010549.htm#fr_2296) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p2"></span> \[The *Shechinah* probably
attended the descent of the Holy Spirit, and what follows in the note
seems a gratuitous explanation. The Ebionite corruption of a truth need
not be resorted to. See chap. cxxviii: The fire in the bush.\] Justin
learned this either from tradition or from apocryphal books. Mention is
made of a fire both in the Ebionite Gospel and in another publication
called *Pauli prædicatio*, the readers and users of which denied that
the rite of baptism had been duly performed, unless *quam mox in aquam
descenderunt, statim super aquam ignis appareat*.

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[244:2298](0010549.htm#fr_2297) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p3"></span> Literally, “sat.”

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[244:2299](0010549.htm#fr_2298) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p4"></span> [Isa. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027)<span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[244:2300](0010549.htm#fr_2299) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p5"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[244:2301](0010549.htm#fr_2300) <span
id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.lxxxviii-p6"></span> The repetition seems quite
superfluous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXIX.—The cross alone is...](0010550)
