[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010764)  [Next](0010766) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.—Refutation of Basilides, and of the opinion that the prophets uttered their predictions under the inspiration of different gods.

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p1"></span>1. Moreover, in addition to what has
been said, Basilides himself will, according to his own principles, find
it necessary to maintain not only that there are three hundred and
sixty-five heavens made in succession by one another, but that an
immense and innumerable multitude of heavens have always been in the
process of being made, and are being made, and will continue to be made,
so that the formation of heavens of this kind can never cease. For if
from the efflux <span id="fr_3296"></span>[3297](#fn_3296) of the first
heaven the second was made after its likeness, and the third after the
likeness of the second, and so on with all the remaining subsequent
ones, then it follows, as a matter of necessity, that from the efflux of
our heaven, which he indeed terms the last, another be formed like to
it, and from that again a third; and thus there can never cease, either
the process of efflux from those heavens which have been already made,
or the manufacture of \[new\] heavens, but the operation must go on *ad
infinitum*, and give rise to a number of heavens which will be
altogether indefinite.

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p3"></span>2. <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>The remainder of those who are falsely
termed Gnostics, and who maintain that the prophets uttered their
prophecies under the inspiration of different gods, will be easily
overthrown by this fact, that all the prophets proclaimed one God and
Lord, and that the very Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things
which are therein; while they moreover announced the advent of His Son,
as I shall demonstrate from the Scriptures themselves, in the books
which follow.

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p4"></span>3. <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p4.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>If,
however, any object that, in the Hebrew language, diverse expressions
\[to represent God\] occur in the Scriptures, such as Sabaoth, Eloë,
Adonai, and all other such terms, striving to prove from these that
there are different powers and gods, let them learn that all expressions
of this kind are but announcements and appellations of one and the same
Being. For the term *Eloë* in the Jewish language denotes *God*, while
*Elōeim* <span id="fr_3297"></span>[3298](#fn_3297) and *Eleōuth* in the
Hebrew language signify “*that which contains all*.” As to the
appellation *Adonai*, sometimes it denotes what is *nameable* <span
id="fr_3298"></span>[3299](#fn_3298) and *admirable*; but at other
times, when the letter *Daleth* in it is doubled, and the word receives
an initial <span id="fr_3299"></span>[3300](#fn_3299) guttural
sound—thus Addonai—\[it signifies\], “One who bounds and separates the
land from the water,” so that the water should not subsequently <span
id="fr_3300"></span>[3301](#fn_3300) submerge the land. <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>In like manner also, *Sabaoth*, <span
id="fr_3301"></span>[3302](#fn_3301) when it is spelled by a Greek Omega
in the last syllable \[Sabaōth\], denotes “*a voluntary agent*;” but
when it is spelled with a Greek Omicron —as, for instance, Sabaŏth—it
expresses “*the first heaven*.” In the same way, too, the word
*Jaōth*, <span id="fr_3302"></span>[3303](#fn_3302) when the last
syllable is made long and aspirated, <span id="page_413">p. 413</span>
<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-Page_413"></span> denotes “*a predetermined
measure*;” but when it is written shortly by the Greek letter Omicron,
namely *Jaŏth*, it signifies “*one who puts evils to flight*.” All the
other expressions likewise bring out <span
id="fr_3303"></span>[3304](#fn_3303) the title of one and the same
Being; as, for example (in English <span
id="fr_3304"></span>[3305](#fn_3304) ), *The Lord of Powers, The Father
of all, God Almighty, The Most High, The Creator, The Maker*, and such
like. These are not the names and titles of a succession of different
beings, but of one and the same, by means of which the one God and
Father is revealed, He who contains all things, and grants to all the
boon of existence.

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p13"></span>4. Now, that the preaching of the
apostles, the authoritative teaching of the Lord, the announcements of
the prophets, the dictated utterances of the apostles, <span
id="fr_3305"></span>[3306](#fn_3305) and the ministration of the law—all
of which praise one and the same Being, the God and Father of all, and
not many diverse beings, nor one deriving his substance from different
gods or powers, but \[declare\] that all things \[were formed\] by one
and the same Father (who nevertheless adapts \[His works\] to the
natures and tendencies of the materials dealt with), things visible and
invisible, and, in short, all things that have been made \[were
created\] neither by angels, nor by any other power, but by God alone,
the Father—are all in harmony with our statements, has, I think, been
sufficiently proved, while by these weighty arguments it has been shown
that there is but one God, the Maker of all things. But that I may not
be thought to avoid that series of proofs which may be derived from the
Scriptures of the Lord (since, indeed, these Scriptures do much more
evidently and clearly proclaim this very point), I shall, for the
benefit of those at least who do not bring a depraved mind to bear upon
them, devote a special book to the Scriptures referred to, which shall
fairly follow them out \[and explain them\], and I shall plainly set
forth from these divine Scriptures proofs to \[satisfy\] all the lovers
of truth. <span id="fr_3306"></span>[3307](#fn_3306)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3296"></span>[412:3297](0010765.htm#fr_3296) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p2"></span> *Ex defluxu*, corresponding to <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>ἐξ ἀποῤῥοίας</span> in
the Greek.

<span id="fn_3297"></span>[412:3298](0010765.htm#fr_3297) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p5"></span> *Eloæ* here occurs in the Latin text,
but Harvey supposes that the Greek had been <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>᾽Ελωείμ</span>. He also remarks that
*Eloeuth* (<span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p5.2"></span>אֱלָהוּת</span>) is the rabbinical
abstract term, *Godhead*.

<span id="fn_3298"></span>[412:3299](0010765.htm#fr_3298) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p6"></span> All that can be remarked on this is,
that the Jews substituted the term *Adonai* (<span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>אֲדֹנַי</span>) for the name *Jehovah*, as
often as the latter occurred in the sacred text. The former might
therefore be styled *nameable*.

<span id="fn_3299"></span>[412:3300](0010765.htm#fr_3299) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p7"></span> The Latin text is, “aliquando autem
duplicata litera delta cum aspiratione,” and Harvey supposes that the
doubling of the Daleth would give “to the scarcely articulate <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>א</span> a more
decidedly guttural character;” but the sense is extremely doubtful.

<span id="fn_3300"></span>[412:3301](0010765.htm#fr_3300) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p8"></span> Instead of “nec posteaquam
insurgere,” Feuardent and Massuet read “ne possit insurgere,” and
include the clause in the definition of *Addonai.*

<span id="fn_3301"></span>[412:3302](0010765.htm#fr_3301) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p9"></span> The author is here utterly mistaken,
and, notwithstanding Harvey’s earnest claim for him of a knowledge of
Hebrew, seems clearly to betray his ignorance of that language. <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>The term *Sabaoth* is never written with
an Omicron, either in the LXX. or by the Greek Fathers, but always with
an Omega (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p9.2"></span>Σαβαώθ</span>). Although Harvey remarks in
his preface, that “It is hoped the Hebrew attainments of Irenæus will no
longer be denied,” there appears enough, in the etymologies and
explanations of Hebrew terms given in this chapter by the venerable
Father, to prevent such a conclusion; and Massuet’s observation on the
passage seems not improbable, when he says, “Sciolus quispiam Irenæo
nostro, in Hebraicis haud satis perito, hic fucum ecisse videtur.”

<span id="fn_3302"></span>[412:3303](0010765.htm#fr_3302) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p10"></span> Probably corresponding to the Hebrew
term *Jehovah* (<span class="Hebrew"><span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>יְהֹוָה</span>)

<span id="fn_3303"></span>[413:3304](0010765.htm#fr_3303) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p11"></span> Literally, “belong to one and the
same name.”

<span id="fn_3304"></span>[413:3305](0010765.htm#fr_3304) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p12"></span> “Secundum *Latinitatem*” in the
text.

<span id="fn_3305"></span>[413:3306](0010765.htm#fr_3305) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p14"></span> The words are “apostolorum
dictatio,” probably referring to the *letters* of the apostles, as
distinguished from their *preaching* already mentioned.

<span id="fn_3306"></span>[413:3307](0010765.htm#fr_3306) <span
id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxxvi-p15"></span> This last sentence is very confused
and ambiguous, and the editors throw but little light upon it. We have
endeavoured to translate it according to the ordinary text and
punctuation, but strongly suspect interpolation and corruption. If we
might venture to strike out “has Scripturas,” and connect “his tamen”
with “prædicantibus,” a better sense would be yielded, as follows: “But
that I may not be thought to avoid that series of proofs which may be
derived from the Scriptures of the Lord (since, indeed, these Scriptures
to much more evidently and clearly set forth this very point, to those
at least who do not bring a depraved mind to their consideration), I
shall devote the particular book which follows to them, and shall,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against Heresies: Book III](0010766)
