[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010865)  [Next](0010867) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.xxix"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.xxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—The distinction to be made between the righteous and the wicked. The future apostasy in the time of Antichrist, and the end of the world.

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Inasmuch, then, as in this world (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.vii.xxix-p1.2"></span>αἰῶνι</span>) some
persons betake themselves to the light, and by faith unite themselves
with God, but others shun the light, and separate themselves from God,
the Word of God comes preparing a fit habitation for both. For those
indeed who are in the light, that they may derive enjoyment from it, and
from the good things contained in it; but for those in darkness, that
they may partake in its calamities. And on this account He says, that
those upon the right hand are called into the kingdom of heaven, but
that those on the left He will send into eternal fire for they have
deprived themselves of all good.

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p2"></span>2. And for this reason the apostle
says: “Because <span id="page_557">p. 557</span> <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-Page_557"></span> they received not the love of God,
that they might be saved, therefore God shall also send them the
operation of error, that they may believe a lie, that they all may be
judged who have not believed the truth, but consented to
unrighteousness.” <span id="fr_4689"></span>[4690](#fn_4689) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p3.2"></span>For when he (Antichrist) is come, and of
his own accord concentrates in his own person the apostasy, and
accomplishes whatever he shall do according to his own will and choice,
sitting also in the temple of God, so that his dupes may adore him as
the Christ; wherefore also shall he deservedly “be cast into the lake of
fire:” <span id="fr_4690"></span>[4691](#fn_4690) \[this will happen
according to divine appointment\], God by His prescience foreseeing all
this, and at the proper time sending such a man, “that they may believe
a lie, that they all may be judged who did not believe the truth, but
consented to unrighteousness;” <span id="ix.vii.xxix-p4.2"></span>whose
coming John has thus described in the Apocalypse: “And the beast which I
had seen was like unto a leopard, and his feet as of a bear, and his
mouth as the mouth of a lion; and the dragon conferred his own power
upon him, and his throne, and great might. And one of his heads was as
it were slain unto death; and his deadly wound was healed, and all the
world wondered after the beast. And they worshipped the dragon because
he gave power to the beast; and they worshipped the beast, saying, Who
is like unto this beast, and who is able to make war with him? And there
was given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemy and
power was given to him during forty and two months. And he opened his
mouth for blasphemy against God, to blaspheme His name and His
tabernacle, and those who dwell in heaven. And power was given him over
every tribe, and people, and tongue, and nation. And all who dwell upon
the earth worshipped him, \[every one\] whose name was not written in
the book of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. If any one
have ears, let him hear. If any one shall lead into captivity, he shall
go into captivity. If any shall slay with the sword, he must be slain
with the sword. Here is the endurance and the faith of the
saints.” <span id="fr_4691"></span>[4692](#fn_4691) After this he
likewise describes his armour-bearer, whom he also terms a false
prophet: “He spake as a dragon, and exercised all the power of the first
beast in his sight, and caused the earth, and those that dwell therein,
to adore the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. And he shall
perform great wonders, so that he can even cause fire to descend from
heaven upon the earth in the sight of men, and he shall lead the
inhabitants of the earth astray.” <span
id="fr_4692"></span>[4693](#fn_4692) Let no one imagine that he performs
these wonders by divine power, but by the working of magic. And we must
not be surprised if, since the demons and apostate spirits are at his
service, he through their means performs wonders, by which he leads the
inhabitants of the earth astray. John says further: “And he shall order
an image of the beast to be made, and he shall give breath to the image,
so that the image shall speak; and he shall cause those to be slain who
will not adore it.” He says also: “And he will cause a mark \[to be
put\] in the forehead and in the right hand, that no one may be able to
buy or sell, unless he who has the mark of the name of the beast or the
number of his name; and the number is six hundred and sixty-six,” <span
id="fr_4693"></span>[4694](#fn_4693) that is, six times a hundred, six
times ten, and six units. \[He gives this\] as a summing up of the whole
of that apostasy which has taken place during six thousand years.

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p8"></span>3. For in as many days as this world
was made, in so many thousand years shall it be concluded. And for this
reason the Scripture says: “Thus the heaven and the earth were finished,
and all their adornment. And God brought to a conclusion upon the sixth
day the works that He had made; and God rested upon the seventh day from
all His works.” <span id="fr_4694"></span>[4695](#fn_4694) This is an
account of the things formerly created, as also it is a prophecy of what
is to come. For the day of the Lord is as a thousand years; <span
id="fr_4695"></span>[4696](#fn_4695) and in six days created things were
completed: it is evident, therefore, that they will come to an end at
the sixth thousand year.

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p11"></span>4. And therefore throughout all time,
man, having been moulded at the beginning by the hands of God, that is,
of the Son and of the Spirit, is made after the image and likeness of
God: the chaff, indeed, which is the apostasy, being cast away; but the
wheat, that is, those who bring forth fruit to God in faith, being
gathered into the barn. And for this cause tribulation is necessary for
those who are saved, that having been after a manner broken up, and
rendered fine, and sprinkled over by the patience of the Word of God,
and set on fire \[for purification\], they may be fitted for the royal
banquet. As a certain man of ours said, when he was condemned to the
wild beasts because of his testimony with respect to God: “I am the
wheat of Christ, and am ground by the teeth of the wild beasts, that I
may be found the pure bread of God.” <span
id="fr_4696"></span>[4697](#fn_4696)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4689"></span>[557:4690](0010866.htm#fr_4689) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p3"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4690"></span>[557:4691](0010866.htm#fr_4690) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p4"></span> [Rev. xix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020)<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4691"></span>[557:4692](0010866.htm#fr_4691) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p5"></span> [Rev. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002)<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p5.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4692"></span>[557:4693](0010866.htm#fr_4692) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p6"></span> [Rev. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p6.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4693"></span>[557:4694](0010866.htm#fr_4693) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p7"></span> [Rev. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014)<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p7.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4694"></span>[557:4695](0010866.htm#fr_4694) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p9"></span> [Gen. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002)<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4695"></span>[557:4696](0010866.htm#fr_4695) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p10"></span> [2 Pet. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4696"></span>[557:4697](0010866.htm#fr_4696) <span
id="ix.vii.xxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.xxix-p12"></span> This is quoted from the Epistle of
Ignatius to the Romans, ch. iv. It is found in the two Greek recensions
of his works, and also in the Syriac. See pp. 75 and 103 of this volume.
The Latin translation is here followed: the Greek of Ignatius would give
“the wheat of God,” and omits “of God” towards the end, as quoted by
Eusebius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX.—All things have been...](0010867)
