[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010645)  [Next](0010647.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvi"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—True knowledge not held by the philosophers.

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvi-p1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>And if “the discovery of the truth” be
given among them as one definition of philosophy, how are they who are
not in possession of the true knowledge worthy of the name of
philosophy? For if Socrates, the wisest of your wise men, to whom even
your oracle, as you yourselves say, bears witness, saying, “Of all men
Socrates is the wisest”—if he confesses that he knows nothing, how did
those who came after him profess to know even things heavenly? For
Socrates said that he was on this account called wise, because, while
other men pretended to know what they were ignorant of, he himself did
not shrink from confessing that he knew nothing. For he said, “I seem to
myself to be wisest by this little particular, that what I do not know,
I do not suppose I know.” Let no one fancy that Socrates ironically
feigned ignorance, because he often used to do so in his dialogues. For
the last expression of his apology which he uttered as he was being led
away to the prison, proves that in seriousness and truth he was
confessing his ignorance: “But now it is time to go away, I indeed to
die, but you to live. And which of us goes to the better state, is
hidden to all but God.” Socrates, indeed, having uttered this last
sentence in the Areopagus, departed to the prison, ascribing to God
alone the knowledge of those things which are hidden from us; but those
who came after him, though they are unable to comprehend even earthly
things, profess to understand things heavenly as if they had seen them.
Aristotle at least—as if he had seen things heavenly with greater
accuracy than Plato—declared that God did not exist, as Plato said, in
the fiery substance (for this was Plato’s doctrine) but in the fifth
element, air. And while he demanded that concerning these matters he
should be believed on account of the excellence of his language, he yet
departed this life because he was overwhelmed with the infamy and
disgrace of being unable to discover even the nature of the Euripus in
Chalcis. <span id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586.md) Let not any one,
therefore, of sound judgment prefer the elegant diction of these men to
his own salvation, but let him, according to that old story, stop his
ears with wax, and flee the sweet hurt which these sirens would inflict
upon him. For the above-mentioned men, presenting their elegant language
as a kind of bait, have sought to seduce many from the right religion,
in imitation of him who dared to teach the first men polytheism. Be not
persuaded by these persons, I entreat you, but read the prophecies of
the sacred writers. <span id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587.md) And if
any slothfulness or old hereditary superstition prevents you from
reading the prophecies of the holy men through which you can be
instructed regarding the one only God, which is the first article of the
true religion, yet believe him who, though at first he taught you
polytheism, yet afterwards preferred to sing a useful and necessary
recantation—I mean Orpheus, who said what I quoted a little before; and
believe the others who wrote the same things concerning one God. For it
was the work of Divine Providence on your behalf, that they, though
unwillingly, bore testimony that what the prophets said regarding one
God was true, in order that, the doctrine of a plurality of gods being
rejected by all, occasion might be afforded you of knowing the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[288:2587](0010646.htm#fr_2586.md) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvi-p2"></span> This is now supposed to be fable.

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[288:2588](0010646.htm#fr_2587.md) <span
id="viii.vi.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.xxxvi-p3"></span> Literally, “sacred men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII.—Of the Sibyl.](0010647.md)
