[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010496)  [Next](0010498) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.xxxvi"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.—He proves that Christ is called Lord of Hosts.

<span id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span>Then he replied, “Let these things be
so as you say—namely, that it was foretold Christ would suffer, and be
called a stone; and after His first appearance, in which it had been
announced He would suffer, would come in glory, and be Judge finally of
all, and eternal King and Priest. Now show if this man be He of whom
these prophecies were made.”

<span id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p2.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>And
I said, “As you wish, Trypho, I shall come to these proofs which you
seek in the fitting place; but now you will permit me first to recount
the prophecies, which I wish to do in order to prove that Christ is
called both God and Lord of hosts, and Jacob, in parable by the Holy
Spirit; and your interpreters, as God says, are foolish, since they say
that reference is made to Solomon and not to Christ, when he bore the
ark of testimony into the temple which he built. <span
id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p2.3"></span><span id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p2.4"></span>The
Psalm of David is this: ‘The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness
thereof; the world, and all that dwell therein. He hath rounded it upon
the seas, and prepared it upon the floods. Who shall ascend into the
hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in His holy place? He that is clean
of hands and pure of heart: who has not received his soul in vain, and
has not sworn guilefully to his neighbour: he shall receive blessing
from the Lord, and mercy from God his Saviour. This is the generation of
them that seek the Lord, that seek the face of the God of Jacob. <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038) Lift up your gates, ye rulers; and
be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come
in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty in battle.
Lift up your gates, ye rulers; <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="viii.iv.xxxvi-Page_213"></span> and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory?
The Lord of hosts, He is the King of glory.’ <span
id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039) Accordingly, it is shown that
Solomon is not the Lord of hosts; but when our Christ rose from the dead
and ascended to heaven, the rulers in heaven, under appointment of God,
are commanded to open the gates of heaven, that He who is King of glory
may enter in, and having ascended, may sit on the right hand of the
Father until He make the enemies His footstool, as has been made
manifest by another Psalm. For when the rulers of heaven saw Him of
uncomely and dishonoured appearance, and inglorious, not recognising
Him, they inquired, ‘Who is this King of glory?’ And the Holy Spirit,
either from the person of His Father, or from His own person, answers
them, ‘The Lord of hosts, He is this King of glory.’ For every one will
confess that not one of those who presided over the gates of the temple
at Jerusalem would venture to say concerning Solomon, though he was so
glorious a king, or concerning the ark of testimony, ‘Who is this King
of glory?’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[212:2039](0010497.htm#fr_2038) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p2.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p3"></span> Maranus remarks from Thirlby: “As
Justin wrote a little before, ‘and is called Jacob in parable,’ it seems
to convince us that Justin wrote, ‘thy face, O Jacob.’ ” \[The meaning
in this latter case becomes plain, if we observe that “O Israel” is
equivalent to, and means, “O house of Jacob:” an apostrophe to the
Church of the ancient people.\]

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[213:2040](0010497.htm#fr_2039) <span
id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p4"></span> [Ps.
xxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#000)<span
id="viii.iv.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII.—The same is proved...](0010498)
