[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010701)  [Next](0010703.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.vi"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—Formation of the Demiurge; description of him. He is the creator of everything outside of the Pleroma.

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p1"></span>1. These three kinds of existence, then,
having, according to them, been now formed,—one from the passion, which
was matter; a second from the conversion, which was animal; and the
third, that which she (Achamoth) herself brought forth, which was
spiritual,—she next addressed herself to the task of giving these form.
But she could not succeed in doing this as respected the spiritual
existence, because it was of the same nature with herself. She therefore
applied herself to give form to the animal substance which had proceeded
from her own conversion, and to bring forth to light the instructions of
the Saviour. <span id="fr_2725"></span>[2726](#fn_2725.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>And they say she first formed out of animal
substance him who is Father and King of all things, both of these which
are of the same nature with himself, that is, animal substances, which
they also call right-handed, and those which sprang from the passion,
and from matter, which they call left-handed. For they affirm that he
formed all the things which came into existence after him, being
secretly impelled thereto by his mother. From this circumstance they
style him <span id="ix.ii.vi-p2.2"></span>Metropator, <span
id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>Apator, Demiurge, and Father, saying that he
is Father of the substances on the right hand, that is, of the animal,
but Demiurge of those on the left, that is, of the material, while he is
at the same time the king of all. <span id="ix.ii.vi-p3.2"></span>For
they say that this Enthymesis, desirous of making all things to the
honour of the Æons, formed images of them, or rather that the
Saviour <span id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727.md) did so through her
instrumentality. And she, in the image <span
id="fr_2728"></span>[2729](#fn_2728.md) of the invisible Father, kept
herself concealed from the Demiurge. But he was in the image of the
only-begotten Son, and the angels and archangels created by him were in
the image of the rest of the Æons.

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p6"></span>2. <span id="ix.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>They
affirm, therefore, that he was constituted the Father and God of
everything outside of the Pleroma, being the creator of all animal and
material substances. For he it was that discriminated these two kinds of
existence hitherto confused, and made corporeal from incorporeal
substances, fashioned things heavenly and earthly, and became the Framer
(Demiurge) of things material and animal, of those on the right and
those on the left, of the light and of the heavy, and of those tending
upwards as well as of those tending downwards. <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p6.2"></span>He created also seven heavens, above which
they say that he, the Demiurge, exists. <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p6.3"></span>And on this account they term him Hebdomas,
and his mother Achamoth Ogdoads, preserving the number of the
first-begotten and primary Ogdoad as the Pleroma. They affirm, moreover,
that these seven heavens are intelligent, and speak of them as being
angels, while they refer to the Demiurge himself as being an angel
bearing a likeness to God; and in the same strain, they declare that
Paradise, situated above the third heaven, is a fourth angel possessed
of power, from whom Adam derived certain qualities while he conversed
with him.

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p7"></span>3. <span id="ix.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>They go
on to say that the Demiurge imagined that he created all these things of
himself, while he in reality made them in conjunction with the
productive power of Achamoth. He formed the heavens, yet was ignorant of
the heavens; he fashioned man, yet knew not man; he brought to light the
earth, yet had no acquaintance with the earth; and, in like manner, they
declare that he was ignorant of the forms of all that he made, and knew
not even of the existence of his own mother, but imagined that he
himself was all things. They further affirm <span id="page_323">p.
323</span> <span id="ix.ii.vi-Page_323"></span> that his mother
originated this opinion in his mind, because she desired to bring him
forth possessed of such a character that he should be the head and
source of his own essence, and the absolute ruler over every kind of
operation \[that was afterwards attempted\]. This mother they also call
Ogdoad, Sophia, Terra, Jerusalem, Holy Spirit, and, with a masculine
reference, Lord. <span id="fr_2729"></span>[2730](#fn_2729.md) Her place of
habitation is an intermediate one, above the Demiurge indeed, but below
and outside of the Pleroma, even to the end. <span
id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730.md)

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p10"></span>4. <span id="ix.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>As,
then, they represent all material substance to be formed from three
passions, viz., fear, grief, and perplexity, the account they give is as
follows: <span id="ix.ii.vi-p10.2"></span>Animal substances originated
from fear and from conversion; the Demiurge they also describe as owing
his origin to conversion; but the existence of all the other animal
substances they ascribe to fear, such as the souls of irrational
animals, and of wild beasts, and men. And on this account, he (the
Demiurge), being incapable of recognising any spiritual essences,
imagined himself to be God alone, and declared through the prophets, “I
am God, and besides me there is none else.” <span
id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p11.3"></span>They further teach that the spirits of
wickedness derived their origin from grief. <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p11.4"></span>Hence the devil, whom they also call
Cosmocrator (the ruler of the world), and the demons, and the angels,
and every wicked spiritual being that exists, found the source of their
existence. They represent the Demiurge as being the son of that mother
of theirs (Achamoth), and Cosmocrator as the creature of the Demiurge.
Cosmocrator has knowledge of what is above himself, because he is a
*spirit* of wickedness; but the Demiurge is ignorant of such things,
inasmuch as he is merely *animal*. Their mother dwells in that place
which is above the heavens, that is, in the intermediate abode; the
Demiurge in the heavenly place, that is, in the hebdomad; but the
Cosmocrator in this our world. The corporeal elements of the world,
again, sprang, as we before remarked, from bewilderment and perplexity,
as from a more ignoble source. Thus the earth arose from her state of
stupor; water from the agitation caused by her fear; air from the
consolidation of her grief; while fire, producing death and corruption,
was inherent in all these elements, even as they teach that ignorance
also lay concealed in these three passions.

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p12"></span>5. <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p12.1"></span>Having thus formed the world, he (the
Demiurge) also created the earthy \[part of\] man, not taking him from
this dry earth, but from an invisible substance consisting of fusible
and fluid matter, and then afterwards, as they define the process,
breathed into him the animal part of his nature. It was this latter
which was created after his image and likeness. The material part,
indeed, was very near to God, so far as the image went, but not of the
same substance with him. The animal, on the other hand, was so in
respect to likeness; and hence his substance was called the spirit of
life, because it took its rise from a spiritual outflowing. After all
this, he was, they say, enveloped all round with a covering of skin; and
by this they mean the outward sensitive flesh.

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p13"></span>6. <span id="ix.ii.vi-p13.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.vi-p13.2"></span>But they further affirm that the Demiurge
himself was ignorant of that offspring of his mother Achamoth, which she
brought forth as a consequence of her contemplation of those angels who
waited on the Saviour, and which was, like herself, of a spiritual
nature. She took advantage of this ignorance to deposit it (her
production) in him without his knowledge, in order that, being by his
instrumentality infused into that animal soul proceeding from himself,
and being thus carried as in a womb in this material body, while it
gradually increased in strength, might in course of time become fitted
for the reception of perfect rationality. <span
id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732.md) Thus it came to pass, then,
according to them, that, without any knowledge on the part of the
Demiurge, the man formed by his inspiration was at the same time,
through an unspeakable providence, rendered a spiritual man by the
simultaneous inspiration received from Sophia. For, as he was ignorant
of his mother, so neither did he recognise her offspring. <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>This \[offspring\] they also declare to be
the Ecclesia, an emblem of the Ecclesia which is above. This, then, is
the kind of man whom they conceive of: he has his animal soul from the
Demiurge, his body from the earth, his fleshy part from matter, and his
spiritual man from the mother Achamoth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2725"></span>[322:2726](0010702.htm#fr_2725.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p2"></span> “In order that,” says Grabe, “this
formation might not be merely *according to essence*, but also
*according to knowledge*, as the formation of the mother Achamoth was
characterized above.”

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[322:2727](0010702.htm#fr_2726.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p2.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p3"></span> Metropator, as proceeding only from his
mother Achamoth: Apator, as having no male progenitor.

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[322:2728](0010702.htm#fr_2727.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p4"></span> Harvey remarks, “The Valentinian Saviour
being an aggregation of all the æonic perfections, the images of them
were reproduced by the spiritual conception of Achamoth beholding the
glory of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>Σωτήρ</span>. The reader will not fail to
observe that every successive development is the reflex of a more divine
antecedent.”

<span id="fn_2728"></span>[322:2729](0010702.htm#fr_2728.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p5"></span> The relation indicated seems to be as
follows: Achamoth, after being formed “according to knowledge,” was
outside of the Pleroma as the image of Propator, the Demiurge was as
Nous, and the mundane angels which he formed corresponded to the other
Æons of the Pleroma.

<span id="fn_2729"></span>[323:2730](0010702.htm#fr_2729.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p8"></span> “Achamoth by these names must be
understood to have an intermediate position between the divine
prototypal idea and creation: she was the reflex of the one, and
therefore *masculo-feminine*; she was the pattern to be realized in the
latter, and therefore was named *Earth and Jerusalem*.” —<span
class="upper"><span id="ix.ii.vi-p8.1"></span>Harvey</span>.

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[323:2731](0010702.htm#fr_2730.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p9"></span> But after the consummation here referred
to, Achamoth regained the Pleroma: see below, chap. vii. 1.

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[323:2732](0010702.htm#fr_2731.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p11"></span> [Isa.
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#006.md)<span id="ix.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>,
[Isa. xlvi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#009.md)<span
id="ix.ii.vi-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[323:2733](0010702.htm#fr_2732.md) <span
id="ix.ii.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.vi-p14"></span> An account is here given of the infusion
of a spiritual principle into mankind. The Demiurge himself could give
no more than the animal soul; but, unwittingly to himself, he was made
the instrument of conveying that spiritual essence from Achamoth, which
had grown up within her from the contemplation of those angels who
accompanied the Saviour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.—The threefold kind of...](0010703.md)
