[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010757)  [Next](0010759.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.xxix"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.xxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—Perfect knowledge cannot be attained in the present life: many questions must be submissively left in the hands of God.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iii.xxix-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p1.3"></span>Having therefore the truth itself as our
rule and the testimony concerning God set clearly before us, we ought
not, by running after numerous and diverse answers to questions, to cast
away the firm and true knowledge of God. But it is much more suitable
that we, directing our inquiries after this fashion, should exercise
ourselves in the investigation of the mystery and administration of the
living God, and should increase in the love of Him who has done, and
still does, so great things for us; but never should fall from the
belief by which it is most clearly proclaimed that this Being alone is
truly God and Father, who both formed this world, fashioned man, and
bestowed the faculty of increase on His own creation, and called him
upwards from lesser things to those greater ones which are in His own
presence, just as He brings an infant which has been conceived in the
womb into the light of the sun, and lays up wheat in the barn after He
has given it full strength on the stalk. But it is one and the same
Creator who both fashioned the womb and created the sun; and one and the
same Lord who both reared the stalk of corn, increased and multiplied
the wheat, and prepared the barn.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p2"></span>2. If, however, we cannot discover
explanations of all those things in Scripture which are made the subject
of investigation, yet let us not on that account seek after any other
God besides Him who really exists. For this is the very greatest
impiety. We should leave things of that nature to God who created us,
being most properly assured that the Scriptures are indeed perfect,
since they were spoken by the Word of God and His Spirit; but we,
inasmuch as we are inferior to, and later in existence than, the Word of
God and His Spirit, are on that very account <span
id="fr_3212"></span>[3213](#fn_3212.md) destitute of the knowledge of His
mysteries. And there is no cause for wonder if this is the case with us
as respects things spiritual and heavenly, and such as require to be
made known to us by revelation, since many even of those things which
lie at our very feet (I mean such as belong to this world, which we
handle, and see, and are in close contact with) transcend our knowledge,
so that even these we must leave to God. For it is fitting that He
should excel all \[in knowledge\]. For how stands the case, for
instance, if we endeavour to explain the cause of the rising of the
Nile? We may say a great deal, plausible or otherwise, on the subject;
but what is true, sure, and incontrovertible regarding it, belongs only
to God. Then, again, the dwelling-place of birds—of those, I mean, which
come to us in spring, but fly away again on the approach of
autumn—though it is a matter connected with this world, escapes our
knowledge. What explanation, again, can we give of the flow and ebb of
the ocean, although every one admits there must be a certain cause \[for
these phenomena\]? Or what can we say as to the nature of those things
which lie beyond it? <span id="fr_3213"></span>[3214](#fn_3213.md) What,
moreover, can we say as to the formation of rain, lightning, thunder,
gatherings of clouds, vapours, the bursting forth of winds, and such
like things; or tell as to the storehouses of snow, hail, and other like
things? \[What do we know respecting\] the conditions requisite for the
preparation of clouds, or what is the real nature of the vapours in the
sky? What as to the reason why the moon waxes and wanes, or what as to
the cause of the difference of nature among various waters, metals,
stones, and such like things? <span id="ix.iii.xxix-p4.1"></span>On all
these points we may indeed say a great deal while we search into their
causes, but God alone who made them can declare the truth regarding
them.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p5"></span>3. If, therefore, even with respect to
creation, there are some things \[the knowledge of\] which belongs only
to God, and others which come within the range of our own knowledge,
what ground is there for complaint, if, in regard to those things which
we investigate in the Scriptures (which are throughout spiritual), we
are able by the grace of God to explain some of them, while we must
leave others in the hands of God, and that not only in the present
world, but also in that which is to come, so that God should for ever
teach, and man should for ever learn the things taught him by God? <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p5.1"></span>As the apostle has said on this point,
that, when other things have been done away, then these three, “faith,
hope, and charity, shall endure.” <span
id="fr_3214"></span>[3215](#fn_3214.md) For faith, which has respect to our
Master, endures <span id="fr_3215"></span>[3216](#fn_3215.md) unchangeably,
<span id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-Page_400"></span> assuring us that there is but one true
God, and that we should truly love Him for ever, seeing that He alone is
our Father; while we hope ever to be receiving more and more from God,
and to learn from Him, because He is good, and possesses boundless
riches, a kingdom without end, and instruction that can never be
exhausted. If, therefore, according to the rule which I have stated, we
leave some questions in the hands of God, we shall both preserve our
faith uninjured, and shall continue without danger; and all Scripture,
which has been given to us by God, shall be found by us perfectly
consistent; and the parables shall harmonize with those passages which
are perfectly plain; and those statements the meaning of which is clear,
shall serve to explain the parables; and through the many diversified
utterances \[of Scripture\] there shall be heard <span
id="fr_3216"></span>[3217](#fn_3216.md) one harmonious melody in us,
praising in hymns that God who created all things. If, for instance, any
one asks, “What was God doing before He made the world?” we reply that
the answer to such a question lies with God Himself. For that this world
was formed perfect <span id="fr_3217"></span>[3218](#fn_3217.md) by God,
receiving a beginning in time, the Scriptures teach us; but no Scripture
reveals to us what God was employed about before this event. The answer
therefore to that question remains with God, and it is not proper <span
id="fr_3218"></span>[3219](#fn_3218.md) for us to aim at bringing forward
foolish, rash, and blasphemous suppositions \[in reply to it\]; so, as
by one’s imagining that he has discovered the origin of matter, he
should in reality set aside God Himself who made all things.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p11"></span>4. For consider, all ye who invent
such opinions, since the Father Himself is alone called God, who has a
real existence, but whom ye style the Demiurge; since, moreover, the
Scriptures acknowledge Him alone as God; and yet again, since the Lord
confesses Him alone as His own Father, and knows no other, as I shall
show from His very words, —when ye style this very Being the fruit of
defect, and the offspring of ignorance, and describe Him as being
ignorant of those things which are above Him, with the various other
allegations which you make regarding Him,—consider the terrible
blasphemy \[ye are thus guilty of\] against Him who truly is God. Ye
seem to affirm gravely and honestly enough that ye believe in God; but
then, as ye are utterly unable to reveal any other God, ye declare this
very Being in whom ye profess to believe, the fruit of defect and the
offspring of ignorance. Now this blindness and foolish talking flow to
you from the fact that ye reserve nothing for God, but ye wish to
proclaim the nativity and production both of God Himself, of His Ennœa,
of His Logos, and Life, and Christ; and ye form the idea of these from
no other than a mere human experience; not understanding, as I said
before, that it is possible, in the case of man, who is a compound
being, to speak in this way of the mind of man and the thought of man;
and to say that thought (ennœa) springs from mind (sensus), intention
(enthymesis) again from thought, and word (logos) from intention (but
which logos? <span id="fr_3219"></span>[3220](#fn_3219.md) for there is
among the Greeks one logos which is the principle that thinks, and
another which is the instrument by means of which thought is expressed);
and \[to say\] that a man sometimes is at rest and silent, while at
other times he speaks and is active. But since God is <span
id="fr_3220"></span>[3221](#fn_3220.md) all mind, all reason, all active
spirit, all light, and always exists one and the same, as it is both
beneficial for us to think of God, and as we learn regarding Him from
the Scriptures, such feelings and divisions \[of operation\] cannot
fittingly be ascribed to Him. For our tongue, as being carnal, is not
sufficient to minister to the rapidity of the human mind, inasmuch as
that is of a spiritual nature, for which reason our word is
restrained <span id="fr_3221"></span>[3222](#fn_3221.md) within us, and is
not at once expressed as it has been conceived by the mind, but is
uttered by successive efforts, just as the tongue is able to serve it.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p15"></span>5. But God being all Mind, and all
Logos, both speaks exactly what He thinks, and thinks exactly what He
speaks. For His thought is Logos, and Logos is Mind, and Mind
comprehending all things is the Father Himself. He, therefore, who
speaks of the mind of God, and ascribes to it a special origin of its
own, declares Him a compound Being, as if God were one thing, and the
original Mind another. So, again, with respect to Logos, when one
attributes to him the third <span id="fr_3222"></span>[3223](#fn_3222.md)
place of production from the Father; on which supposition he is ignorant
of His greatness; and thus Logos has been far separated from God. As for
the prophet, he declares respecting Him, “Who shall describe His
generation?” <span id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223.md) But ye pretend
to set forth His generation from the Father, and ye transfer the
production of the word of men which takes place by means of a tongue to
the Word of God, and thus are righteously exposed by your own <span
id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxix-Page_401"></span>
selves as knowing neither things human nor divine.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p18"></span>6. But, beyond reason inflated \[with
your own wisdom\], ye presumptuously maintain that ye are acquainted
with the unspeakable mysteries of God; while even the Lord, the very Son
of God, allowed that the Father alone knows the very day and hour of
judgment, when He plainly declares, “But of that day and that hour
knoweth no man, neither the Son, but the Father only.” <span
id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224.md) If, then, the Son was not ashamed
to ascribe the knowledge of that day to the Father only, but declared
what was true regarding the matter, neither let us be ashamed to reserve
for God those greater questions which may occur to us. For no man is
superior to his master. <span id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225.md) If
any one, therefore, says to us, “How then was the Son produced by the
Father?” we reply to him, that no man understands that production, or
generation, or calling, or revelation, or by whatever name one may
describe His generation, which is in fact altogether indescribable.
Neither Valentinus, nor Marcion, nor Saturninus, nor Basilides, nor
angels, nor archangels, nor principalities, nor powers \[possess this
knowledge\], but the Father only who begat, and the Son who was
begotten. Since therefore His generation is unspeakable, those who
strive to set forth generations and productions cannot be in their right
mind, inasmuch as they undertake to describe things which are
indescribable. For that a word is uttered at the bidding of thought and
mind, all men indeed well understand. Those, therefore, who have
excogitated \[the theory of\] emissions have not discovered anything
great, or revealed any abstruse mystery, when they have simply
transferred what all understand to the only-begotten Word of God; and
while they style Him unspeakable and unnameable, they nevertheless set
forth the production and formation of His first generation, as if they
themselves had assisted at His birth, thus assimilating Him to the word
of mankind formed by emissions.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p21"></span>7. But we shall not be wrong if we
affirm the same thing also concerning the substance of matter, that God
produced it. For we have learned from the Scriptures that God holds the
supremacy over all things. But whence or in what way He produced it,
neither has Scripture anywhere declared; nor does it become us to
conjecture, so as, in accordance with our own opinions, to form endless
conjectures concerning God, but we should leave such knowledge in the
hands of God Himself. In like manner, also, we must leave the cause why,
while all things were made by God, certain of His creatures sinned and
revolted from a state of submission to God, and others, indeed the great
majority, persevered, and do still persevere, in \[willing\] subjection
to Him who formed them, and also of what nature those are who sinned,
and of what nature those who persevere,—\[we must, I say, leave the
cause of these things\] to God and His Word, to whom alone He said, “Sit
at my right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool.” <span
id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226.md) But as for us, we still dwell upon
the earth, and have not yet sat down upon His throne. For although the
Spirit of the Saviour that is in Him “searcheth all things, even the
deep things of God,” <span id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227.md) yet as
to us “there are diversities of gifts, differences of administrations,
and diversities of operations;” <span
id="fr_3228"></span>[3229](#fn_3228.md) and we, while upon the earth, as
Paul also declares, “know in part, and prophesy in part.” <span
id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229.md) Since, therefore, we know but in
part, we ought to leave all sorts of \[difficult\] questions in the
hands of Him who in some measure, \[and that only,\] bestows grace on
us. That eternal fire, \[for instance,\] is prepared for sinners, both
the Lord has plainly declared, and the rest of the Scriptures
demonstrate. And that God foreknew that this would happen, the
Scriptures do in like manner demonstrate, since He prepared eternal fire
from the beginning for those who were \[afterwards\] to transgress \[His
commandments\]; but the cause itself of the nature of such transgressors
neither has any Scripture informed us, nor has an apostle told us, nor
has the Lord taught us. It becomes us, therefore, to leave the knowledge
of this matter to God, even as the Lord does of the day and hour \[of
judgment\], and not to rush to such an extreme of danger, that we will
leave nothing in the hands of God, even though we have received only a
measure of grace \[from Him in this world\]. But when we investigate
points which are above us, and with respect to which we cannot reach
satisfaction, \[it is absurd <span id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230.md)
\] that we should display such an extreme of presumption as to lay open
God, and things which are not yet discovered, <span
id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231.md) as if already we had found out, by
the vain talk about emissions, God Himself, the Creator of all things,
and to assert that He derived His substance from apostasy and ignorance,
so as to frame an impious hypothesis in opposition to God.

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p28"></span>8. Moreover, they possess no proof of
their system, which has but recently been invented by them, sometimes
resting upon certain numbers, sometimes on syllables, and sometimes,
again, on names; and there are occasions, too, when, <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span id="ix.iii.xxix-Page_402"></span> by
means of those letters which are contained in letters, by parables not
properly interpreted, or by certain \[baseless\] conjectures, they
strive to establish that fabulous account which they have devised. For
if any one should inquire the reason why the Father, who has fellowship
with the Son in all things, has been declared by the Lord alone to know
the hour and the day \[of judgment\], he will find at present no more
suitable, or becoming, or safe reason than this (since, indeed, the Lord
is the only true Master), that we may learn through Him that the Father
is above all things. For “the Father,” says He, “is greater than
I.” <span id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232.md) The Father, therefore,
has been declared by our Lord to excel with respect to knowledge; for
this reason, that we, too, as long as we are connected with the scheme
of things in this world, should leave perfect knowledge, and such
questions \[as have been mentioned\], to God, and should not by any
chance, while we seek to investigate the sublime nature of the Father,
fall into the danger of starting the question whether there is another
God above God. <span id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233.md)

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p31"></span>9. But if any lover of strife
contradict what I have said, and also what the apostle affirms, that “we
know in part, and prophesy in part,” <span
id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234.md) and imagine that he has acquired
not a partial, but a universal, knowledge of all that exists, —being
such an one as Valentinus, or Ptolemæus, or Basilides, or any other of
those who maintain that they have searched out the deep <span
id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235.md) things of God,—let him not
(arraying himself in vainglory) boast that he has acquired greater
knowledge than others with respect to those things which are invisible,
or cannot be placed under our observation; but let him, by making
diligent inquiry, and obtaining information from the Father, tell us the
reasons (which we know not) of those things which are in this world,
—as, for instance, the number of hairs on his own head, and the sparrows
which are captured day by day, and such other points with which we are
not previously acquainted,—so that we may credit him also with respect
to more important points. But if those who are *perfect* do not yet
understand the very things in their hands, and at their feet, and before
their eyes, and on the earth, and especially the rule followed with
respect to the hairs of their head, how can we believe them regarding
things spiritual, and super-celestial, <span
id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236.md) and those which, with a vain
confidence, they assert to be above God? So much, then, I have said
concerning numbers, and names, and syllables, and questions respecting
such things as are above our comprehension, and concerning their
improper expositions of the parables: \[I add no more on these points,\]
since thou thyself mayest enlarge upon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3212"></span>[399:3213](0010758.htm#fr_3212.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p3"></span> Or, “to that degree.”

<span id="fn_3213"></span>[399:3214](0010758.htm#fr_3213.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p4"></span> Comp. Clem. Rom. *Ep. to Cor.*, c.
xx.; and August, *De. Civit Dei*, xvi. 9.

<span id="fn_3214"></span>[399:3215](0010758.htm#fr_3214.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3215"></span>[399:3216](0010758.htm#fr_3215.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p7"></span> “Permanet firma,”—no doubt
corresponding to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p7.1"></span>μένει</span> of the apostle, [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p7.2"></span>.
Harvey here remarks, that “the author seems to misapprehend the
apostle’s meaning…. There will be no longer room for hope, when the
substance of things hoped for shall have become a matter of fruition;
neither will there be any room for faith, when the soul shall be
admitted to see God as He is.” But the best modern interpreters take the
same view of the passage as Irenæus. They regard the <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxix-p7.3"></span>νυνὶ δέ</span> of St.
Paul as not being *temporal*, but *logical*, and conclude therefore the
meaning to be, that *faith* and *hope*, as well as *love*, will, in a
sense, endure for ever. Comp., e.g., Alford, *in loc*.

<span id="fn_3216"></span>[400:3217](0010758.htm#fr_3216.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p8"></span> The Latin text is here
untranslateable. Grabe proposes to read, “*una consonans melodia in
nobis sentietur*;” while Stieren and others prefer to exchange <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxix-p8.1"></span>αἰσθήσεται</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxix-p8.2"></span>ἀσθήσεται</span>.

<span id="fn_3217"></span>[400:3218](0010758.htm#fr_3217.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p9"></span> “Apotelesticos.” This word, says
Harvey, “may also refer to the vital energy of nature, whereby its
effects are for ever reproduced in unceasing succession.” Comp. Hippol.,
*Philos.*, vii. 24.

<span id="fn_3218"></span>[400:3219](0010758.htm#fr_3218.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p10"></span> We here follow Grabe, who understands
*decet*. Harvey less simply explains the very obscure Latin text.

<span id="fn_3219"></span>[400:3220](0010758.htm#fr_3219.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p12"></span> The Greek term <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxix-p12.1"></span>λόγος</span>, as is
well known, denotes both *ratio* (reason) and *sermo* (speech). Some
deem the above parenthesis an interpolation.

<span id="fn_3220"></span>[400:3221](0010758.htm#fr_3220.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p13"></span> Comp. i. 12, 2.

<span id="fn_3221"></span>[400:3222](0010758.htm#fr_3221.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p14"></span> “Suffugatur:” some read “suffocatur;”
and Harvey proposes “suffragatur,” as the representative of the Greek
<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p14.1"></span>ψηφίζεται</span>. The meaning in any case
is, that while ideas are instantaneously formed in the human mind, they
can be expressed through means of words only fractionally, and by
successive utterances.

<span id="fn_3222"></span>[400:3223](0010758.htm#fr_3222.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p16"></span> Thus: *Bythus, Nous, Logos*.

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[400:3224](0010758.htm#fr_3223.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p17"></span> [Isa. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[401:3225](0010758.htm#fr_3224.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p19"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p19.1"></span>. The words, “neither the angels which are
in heaven,” are here omitted, probably because, as usual, the writer
quotes from memory.

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[401:3226](0010758.htm#fr_3225.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p20"></span> Comp. [Matt. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p20.1"></span>; [Luke xi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#040.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p20.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[401:3227](0010758.htm#fr_3226.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p22"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[401:3228](0010758.htm#fr_3227.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p23"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3228"></span>[401:3229](0010758.htm#fr_3228.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p24"></span> [1 Cor.
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[401:3230](0010758.htm#fr_3229.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p25"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[401:3231](0010758.htm#fr_3230.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p26"></span> Massuet proposes to insert these
words, and some such supplement seems clearly necessary to complete the
sense. But the sentence still remains confused and doubtful.

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[401:3232](0010758.htm#fr_3231.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p27"></span> \[[Gen. xl.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p27.1"></span>;
[Deut. xxix. 29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p27.2"></span>; [Ps.
cxxxi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#000.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p27.3"></span>\]

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[402:3233](0010758.htm#fr_3232.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p29"></span> [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[402:3234](0010758.htm#fr_3233.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p30"></span> \[On the great matter of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iii.xxix-p30.1"></span>περιχώρησις</span>,
the subordination of the Son, etc., Bull has explored Patristic
doctrine, and may well be consulted here. *Defens. Fid. Nicænæ*, sect.
iv.; see also vol. v. 363\]

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[402:3235](0010758.htm#fr_3234.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p32"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[402:3236](0010758.htm#fr_3235.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p33"></span> “Altitudines,” literally, *heights*.

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[402:3237](0010758.htm#fr_3236.md) <span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.xxix-p34"></span> \[[Wis.
9:13](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#013.md),
[17](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#017.md)<span
id="ix.iii.xxix-p34.1"></span>. A passage of marvellous beauty.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX.—Refutation of the...](0010759.md)
