[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010734)  [Next](0010736) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iii.vi"></span>

### <span id="ix.iii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—This world was not formed by any other beings within the territory which is contained by the Father.

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>The
remarks, therefore, which I made a little while ago <span
id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005) are suitable in answer to those who
assert that this world was formed outside of the Pleroma, or under a
“good God;” and such persons, with the Father they speak of, will be
quite cut off from that which is outside the Pleroma, in which, at the
same time, it is necessary that they should finally rest. <span
id="fr_3006"></span>[3007](#fn_3006) In answer to those, again, who
maintain that this world was formed by certain other beings within that
territory which is contained by the Father, all those points which have
now <span id="fr_3007"></span>[3008](#fn_3007) been noticed will present
themselves \[as exhibiting their\] absurdities and incoherencies; and
they will be compelled either to acknowledge all those things which are
within the Father, lucid, full, and energetic, or to accuse the light of
the Father as if He could not illuminate all things; or, as a portion of
their Pleroma \[is so described\], the whole of it must be confessed to
be void, chaotic, and full of darkness. And they accuse all other
created things as if these were merely temporal, or \[at the best\], if
eternal, <span id="fr_3008"></span>[3009](#fn_3008) yet material.
But <span id="fr_3009"></span>[3010](#fn_3009) these (the Æons) ought to
be regarded as beyond the reach of such accusations, since they are
within the Pleroma, or the charges in question will equally fall against
the entire Pleroma; and thus the Christ of whom they speak is discovered
to be the author of ignorance. For, according to their statements, when
He had given a form so far as substance was concerned to the Mother they
conceive of, He cast her outside of the Pleroma; that is, He cut her off
from knowledge. He, therefore, who separated her from knowledge, did in
reality produce ignorance in her. How then could the very same person
bestow the gift of knowledge on the rest of the Æons, those who were
anterior to Him \[in production\], and yet be the author of ignorance to
His Mother? For He placed her beyond the pale of knowledge, when He cast
her outside of the Pleroma.

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p7"></span>2. Moreover, if they explain being within
and without the Pleroma as implying knowledge and ignorance
respectively, as certain of them do (since he who has knowledge is
within that which knows), then they must of necessity grant that the
Saviour Himself (whom they designate *All Things*) was in a state of
ignorance. For they maintain that, on His coming forth outside of the
Pleroma, He imparted form to their Mother \[Achamoth\]. If, then, they
assert that whatever is outside \[the Pleroma\] is ignorant of all
things, and if the Saviour went forth to impart form to their Mother,
then He was situated beyond the pale of the knowledge of all things;
that is, He was in ignorance. How then could He communicate knowledge to
her, when He Himself was beyond the pale of knowledge? For we, too, they
declare to be outside the Pleroma, inasmuch as we are outside of the
knowledge which they possess. And once more: If the Saviour really went
forth beyond the Pleroma to seek after the sheep which was lost, but the
Pleroma is \[co-extensive with\] knowledge, then He placed Himself
beyond the pale of knowledge, that is, in ignorance. For it is necessary
either that they grant that what is outside the Pleroma is so in a local
sense, in which case all the remarks formerly made will rise up against
them; or if they speak of that which is within in regard to knowledge,
and of that which is without in respect to ignorance, then their
Saviour, and Christ long before Him, must have been formed in ignorance,
inasmuch as they went forth beyond the Pleroma, that is, beyond the pale
of knowledge, in order to impart form to their Mother.

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p8"></span>3. These arguments may, in like manner,
be adapted to meet the case of all those who, in any way, maintain that
the world was formed either by angels or by any other one than the true
God. For the charges which they bring against the Demiurge, and those
things which were made material and temporal, will in truth fall back on
the Father; if indeed the <span id="fr_3010"></span>[3011](#fn_3010)
very things which <span id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span
id="ix.iii.vi-Page_365"></span> were formed in the bosom of the Pleroma
began by and by in fact to be dissolved, in accordance with the
permission and good-will of the Father. The \[immediate\] Creator, then,
is not the \[real\] Author of this work, thinking, as He did, that He
formed it very good, but *He* who allows and approves of the productions
of defect, and the works of error having a place among his own
possessions, and that temporal things should be mixed up with eternal,
corruptible with incorruptible, and those which partake of error with
those which belong to truth. If, however, these things were formed
without the permission or approbation of the Father of all, then that
Being must be more powerful, stronger, and more kingly, who made these
things within a territory which properly belongs to Him (the Father),
and did so without His permission. If again, as some say, their Father
permitted these things without approving of them, then He gave the
permission on account of some necessity, being either able to prevent
\[such procedure\], or not able. But if indeed He could not \[hinder
it\], then He is weak and powerless; while, if He could, He is a
seducer, a hypocrite, and a slave of necessity, inasmuch as He does not
consent \[to such a course\], and yet allows it as if He did consent.
And allowing error to arise at the first, and to go on increasing, He
endeavours in later times to destroy it, when already many have
miserably perished on account of the \[original\] defect.

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p10"></span>4. It is not seemly, however, to say of
Him who is God over all, since He is free and independent, that He was a
slave to necessity, or that anything takes place with His permission,
yet against His desire; otherwise they will make necessity greater and
more kingly than God, since that which has the most power is
superior <span id="fr_3011"></span>[3012](#fn_3011) to all \[others\].
And He ought at the very beginning to have cut off the causes of \[the
fancied\] necessity, and not to have allowed Himself to be shut up to
yielding to that necessity, by permitting anything besides that which
became Him. For it would have been much better, more consistent, and
more God-like, to cut off at the beginning the principle of this kind of
necessity, than afterwards, as if moved by repentance, to endeavour to
extirpate the results of necessity when they had reached such a
development. And if the Father of all be a slave to necessity, and must
yield to fate, while He unwillingly tolerates the things which are done,
but is at the same time powerless to do anything in opposition to
necessity and fate (like the Homeric Jupiter, who says of necessity, “I
have willingly given thee, yet with unwilling mind”), then, according to
this reasoning, the Bythus of whom they speak will be found to be the
slave of necessity and fate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[364:3006](0010735.htm#fr_3005) <span
id="ix.iii.vi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p2"></span> See above, chap. i.

<span id="fn_3006"></span>[364:3007](0010735.htm#fr_3006) <span
id="ix.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p3"></span> The Latin text here is, “et concludentur
tales cum patre suo ab eo qui est extra Pleroma, in quo etiam et
desinere eos necesse est.” None of the editors notice the difficulty or
obscurity of the clause, but it appears to us absolutely
untranslateable. We have rendered it as if the reading were “ab eo
*quod,*” though, if the strict grammatical construction be followed, the
translation must be, “from *Him* who.” But then to what does “in quo,”
which follows, refer? It may be ascribed either to the immediate
antecedent *Pleroma*, or to *Him* who is described as being beyond it.

<span id="fn_3007"></span>[364:3008](0010735.htm#fr_3007) <span
id="ix.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p4"></span> Chap. ii., iii., iv.

<span id="fn_3008"></span>[364:3009](0010735.htm#fr_3008) <span
id="ix.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p5"></span> This is an extremely difficult passage.
We follow the reading *æternochoica* adopted by Massuet, but Harvey
reads *æterna choica*, and renders, “They charge all other substance
(i.e., spiritual) with the imperfections of the material creation, as
though Æon substance were equally ephemeral and choic.”

<span id="fn_3009"></span>[364:3010](0010735.htm#fr_3009) <span
id="ix.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p6"></span> The common reading is “aut;” we adopt
Harvey’s conjectural emendation of “at.”

<span id="fn_3010"></span>[364:3011](0010735.htm#fr_3010) <span
id="ix.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p9"></span> The above clause is very obscure;
Massuet reads it interrogatively.

<span id="fn_3011"></span>[365:3012](0010735.htm#fr_3011) <span
id="ix.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii.vi-p11"></span> The text has “antiquius,” literally
“more ancient,” but it may here be rendered as above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.—The angels and the...](0010736)
