[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010553)  [Next](0010555) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.xciii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.xciii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XCIII.—The same kind of righteousness is bestowed on all. Christ comprehends it in two precepts.

<span id="viii.iv.xciii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xciii-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.xciii-p1.2"></span>“For
\[God\] sets before every race of mankind that which is always and
universally just, as well as all righteousness; and every race knows
that adultery, and fornication, and homicide, <span
id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311) and such like, are sinful; and
though they all commit such practices, yet they do not escape from the
knowledge that they act unrighteously whenever they so do, with the
exception of those who are possessed with an unclean spirit, and who
have been debased by education, by wicked customs, and by sinful
institutions, and who have lost, or rather quenched and put under, their
natural ideas. For we may see that such persons are unwilling to submit
to the same things which they inflict upon others, and reproach each
other with hostile consciences for the acts which they perpetrate. <span
id="viii.iv.xciii-p2.4"></span>And hence I think that our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ spoke well when He summed up all righteousness and
piety in two commandments. They are these: ‘Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbour as
thyself.’ <span id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) For the man who
loves God with all the heart, and with all the strength, being filled
with a God-fearing mind, will reverence no other god; and since God
wishes it, he would reverence that angel who is beloved by the same Lord
and God. And the man who loves his neighbour as himself will wish for
him the same good things that he wishes for himself, and no man will
wish evil things for himself. Accordingly, he who loves his neighbour
would pray and labour that his neighbour may be possessed of the same
benefits as himself. Now nothing else is neighbour to man than that
similarly-affectioned and reasonable being—man. Therefore, since all
righteousness is divided into two branches, namely, in so far as it
regards God and men, whoever, says the Scripture, loves the Lord God
with all the heart, and all the strength, and his neighbour as himself,
would be truly a righteous man. <span id="viii.iv.xciii-p3.2"></span>But
you were never shown to be possessed of friendship or love either
towards God, or towards the prophets, or towards yourselves, but, as is
evident, you are ever found to be idolaters and murderers of righteous
men, so that you laid hands even on Christ Himself; and to this very day
you abide in your wickedness, execrating those who prove that this man
who was crucified by you is the Christ. Nay, more than this, you suppose
that He was crucified as hostile to and cursed by God, which supposition
is the product of your most irrational mind. For though you have the
means of understanding that this man is Christ from the signs given by
Moses, yet you will not; but, in addition, fancying that we can have no
arguments, you put whatever question comes into your minds, while you
yourselves are at a loss for arguments whenever you meet with some
firmly established Christian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[246:2312](0010554.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="viii.iv.xciii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xciii-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.iv.xciii-p2.1"></span>ἀνδρομανία</span> is read in <span
class="upper"><span id="viii.iv.xciii-p2.2"></span>mss.</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iv.xciii-p2.3"></span>ἀνδροφονία</span>.

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[246:2313](0010554.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="viii.iv.xciii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xciii-p3"></span> [Matt. xxii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="viii.iv.xciii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCIV.—In what sense he who...](0010555)
