[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010719)  [Next](0010721) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—Doctrines and practices of Simon Magus and Menander.

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p1.2"></span>Simon the
Samaritan was that magician of whom Luke, the disciple and follower of
the apostles, says, “But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who
beforetime used magical arts in that city, and led astray the people of
Samaria, declaring that he himself was some great one, to whom they all
gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This is the power of
God, which is called great. And to him they had regard, because that of
long time he had driven them mad by his sorceries.” <span
id="fr_2933"></span>[2934](#fn_2933) This Simon, then—who feigned faith,
supposing that the apostles themselves performed their cures by the art
of magic, and not by the power of God; and with respect to their filling
with the Holy Ghost, through the imposition of hands, those that
believed in God through Him who was preached by them, namely, Christ
Jesus—suspecting that even this was done through a kind of greater
knowledge of magic, and offering money to the apostles, thought he, too,
might receive this power of bestowing the Holy Spirit on whomsoever he
would,—was addressed in these words by Peter: “Thy money perish with
thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God can be purchased
with money: thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart
is not right in the sight of God; for I perceive that thou art in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.” <span
id="fr_2934"></span>[2935](#fn_2934) He, then, not putting faith in God
a whit the more, set himself eagerly to contend against the apostles, in
order that he himself might seem to be a wonderful being, and applied
himself with still greater zeal to the study of the whole magic art,
that he might the better bewilder and overpower multitudes of men. <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>Such was his procedure in the reign of
Claudius Cæsar, by whom also he is said to have been honoured with a
statue, on account of his <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-Page_348"></span> magical power. <span
id="fr_2935"></span>[2936](#fn_2935) This man, then, was glorified by
many as if he were a god; and he taught that it was himself who appeared
among the Jews as the Son, but descended in Samaria as the Father while
he came to other nations in the character of the Holy Spirit. He
represented himself, in a word, as being the loftiest of all powers,
that is, the Being who is the Father over all, and he allowed himself to
be called by whatsoever title men were pleased to address him.

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p5"></span>2. Now this Simon of Samaria, from whom
all sorts of heresies derive their origin, formed his sect out of the
following materials:—<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p5.2"></span>Having redeemed from slavery at Tyre, a city
of Phœnicia, a certain woman named Helena, he was in the habit of
carrying her about with him, declaring that this woman was the first
conception of his mind, the mother of all, by whom, in the beginning, he
conceived in his mind \[the thought\] of forming angels and archangels.
For this Ennœa leaping forth from him, and comprehending the will of her
father, descended to the lower regions \[of space\], and generated
angels and powers, by whom also he declared this world was formed. But
after she had produced them, she was detained by them through motives of
jealousy, because they were unwilling to be looked upon as the progeny
of any other being. As to himself, they had no knowledge of him
whatever; but his Ennœa was detained by those powers and angels who had
been produced by her. She suffered all kinds of contumely from them, so
that she could not return upwards to her father, but was even shut up in
a human body, and for ages passed in succession from one female body to
another, as from vessel to vessel. She was, for example, in that Helen
on whose account the Trojan war was undertaken; for whose sake also
<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p5.3"></span>Stesichorus <span
id="fr_2936"></span>[2937](#fn_2936) was struck blind, because he had
cursed her in his verses, but afterwards, repenting and writing what are
called *palinodes*, in which he sang her praise, he was restored to
sight. Thus she, passing from body to body, and suffering insults in
every one of them, at last became a common prostitute; and she it was
that was meant by the lost sheep. <span
id="fr_2937"></span>[2938](#fn_2937)

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p8"></span>3. For this purpose, then, he had come
that he might win her first, and free her from slavery, while he
conferred salvation upon men, by making himself known to them. For since
the angels ruled the world ill because each one of them coveted the
principal power for himself, he had come to amend matters, and had
descended, transfigured and assimilated to powers and principalities and
angels, so that he might appear among men to be a man, while yet he was
not a man; and that thus he was thought to have suffered in Judæa, when
he had not suffered. Moreover, the prophets uttered their predictions
under the inspiration of those angels who formed the world; for which
reason those who place their trust in him and Helena no longer regarded
them, but, as being free, live as they please; for men are saved through
his grace, and not on account of their own righteous actions. For such
deeds are not righteous in the nature of things, but by mere accident,
just as those angels who made the world, have thought fit to constitute
them, seeking, by means of such precepts, to bring men into bondage. On
this account, he pledged himself that the world should be dissolved, and
that those who are his should be freed from the rule of them who made
the world.

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p9"></span>4. <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p9.1"></span>Thus, then, the mystic priests belonging to
this sect both lead profligate lives and practise magical arts, each one
to the extent of his ability. They use exorcisms and incantations.
Love-potions, too, and charms, as well as those beings who are called
“Paredri” (familiars) and “Oniropompi” (dream-senders), and whatever
other curious arts can be had recourse to, are eagerly pressed into
their service. They also have an image of Simon fashioned after the
likeness of Jupiter, and another of Helena in the shape of Minerva; and
these they worship. In fine, they have a name derived from Simon, the
author of these most impious doctrines, being called Simonians; and from
them “knowledge, falsely so called,” <span
id="fr_2938"></span>[2939](#fn_2938) received its beginning, as one may
learn even from their own assertions.

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p11"></span>5. <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p11.1"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p11.2"></span>The
successor of this man was Menander, also a Samaritan by birth, and he,
too, was a perfect adept in the practice of magic. He affirms that the
primary Power continues unknown to all, but that he himself is the
person who has been sent forth from the presence of the invisible beings
as a saviour, for the deliverance of men. The world was made by angels,
whom, like Simon, he maintains to have been produced by Ennœa. He gives,
too, as he affirms, by means of that magic which he teaches, knowledge
to this effect, that one may overcome those very angels that made the
world; for his disciples obtain the *resurrection* by being baptized
into him, and can die no more, but remain in the possession of immortal
youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2933"></span>[347:2934](0010720.htm#fr_2933) <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p2"></span> [Acts viii.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009)<span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2934"></span>[347:2935](0010720.htm#fr_2934) <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> [Acts
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#023)<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2935"></span>[348:2936](0010720.htm#fr_2935) <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> Comp. Just. Mart., *Apol.*, i. 26. It
is generally supposed that Simon Magus was thus confounded with the
Sabine god, Semo Sancus; but see our note, *loc. cit.* \[And mine at end
of the First Apology. Consult *Orelli’s Inscriptions* there noted.\]

<span id="fn_2936"></span>[348:2937](0010720.htm#fr_2936) <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p6"></span> A lyric poet of Sicily, said to have
been dealt with, as stated above, by Castor and Pollux.

<span id="fn_2937"></span>[348:2938](0010720.htm#fr_2937) <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p7"></span> [Matt. xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#012)<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2938"></span>[348:2939](0010720.htm#fr_2938) <span
id="ix.ii.xxiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p10"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span id="ix.ii.xxiv-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV.—Doctrines of...](0010721)
