[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010704)  [Next](0010706) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ix"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—How the Valentinians pervert the Scriptures to support their own pious opinions.

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.ii.ix-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.ix-p1.2"></span><span id="ix.ii.ix-p1.3"></span>Such, then, is
their system, which neither the prophets announced, nor the Lord taught,
nor the apostles delivered, but of which they boast that beyond all
others they have a perfect knowledge. They gather their views from other
sources than the Scriptures; <span id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749)
and, to use a common proverb, they strive to weave ropes of sand, while
they endeavour to adapt with an air of probability to their own peculiar
assertions the parables of the Lord, the sayings of the prophets, and
the words of the apostles, in order that their scheme may not seem
altogether without support. In doing so, however, they disregard the
order and the connection of the Scriptures, and so far as in them lies,
dismember and destroy the truth. By transferring passages, and dressing
them up anew, and making one thing out of another, they succeed in
deluding many through their wicked art in adapting the oracles of the
Lord to their opinions. Their manner of acting is just as if one, when a
beautiful image of a king has been constructed by some skilful artist
out of precious jewels, should then take this likeness of the man all to
pieces, should rearrange the gems, and so fit them together as to make
them into the form of a dog or of a fox, and even that but poorly
executed; and should then maintain and declare that *this* was the
beautiful image of the king which the skilful artist constructed,
pointing to the jewels which had been admirably fitted together by the
first artist to form the image of the king, but have been with bad
effect transferred by the latter one to the shape of a dog, and by thus
exhibiting the jewels, should deceive the ignorant who had no conception
what a king’s form was like, and persuade them that that miserable
likeness of the fox was, in fact, the beautiful image of the king. In
like manner do these persons patch together old wives’ fables, and then
endeavour, by violently drawing away from their proper connection,
words, expressions, and parables whenever found, to adapt the oracles of
God to their baseless fictions. We have already stated how far they
proceed in this way with respect to the interior of the Pleroma.

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p3"></span>2. Then, again, as to those things outside
of their Pleroma, the following are some specimens of what they attempt
to accommodate out of the Scriptures to their opinions. They affirm that
<span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span id="ix.ii.ix-Page_327"></span>
the Lord came in the last times of the world to endure suffering, for
this end, that He might indicate the passion which occurred to the last
of the Æons, and might by His own end announce the cessation of that
disturbance which had risen among the Æons. They maintain, further, that
that girl of twelve years old, the daughter of the ruler of the
synagogue, <span id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750) to whom the Lord
approached and raised her from the dead, was a type of Achamoth, to whom
their Christ, by extending himself, imparted shape, and whom he led anew
to the perception of that light which had forsaken her. And that the
Saviour appeared to her when she lay outside of the Pleroma as a kind of
abortion, they affirm Paul to have declared in his Epistle to the
Corinthians \[in these words\], “And last of all, He appeared to me
also, as to one born out of due time.” <span
id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751) Again, the coming of the Saviour
with His attendants to Achamoth is declared in like manner by him in the
same Epistle, when he says, “A woman ought to have a veil upon her head,
because of the angels.” <span id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) Now,
that Achamoth, when the Saviour came to her, drew a veil over herself
through modesty, Moses rendered manifest when he put a veil upon his
face. Then, also, they say that the passions which she endured were
indicated by the Lord upon the cross. Thus, when He said, “My God, my
God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753) He simply showed that Sophia was
deserted by the light, and was restrained by Horos from making any
advance forward. Her anguish, again, was indicated when He said, “My
soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death;” <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754) her fear by the words, “Father, if
it be possible, let this cup pass from Me;” <span
id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755) and her perplexity, too, when He
said, “And what I shall say, I know not.” <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756)

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p11"></span>3. And they teach that He pointed out the
three kinds of men as follows: the *material*, when He said to him that
asked Him, “Shall I follow Thee?” <span
id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757) “The Son of man hath not where to
lay His head;”— <span id="ix.ii.ix-p12.2"></span>the *animal*, when He
said to him that declared, “I will follow Thee, but suffer me first to
bid them farewell that are in my house,” “No man, putting his hand to
the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of heaven” <span
id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758) (for this man they declare to be of
the intermediate class, even as they do that other who, though he
professed to have wrought a large amount of righteousness, yet refused
to follow Him, and was so overcome by \[the love of\] riches, as never
to reach perfection)—this one it pleases them to place in the animal
class;—the *spiritual*, again, when He said, “Let the dead bury their
dead, but go thou and preach the kingdom of God,” <span
id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759) and when He said to Zaccheus the
publican, “Make haste, and come down, for to-day I must abide in thine
house” <span id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) —for these they
declared to have belonged to the spiritual class. Also the parable of
the leaven which the woman is described as having hid in three measures
of meal, they declare to make manifest the three classes. For, according
to their teaching, the woman represented Sophia; the three measures of
meal, the three kinds of men— spiritual, animal, and material; while the
leaven denoted the Saviour Himself. Paul, too, very plainly set forth
the material, animal, and spiritual, saying in one place, “As is the
earthy, such are they also that are earthy;” <span
id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761) and in another place, “But the
animal man receiveth not the things of the Spirit;” <span
id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762) and again: “He that is spiritual
judgeth all things.” <span id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) And
this, “The animal man receiveth not the things of the Spirit,” they
affirm to have been spoken concerning the Demiurge, who, as being
animal, knew neither his mother who was spiritual, nor her seed, nor the
Æons in the Pleroma. And that the Saviour received first-fruits of those
whom He was to save, Paul declared when he said, “And if the
first-fruits be holy, the lump is also holy,” <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) teaching that the expression
“first-fruits” denoted that which is spiritual, but that “the lump”
meant us, that is, the animal Church, the lump of which they say He
assumed, and blended it with Himself, inasmuch as He is “the leaven.”

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p20"></span>4. Moreover, that Achamoth wandered
beyond the Pleroma, and received form from Christ, and was sought after
by the Saviour, they declare that He indicated when He said, that He had
come after that sheep which was gone astray. <span
id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765) For they explain the wandering
sheep to mean their mother, by whom they represent the Church as having
been sown. The wandering itself denotes her stay outside of the Pleroma
in a state of varied passion, from which they maintain that matter
derived its origin. The woman, again, who sweeps the house and finds the
piece of money, they declare to denote the Sophia above, who, having
lost her enthymesis, afterwards recovered it, on all things <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="ix.ii.ix-Page_328"></span> being
purified by the advent of the Saviour. Wherefore this substance also,
according to them, was reinstated in Pleroma. They say, too, that
Simeon, “who took Christ into his arms, and gave thanks to God, and
said, Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to
Thy word,” <span id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766) was a type of the
Demiurge, who, on the arrival of the Saviour, learned his own change of
place, and gave thanks to Bythus. They also assert that by Anna, who is
spoken of in the gospel <span id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767) as a
prophetess, and who, after living seven years with her husband, passed
all the rest of her life in widowhood until she saw the Saviour, and
recognised Him, and spoke of Him to all, was most plainly indicated
Achamoth, who, having for a little while looked upon the Saviour with
His associates, and dwelling all the rest of the time in the
intermediate place, waited for Him till He should come again, and
restore her to her proper consort. Her name, too, was indicated by the
Saviour, when He said, “Yet wisdom is justified by her children.” <span
id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768) This, too, was done by Paul in
these words, “But we speak wisdom among them that are perfect.” <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769) They declare also that Paul has
referred to the conjunctions within the Pleroma, showing them forth by
means of one; for, when writing of the conjugal union in this life, he
expressed himself thus: “This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church.” <span id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770)

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p27"></span>5. <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p27.1"></span>Further, they teach that John, the disciple
of the Lord, indicated the first Ogdoad, expressing themselves in these
words: John, the disciple of the Lord, wishing to set forth the origin
of all things, so as to explain how the Father produced the whole, lays
down a certain principle,—that, namely, which was first-begotten by God,
which Being he has termed both the only-begotten Son and God, in whom
the Father, after a seminal manner, brought forth all things. By him the
Word was produced, and in him the whole substance of the Æons, to which
the Word himself afterwards imparted form. Since, therefore, he treats
of the first origin of things, he rightly proceeds in his teaching from
the beginning, that is, from God and the Word. And he expresses himself
thus: “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God; the same was in the beginning with God.” <span
id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771) Having first of all distinguished
these three—God, the Beginning, and the Word —he again unites them, that
he may exhibit the production of each of them, that is, of the Son and
of the Word, and may at the same time show their union with one another,
and with the Father. For “the beginning” is in the Father, and of the
Father, while “the Word” is in the beginning, and of the beginning. Very
properly, then, did he say, “In the beginning was the Word,” for He was
in the Son; “and the Word was with God,” for He was the beginning; “and
the Word was God,” of course, for that which is begotten of God is God.
“The same was in the beginning with God”—this clause discloses the order
of production. “All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing
made;” <span id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772) for the Word was the
author of form and beginning to all the Æons that came into existence
after Him. But “what was made in Him,” says John, “is life.” <span
id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773) Here again he indicated
conjunction; for all things, he said, were made *by* Him, but *in* Him
was life. This, then, which is in Him, is more closely connected with
Him than those things which were simply made by Him, for it exists along
with Him, and is developed by Him. When, again, he adds, “And the life
was the light of men,” while thus mentioning Anthropos, he indicated
also Ecclesia by that one expression, in order that, by using only one
name, he might disclose their fellowship with one another, in virtue of
their conjunction. For Anthropos and Ecclesia spring from Logos and Zoe.
Moreover, he styled life (Zoe) the light of men, because they are
enlightened by her, that is, formed and made manifest. This also Paul
declares in these words: “For whatsoever doth make manifest is
light.” <span id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774) Since, therefore, Zoe
manifested and begat both Anthropos and Ecclesia, she is termed their
light. Thus, then, did John by these words reveal both other things and
the second Tetrad, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia. And still
further, he also indicated the first Tetrad. For, in discoursing of the
Saviour and declaring that all things beyond the Pleroma received form
from Him, he says that He is the fruit of the entire Pleroma. For he
styles Him a “light which shineth in darkness, and which was not
comprehended” <span id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775) by it, inasmuch
as, when He imparted form to all those things which had their origin
from passion, He was not known by it. <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776) He also styles Him Son, and
Aletheia, and Zoe, and the “Word made flesh, whose glory,” he says, “we
beheld; and His glory was as that of the Only-begotten (given to Him by
the Father), full of grace and truth.” <span
id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777) (But what John really does <span
id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span id="ix.ii.ix-Page_329"></span> say is
this: “And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; and we beheld
His glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth.” <span id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778) ) Thus,
then, does he \[according to them\] distinctly set forth the first
Tetrad, when he speaks of the Father, and Charis, and Monogenes, and
Aletheia. In this way, too, does John tell of the first Ogdoad, and that
which is the mother of all the Æons. For he mentions the Father, and
Charis, and Monogenes, and Aletheia, and Logos, and Zoe, and Anthropos,
and Ecclesia. Such are the views of Ptolemæus. <span
id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[326:2750](0010705.htm#fr_2749) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p2"></span> Literally, “reading from things
unwritten.”

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[327:2751](0010705.htm#fr_2750) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p4"></span> [Luke viii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#041)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[327:2752](0010705.htm#fr_2751) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[327:2753](0010705.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>.
Irenæus here reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ix-p6.2"></span>κάλυμμα</span>, *veil*, instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ix-p6.3"></span>ἐξουσίαν</span>, *power*,
as in the received text. \[An interesting fact, as it betokens an old
gloss, which may have slipped into the text of some ancient <span
class="upper"><span id="ix.ii.ix-p6.4"></span>mss.</span>\]

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[327:2754](0010705.htm#fr_2753) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p6.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p7"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[327:2755](0010705.htm#fr_2754) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p8"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[327:2756](0010705.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p9"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[327:2757](0010705.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p10"></span> [John xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>.
The Valentinians seem, for their own purposes, to have added <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ix-p10.2"></span>οὐκ οἶδα</span> to this
text.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[327:2758](0010705.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p12"></span> [Luke
9:57](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#057),
[58](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#058)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[327:2759](0010705.htm#fr_2758) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p13"></span> [Luke
9:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#061),
[62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[327:2760](0010705.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p14"></span> [Luke ix.
60](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#060)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[327:2761](0010705.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p15"></span> [Luke xix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[327:2762](0010705.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
48](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#048)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[327:2763](0010705.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p17"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[327:2764](0010705.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p18"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[327:2765](0010705.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p19"></span> [Rom. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[327:2766](0010705.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p21"></span> [Luke
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[328:2767](0010705.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p22"></span> [Luke ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#028)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[328:2768](0010705.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p23"></span> [Luke ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[328:2769](0010705.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p24"></span> [Luke vii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#035)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[328:2770](0010705.htm#fr_2769) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p25"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[328:2771](0010705.htm#fr_2770) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p26"></span> [Eph. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[328:2772](0010705.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p28"></span> [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[328:2773](0010705.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p29"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[328:2774](0010705.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p30"></span> [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p30.1"></span>.
The punctuation here followed is different from that commonly adopted,
but is found in many of the Fathers, and in some of the most ancient
<span class="upper"><span id="ix.ii.ix-p30.2"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[328:2775](0010705.htm#fr_2774) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p31"></span> [Eph. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#013)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[328:2776](0010705.htm#fr_2775) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p32"></span> [John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[328:2777](0010705.htm#fr_2776) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ix-p33.1"></span>ὑπ’ αὐτῆς</span>, occurring twice, is
rendered both times in the old Latin version, “ab eis.” The reference is
to <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ix-p33.2"></span>σκοτία</span>,
*darkness*, i.e., all those not belonging to the spiritual seed.

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[328:2778](0010705.htm#fr_2777) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p34"></span> Comp. [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ix.ii.ix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[329:2779](0010705.htm#fr_2778) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p35"></span> This is parenthetically inserted by the
author, to show the misquotation of Scripture by these heretics.

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[329:2780](0010705.htm#fr_2779) <span
id="ix.ii.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ix-p36"></span> These words are wanting in the Greek,
but are inserted in the old Latin version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX.—Refutation of the...](0010706)
