[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010618)  [Next](0010620.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.vi.ix"></span> <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="viii.vi.ix-Page_277"></span>

### <span id="viii.vi.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.—The antiquity of Moses proved by Greek writers.

<span id="viii.vi.ix-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi.ix-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.vi.ix-p1.2"></span>I will begin, then, with our first prophet
and lawgiver, Moses; first explaining the times in which he lived, on
authorities which among you are worthy of all credit. For I do not
propose to prove these things only from our own divine histories, which
as yet you are unwilling to credit on account of the inveterate error of
your forefathers, but also from your own histories, and such, too, as
have no reference to our worship, that you may know that, of all your
teachers, whether sages, poets, historians, philosophers, or lawgivers,
by far the oldest, as the Greek histories show us, was Moses, who was
our first religious teacher. <span id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533.md)
For in the times of Ogyges and Inachus, whom some of your poets suppose
to have been earth-born, <span id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534.md)
Moses is mentioned as the leader and ruler of the Jewish nation. For in
this way he is mentioned both by Polemon in the first book of his
*Hellenics*, and by Apion son of Posidonius in his book against the
Jews, and in the fourth book of his history, where he says that during
the reign of Inachus over Argos the Jews revolted from Amasis king of
the Egyptians, and that Moses led them. And Ptolemæus the Mendesian, in
relating the history of Egypt, concurs in all this. And those who write
the Athenian history, Hellanicus and Philochorus (the author of *The
Attic History*), Castor and Thallus and Alexander Polyhistor, and also
the very well informed writers on Jewish affairs, Philo and Josephus,
have mentioned Moses as a very ancient and time-honoured prince of the
Jews. Josephus, certainly, desiring to signify even by the title of his
work the antiquity and age of the history, wrote thus at the
commencement of the history: “The Jewish antiquities <span
id="fr_2535"></span>[2536](#fn_2535.md) of Flavius Josephus,”—signifying
the oldness of the history by the word “antiquities.” And your most
renowned historian Diodorus, who employed thirty whole years in
epitomizing the libraries, and who, as he himself wrote, travelled over
both Asia and Europe for the sake of great accuracy, and thus became an
eye-witness of very many things, wrote forty entire books of his own
history. And he in the first book, having said that he had learned from
the Egyptian priests that Moses was an ancient lawgiver, and even the
first, wrote of him in these very words: “For subsequent to the ancient
manner of living in Egypt which gods and heroes are fabled to have
regulated, they say that Moses <span
id="fr_2536"></span>[2537](#fn_2536.md) first persuaded the people to use
written laws, and to live by them; and he is recorded to have been a man
both great of soul and of great faculty in social matters.” Then, having
proceeded a little further, and wishing to mention the ancient
lawgivers, he mentions Moses first. For he spoke in these words: “Among
the Jews they say that Moses ascribed his laws <span
id="fr_2537"></span>[2538](#fn_2537.md) to that God who is called Jehovah,
whether because they judged it a marvellous and quite divine conception
which promised to benefit a multitude of men, or because they were of
opinion that the people would be the more obedient when they
contemplated the majesty and power of those who were said to have
invented the laws. And they say that Sasunchis was the second Egyptian
legislator, a man of excellent understanding. And the third, they say,
was Sesonchosis the king, who not only performed the most brilliant
military exploits of any in Egypt, but also consolidated that warlike
race by legislation. And the fourth lawgiver, they say, was Bocchoris
the king, a wise and surpassingly skilful man. And after him it is said
that Amasis the king acceded to the government, whom they relate to have
regulated all that pertains to the rulers of provinces, and to the
general administration of the government of Egypt. And they say that
Darius, the father of Xerxes, was the sixth who legislated for the
Egyptians.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[277:2534](0010619.htm#fr_2533.md) <span
id="viii.vi.ix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ix-p2"></span> The incongruity in this sentence is
Justin’s.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[277:2535](0010619.htm#fr_2534.md) <span
id="viii.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ix-p3"></span> \[Autochthones\]. That is, sprung from
the soil; and hence the oldest inhabitants, the aborigines.

<span id="fn_2535"></span>[277:2536](0010619.htm#fr_2535.md) <span
id="viii.vi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ix-p4"></span> Literally, archæology.

<span id="fn_2536"></span>[277:2537](0010619.htm#fr_2536.md) <span
id="viii.vi.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ix-p5"></span> Unfortunately, Justin here mistook
Menes for Moses. \[But he may have so read the name in his copy. See
Grabe’s note on Diodorus, and the quotation following in another note.\]

<span id="fn_2537"></span>[277:2538](0010619.htm#fr_2537.md) <span
id="viii.vi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi.ix-p6"></span> This sentence must be so completed from
the context in Diodorus. See the note of Maranus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X—Training and inspiration...](0010620.md)
