[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010712)  [Next](0010714.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xvii"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—Absurd interpretations of the Marcosians.

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Blending in one the production of their own
Æons, and the straying and recovery of the sheep \[spoken of in the
Gospel <span id="fr_2863"></span>[2864](#fn_2863.md) \], these persons
endeavour to set forth things in a more mystical style, while they refer
everything to numbers, maintaining that the universe has been formed out
of a Monad and a Dyad. And then, reckoning from unity on to four, they
thus generate the Decad. For when one, two, three, and four are added
together, they give rise to the number of the ten Æons. And, again, the
Dyad advancing from itself \[by twos\] up to six—two, and four, and
six—brings out the Duodecad. Once more, if we reckon in the same way up
to ten, the number thirty appears, in which are found eight, and ten,
and twelve. They therefore term the Duodecad—because it contains the
Episemon, <span id="fr_2864"></span>[2865](#fn_2864.md) and because the
Episemon \[so to speak\] waits upon it—the passion. And for this reason,
because an error occurred in connection with the twelfth number, <span
id="fr_2865"></span>[2866](#fn_2865.md) the sheep frisked off, and went
astray; for they assert that a defection took place from the Duodecad.
In the same way they oracularly declare, that one power having departed
also from the Duodecad, has perished; and this was represented by the
woman who lost the drachma, <span id="fr_2866"></span>[2867](#fn_2866.md)
and, lighting a lamp, again found it. Thus, therefore, the numbers that
were left, viz., nine, as respects the pieces of money, and eleven in
regard to the sheep, <span id="fr_2867"></span>[2868](#fn_2867.md) when
multiplied together, give birth to the number ninety-nine, for nine
times eleven are ninety-nine. Wherefore also they maintain the word
“Amen” contains this number.

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p7"></span>2. I will not, however, weary thee by
recounting their other interpretations, that you may perceive the
results everywhere. They maintain for instance, that the letter *Eta*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>η</span>) along
with the *Episemon* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p7.2"></span>ς</span>) constitutes an Ogdoad, inasmuch as
it occupies the eighth place from the first letter. Then, again, without
the *Episemon*, reckoning the number of the letters, and adding them up
till we come to *Eta*, they bring out the Triacontad. For if one begins
at *Alpha* and ends with *Eta*, omitting the *Episemon*, and adds
together the value of the letters in succession, he will find their
number altogether to amount to thirty. For up to *Epsilon* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xvii-p7.3"></span>ε</span>) fifteen are
formed; then adding seven to that number, the sum of twenty-two is
reached. Next, *Eta* being added to these, since its value is eight, the
most wonderful Triacontad is completed. And hence they give forth that
the Ogdoad is the mother of the thirty Æons. Since, therefore, the
number thirty is composed of three powers \[the Ogdoad, Decad, and
Duodecad\], when multiplied by three, it produces ninety, for three
times thirty are ninety. Likewise this Triad, when multiplied by itself,
gives rise to nine. Thus the Ogdoad generates, by these means,
ninety-nine. And since the twelfth Æon, by her defection, left eleven in
the heights above, they maintain that therefore the position of the
letters is a true coordinate of the method of their calculation <span
id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868.md) (for Lambda is the eleventh in
order among the letters, and represents the number thirty), and also
forms a representation of the arrangement of affairs above, since, on
from Alpha, omitting *Episemon*, the number of the letters up to Lambda,
when added together according to the successive value of the letters,
and including *Lambda* itself, forms the sum of ninety-nine; but that
this *Lambda*, being the eleventh in order, descended to seek after one
equal to itself, so as to complete the number of twelve letters, and
when it found such a one, the number was completed, is manifest from the
very configuration of the letter; for *Lambda* being engaged, as it
were, in the quest of one similar to itself, and finding such an one,
and clasping it to itself, thus filled up the place of the twelfth, the
letter *Mu* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p8.3"></span>Μ</span>) being composed of two *Lambdas*
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xvii-p8.4"></span>ΛΛ</span>).
Wherefore also they, by means of their “knowledge,” avoid the place of
ninety-nine, that is, the defection—a type of the left hand, <span
id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869.md) —but endeavour to secure *one*
more, which, when added to the ninety and nine, has the effect of
changing their reckoning to the right hand.

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p10"></span>3. I well know, my dear friend, that
when thou hast read through all this, thou wilt indulge in a hearty
laugh over this their inflated wise folly! But those men are really
worthy of being mourned over, who promulgate such a kind of religion,
and who so frigidly and perversely pull to pieces the greatness of the
truly unspeakable power, and the dispensations of God in themselves so
striking, by means of Alpha and Beta, and through the aid of numbers.
But as many as separate from the Church, and give heed to such old
wives’ fables as these, are truly self-condemned; and these men Paul
commands us, “after a first and second admonition, to avoid.” <span
id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870.md) <span id="page_342">p. 342</span>
<span id="ix.ii.xvii-Page_342"></span> And John, the disciple of the
Lord, has intensified their condemnation, when he desires us not even to
address to them the salutation of “good-speed;” for, says he, “He that
bids them be of good-speed is a partaker with their evil deeds;” <span
id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871.md) and that with reason, “for there is
no good-speed to the ungodly,” <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872.md) saith the Lord. Impious indeed,
beyond all impiety, are these men, who assert that the Maker of heaven
and earth, the only God Almighty, besides whom there is no God, was
produced by means of a defect, which itself sprang from another defect,
so that, according to them, He was the product of the third
defect. <span id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873.md) Such an opinion we
should detest and execrate, while we ought everywhere to flee far apart
from those that hold it; and in proportion as they vehemently maintain
and rejoice in their fictitious doctrines, so much the more should we be
convinced that they are under the influence of the wicked spirits of the
Ogdoad,—just as those persons who fall into a fit of frenzy, the more
they laugh, and imagine themselves to be well, and do all things as if
they were in good health \[both of body and mind\], yea, some things
better than those who really are so, are only thus shown to be the more
seriously diseased. In like manner do these men, the more they seem to
excel others in wisdom, and waste their strength by drawing the bow too
tightly, <span id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874.md) the greater fools do
they show themselves. For when the unclean spirit of folly has gone
forth, and when afterwards he finds them not waiting upon God, but
occupied with mere worldly questions, then, “taking seven other spirits
more wicked than himself,” <span id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875.md)
and inflating the minds of these men with the notion of their being able
to conceive of something beyond God, and having fitly prepared them for
the reception of deceit, he implants within them the Ogdoad of the
foolish spirits of wickedness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2863"></span>[341:2864](0010713.htm#fr_2863.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p2"></span> [Luke xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2864"></span>[341:2865](0010713.htm#fr_2864.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p3"></span> All the editors, Grabe, Massuet,
Stieren, and Harvey, differ as to the text and interpretation of this
sentence. We have given what seems the simplest rendering of the text as
it stands.

<span id="fn_2865"></span>[341:2866](0010713.htm#fr_2865.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p4"></span> Referring to the last of the twelve
Æons.

<span id="fn_2866"></span>[341:2867](0010713.htm#fr_2866.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p5"></span> [Luke xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2867"></span>[341:2868](0010713.htm#fr_2867.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p6"></span> Meaning the Æon who left the Duodecad,
when eleven remained, and not referring to the lost sheep of the
parable.

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[341:2869](0010713.htm#fr_2868.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p8"></span> Harvey gives the above paraphrase of
the very obscure original; others propose to read <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xvii-p8.1"></span>λ´</span> instead of
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xvii-p8.2"></span>λόγου</span>.

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[341:2870](0010713.htm#fr_2869.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p9"></span> Massuet explains this and the following
reference, by remarking that the ancients used the fingers of the hand
in counting; by the left hand they indicated all the numbers below a
hundred, but by the right hand all above that sum.—Comp. Juvenal,
*Sat.*, x. 249.

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[341:2871](0010713.htm#fr_2870.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p11"></span> [Tit. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[342:2872](0010713.htm#fr_2871.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p12"></span> [2 John.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011.md)<span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[342:2873](0010713.htm#fr_2872.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p13"></span> [Isa. xlviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[342:2874](0010713.htm#fr_2873.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p14"></span> The Demiurge being the fruit of the
abortive conversion of the abortive passion of Achamoth, who, again, was
the abortive issue of Sophia.

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[342:2875](0010713.htm#fr_2874.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p15"></span> i.e., by aiming at what transcends
their ability, they fall into absurdity, as a bow is broken by bending
it too far.

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[342:2876](0010713.htm#fr_2875.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p16"></span> [Matt. xii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043.md)<span id="ix.ii.xvii-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.—The theory of the...](0010714.md)
