[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010473)  [Next](0010475) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.xiii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.xiii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.—Isaiah teaches that sins are forgiven through Christ’s blood.

<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.xiii-p1.2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p1.3"></span><span id="viii.iv.xiii-p1.4"></span>“For
Isaiah did not send you to a bath, there to wash away murder and other
sins, which not even all the water of the sea were sufficient to purge;
but, as might have been expected, this was that saving bath of the olden
time which followed <span id="fr_1972"></span>[1973](#fn_1972) those who
repented, and who no longer were purified by the blood of goats and of
sheep, or by the ashes of an heifer, or by the offerings of fine flour,
but by faith through the blood of Christ, and through His death, who
died for this very reason, as Isaiah himself said, when he spake thus:
‘The Lord shall make bare His holy arm in the eyes of all the nations,
and all the nations and the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
God. Depart ye, depart ye, depart ye, <span
id="fr_1973"></span>[1974](#fn_1973) go ye out from thence, and touch no
unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her, be ye clean that bear the
vessels of the Lord, for <span id="fr_1974"></span>[1975](#fn_1974) ye
go not with haste. For the Lord shall go before you; and the Lord, the
God of Israel, shall gather you together. Behold, my servant shall deal
prudently; and He shall be exalted, and be greatly glorified. As many
were astonished at Thee, so Thy form and Thy glory shall be marred more
than men. So shall many nations be astonished at Him, and the kings
shall shut their mouths; for that which had not been told them
concerning Him shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall
they consider. Lord, <span id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span
id="viii.iv.xiii-Page_201"></span> who hath believed our report? and to
whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? We have announced Him as a child
before Him, as a root in a dry ground. He hath no form or comeliness,
and when we saw Him He had no form or beauty; but His form is
dishonoured, and fails more than the sons of men. He is a man in
affliction, and acquainted with bearing sickness, because His face has
been turned away; He was despised, and we esteemed Him not. He bears our
sins, and is distressed for us; and we esteemed Him to be in toil and in
affliction, and in evil treatment. But He was wounded for our
transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of
our peace was upon Him. With His stripes we are healed. All we, like
sheep, have gone astray. Every man has turned to his own way; and the
Lord laid on Him our iniquities, and by reason of His oppression He
opens not His mouth. He was brought as a sheep to the slaughter; and as
a lamb before her shearer is dumb, so He openeth not His mouth. In His
humiliation His judgment was taken away. And who shall declare His
generation? For His life is taken from the earth. Because of the
transgressions of my people He came unto death. And I will give the
wicked for His grave, and the rich for His death, because He committed
no iniquity, and deceit was not found in His mouth. And the Lord wills
to purify Him from affliction. If he has been given for sin, your soul
shall see a long-lived seed. And the Lord wills to take His soul away
from trouble, to show Him light, and to form Him in understanding, to
justify the righteous One who serves many well. And He shall bear our
sins; therefore He shall inherit many, and shall divide the spoil of the
strong, because His soul was delivered to death; and He was numbered
with the transgressors, and He bare the sins of many, and was delivered
for their transgression. Sing, O barren, who bearest not; break forth
and cry aloud, thou who dost not travail in pain: for more are the
children of the desolate than the children of the married wife. For the
Lord said, Enlarge the place of thy tent and of thy curtains; fix them,
spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; stretch forth
to thy right and thy left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and
thou shalt make the desolate cities to be inherited. Fear not because
thou art ashamed, neither be thou confounded because thou hast been
reproached; for thou shalt forget everlasting shame, and shalt not
remember the reproach of thy widowhood, because the Lord has made a name
for Himself, and He who has redeemed thee shall be called through the
whole earth the God of Israel. The Lord has called thee as <span
id="fr_1975"></span>[1976](#fn_1975) a woman forsaken and grieved in
spirit, as <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1977](#fn_1976) a woman hated from
her youth.’ <span id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[200:1973](0010474.htm#fr_1972) <span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p1.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p2"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>.
Otto reads: which he mentioned and which was for those who repented.

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[200:1974](0010474.htm#fr_1973) <span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p3"></span> Three times in Justin, not in LXX.

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[200:1975](0010474.htm#fr_1974) <span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p4"></span> Deviating slightly from LXX.,
omitting a clause.

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[201:1976](0010474.htm#fr_1975) <span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p5"></span> LXX. “*not* as,” etc.

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[201:1977](0010474.htm#fr_1976) <span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p6"></span> LXX. “*not* as,” etc.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[201:1978](0010474.htm#fr_1977) <span
id="viii.iv.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p7"></span> [Isa. lii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010)<span id="viii.iv.xiii-p7.1"></span>
ff. following LXX. on to liv. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.—Righteousness is not...](0010475)
