[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010838)  [Next](0010840.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vii.ii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.—Christ alone is able to teach divine things, and to redeem us: He, the same, took flesh of the Virgin Mary, not merely in appearance, but actually, by the operation of the Holy Spirit, in order to renovate us. Strictures on the conceits of Valentinus and Ebion.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.vii.ii-p1.1"></span><span
class="upper"><span id="ix.vii.ii-p1.2"></span>For</span> in no other
way could we have learned the things of God, unless our Master, existing
as the Word, had become man. For no other being had the power of
revealing to us the things of the Father, except His own proper Word.
For what other person “knew the mind of the Lord,” or who else “has
become His counsellor?” <span id="fr_4449"></span>[4450](#fn_4449.md)
Again, we could have learned in no other way than by seeing our Teacher,
and hearing His voice with our own ears, that, having become imitators
of His works as well as doers of His words, we may have communion with
Him, receiving increase from the perfect One, and from Him who is prior
to all creation. We —who were but lately created by the only best and
good Being, by Him also who has the gift of immortality, having been
formed after <span id="page_527">p. 527</span> <span
id="ix.vii.ii-Page_527"></span> His likeness (predestinated, according
to the prescience of the Father, that we, who had as yet no existence,
might come into being), and made the first-fruits of creation <span
id="fr_4450"></span>[4451](#fn_4450.md) —have received, in the times known
beforehand, \[the blessings of salvation\] according to the ministration
of the Word, who is perfect in all things, as the mighty Word, and very
man, who, redeeming us by His own blood in a manner consonant to reason,
gave Himself as a redemption for those who had been led into captivity.
And since the apostasy tyrannized over us unjustly, and, though we were
by nature the property of the omnipotent God, alienated us contrary to
nature, rendering us its own disciples, the Word of God, powerful in all
things, and not defective with regard to His own justice, did
righteously turn against that apostasy, and redeem from it His own
property, not by violent means, as the \[apostasy\] had obtained
dominion over us at the beginning, when it insatiably snatched away what
was not its own, but by means of persuasion, as became a God of counsel,
who does not use violent means to obtain what He desires; so that
neither should justice be infringed upon, nor the ancient handiwork of
God go to destruction. <span id="ix.vii.ii-p3.2"></span>Since the Lord
thus has redeemed us through His own blood, giving His soul for our
souls, and His flesh for our flesh, <span
id="fr_4451"></span>[4452](#fn_4451.md) and has also poured out the Spirit
of the Father for the union and communion of God and man, imparting
indeed God to men by means of the Spirit, and, on the other hand,
attaching man to God by His own incarnation, and bestowing upon us at
His coming immortality durably and truly, by means of communion with
God,—all the doctrines of the heretics fall to ruin.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p5"></span>2. <span id="ix.vii.ii-p5.1"></span>Vain
indeed are those who allege that He appeared in mere seeming. For these
things were not done in appearance only, but in actual reality. But if
He did appear as a man, when He was not a man, neither could the Holy
Spirit have rested upon Him,—an occurrence which did actually take
place—as the Spirit is invisible; nor, \[in that case\], was there any
degree of truth in Him, for He was not that which He seemed to be. But I
have already remarked that Abraham and the other prophets beheld Him
after a prophetical manner, foretelling in vision what should come to
pass. If, then, such a being has now appeared in outward semblance
different from what he was in reality, there has been a certain
prophetical vision made to men; and another advent of His must be looked
forward to, in which He shall be such as He has now been seen in a
prophetic manner. And I have proved already, that it is the same thing
to say that He appeared merely to outward seeming, and \[to affirm\]
that He received nothing from Mary. For He would not have been one truly
possessing flesh and blood, by which He redeemed us, unless He had
summed up in Himself the ancient formation of Adam. Vain therefore are
the disciples of Valentinus who put forth this opinion, in order that
they my exclude the flesh from salvation, and cast aside what God has
fashioned.

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p6"></span>3. <span id="ix.vii.ii-p6.1"></span>Vain
also are the Ebionites, who do not receive by faith into their soul the
union of God and man, but who remain in the old leaven of \[the
natural\] birth, and who do not choose to understand that the Holy Ghost
came upon Mary, and the power of the Most High did overshadow her: <span
id="fr_4452"></span>[4453](#fn_4452.md) wherefore also what was generated
is a holy thing, and the Son of the Most High God the Father of all, who
effected the incarnation of this being, and showed forth a new \[kind
of\] generation; that as by the former generation we inherited death, so
by this new generation we might inherit life. <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p7.2"></span>Therefore do these men reject the commixture
of the heavenly wine, <span id="fr_4453"></span>[4454](#fn_4453.md) and
wish it to be water of the world only, not receiving God so as to have
union with Him, but they remain in that Adam who had been conquered and
was expelled from Paradise: not considering that as, at the beginning of
our formation in Adam, that breath of life which proceeded from God,
having been united to what had been fashioned, animated the man, and
manifested him as a being endowed with reason; so also, in \[the times
of\] the end, the Word of the Father and the Spirit of God, having
become united with the ancient substance of Adam’s formation, rendered
man living and perfect, receptive of the perfect Father, in order that
as in the natural \[Adam\] we all were dead, so in the spiritual we may
all be made alive. <span id="fr_4454"></span>[4455](#fn_4454.md) For never
at any time did Adam escape the *hands* <span
id="fr_4455"></span>[4456](#fn_4455.md) of God, to whom the Father
speaking, said, “Let Us make man in Our image, after Our likeness.” And
for this reason in the last times (*fine*), not by the will of the
flesh, nor by the will of man, but by the good pleasure of the
Father, <span id="fr_4456"></span>[4457](#fn_4456.md) His hands formed a
living man, in order that Adam might be created \[again\] after the
image and likeness of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4449"></span>[526:4450](0010839.htm#fr_4449.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p2"></span> [Rom. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034.md)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4450"></span>[527:4451](0010839.htm#fr_4450.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p3"></span> “Initium facturæ,” which Grabe thinks
should be thus translated with reference to [Jas. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018.md)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4451"></span>[527:4452](0010839.htm#fr_4451.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p4"></span> \[Compare Clement, cap. 49, p. 18, this
volume.\]

<span id="fn_4452"></span>[527:4453](0010839.htm#fr_4452.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p7"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035.md)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4453"></span>[527:4454](0010839.htm#fr_4453.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p8"></span> In allusion to the mixture of water in
the eucharistic cup, as practised in these primitive times. The
Ebionites and others used to consecrate the element of water alone.

<span id="fn_4454"></span>[527:4455](0010839.htm#fr_4454.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p9"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4455"></span>[527:4456](0010839.htm#fr_4455.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p10"></span> Viz., the Son and the Spirit.

<span id="fn_4456"></span>[527:4457](0010839.htm#fr_4456.md) <span
id="ix.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii.ii-p11"></span> [John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.—When Christ visited us...](0010840.md)
