[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010449)  [Next](0010451) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.v"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.—How the angels transgressed.

<span id="viii.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii.v-p1.1"></span>But if
this idea take possession of some one, that if we acknowledge God as our
helper, we should not, as we say, be oppressed and persecuted by the
wicked; this, too, I will solve. God, when He had made the whole world,
and subjected things earthly to man, and arranged the heavenly elements
for the increase of fruits and rotation of the seasons, and appointed
this divine law—for these things also He evidently made for
man—committed the care of men and of all things under heaven to angels
whom He appointed over them. <span id="viii.iii.v-p1.2"></span>But the
angels transgressed this appointment, and were captivated by love of
women, and begat children who are those that are called demons; and
besides, they afterwards subdued the human race to themselves, partly by
magical writings, and partly by fears and the punishments they
occasioned, and partly by teaching them to offer sacrifices, and
incense, and libations, of which things they stood in need after they
were enslaved by lustful passions; and among men they sowed murders,
wars, adulteries, intemperate deeds, and all wickedness. Whence also the
poets and mythologists, not knowing that it was the angels and those
demons who had been begotten by them that did these things to men, and
women, and cities, and nations, which they related, ascribed them to god
himself, and to those who were accounted to be his very offspring, and
to the offspring of those who were called his brothers, Neptune and
Pluto, and to the children again of these their offspring. For whatever
name each of the angels had given to himself and his children, by that
name they called them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.—Names of God and of...](0010451)
