[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010787)  [Next](0010789) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xxii"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXI.—A vindication of the prophecy in [Isa. vii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p0.2"></span> against the misinterpretations of Theodotion, Aquila, the Ebionites, and the Jews. Authority of the Septuagint version. Arguments in proof that Christ was born of a virgin.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span><span id="ix.iv.xxii-p1.2"></span><span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p1.3"></span><span id="ix.iv.xxii-p1.4"></span>God, then,
was made man, and the Lord did Himself save us, giving us the token of
the Virgin. But not as some allege, among those now presuming to expound
the Scripture, \[thus:\] “Behold, a young woman shall conceive, and
bring forth a son,” <span id="fr_3707"></span>[3708](#fn_3707) as
Theodotion the Ephesian has interpreted, and Aquila of Pontus, <span
id="fr_3708"></span>[3709](#fn_3708) both Jewish proselytes. The
Ebionites, following these, assert that He was begotten by Joseph; thus
destroying, as far as in them lies, such a marvellous dispensation of
God, and setting aside the testimony of the prophets which proceeded
from God. For truly this prediction was uttered before the removal of
the people to Babylon; that is, anterior to the supremacy acquired by
the Medes and Persians. But it was interpreted into Greek by the Jews
themselves, much before the period of our Lord’s advent, that there
might remain no suspicion that perchance the Jews, complying with our
humour, did put this interpretation upon these words. They indeed, had
they been cognizant of our future existence, and that we should use
these proofs from the Scriptures, would themselves never have hesitated
to burn their own Scriptures, which do declare that all other nations
partake of \[eternal\] life, and show that they who boast themselves as
being the house of Jacob and the people of Israel, are disinherited from
the grace of God.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p4"></span>2. <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p4.1"></span><span id="ix.iv.xxii-p4.2"></span>For before
the Romans possessed their kingdom, <span
id="fr_3709"></span>[3710](#fn_3709) while as yet the Macedonians held
Asia, Ptolemy the son of Lagus, being anxious to adorn the library which
he had founded in Alexandria, with a collection of the writings of all
men, which were \[works\] of merit, made request to the people of
Jerusalem, that they should have their Scriptures translated into the
Greek language. <span id="ix.iv.xxii-p5.2"></span>And they—for at that
time they were still subject to the Macedonians—sent to Ptolemy seventy
of their elders, who were thoroughly skilled in the Scriptures and in
both the languages, to carry out what he had desired. <span
id="fr_3710"></span>[3711](#fn_3710) But he, wishing to test them
individually, and fearing lest they might perchance, by taking counsel
together, conceal the truth in the Scriptures, by their interpretation,
separated them from each other, and commanded them all to write the same
translation. He did this with respect to all the books. But when they
came together in the same place before Ptolemy, and <span
id="page_452">p. 452</span> <span id="ix.iv.xxii-Page_452"></span> each
of them compared his own interpretation with that of every other, God
was indeed glorified, and the Scriptures were acknowledged as truly
divine. For all of them read out the common translation \[which they had
prepared\] in the very same words and the very same names, from
beginning to end, so that even the Gentiles present perceived that the
Scriptures had been interpreted by the inspiration of God. <span
id="fr_3711"></span>[3712](#fn_3711) And there was nothing astonishing
in God having done this,—He who, when, during the captivity of the
people under Nebuchadnezzar, the Scriptures had been corrupted, and
when, after seventy years, the Jews had returned to their own land,
then, in the times of Artaxerxes king of the Persians, inspired Esdras
the priest, of the tribe of Levi, to recast <span
id="fr_3712"></span>[3713](#fn_3712) all the words of the former
prophets, and to re-establish with the people the Mosaic legislation.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p9"></span>3. <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p9.1"></span>Since, therefore, the Scriptures have been
interpreted with such fidelity, and by the grace of God, and since from
these God has prepared and formed again our faith towards His Son, and
has preserved to us the unadulterated Scriptures in Egypt, where the
house of Jacob flourished, fleeing from the famine in Canaan; where also
our Lord was preserved when He fled from the persecution set on foot by
Herod; and \[since\] this interpretation of these Scriptures was made
prior to our Lord’s descent \[to earth\], and came into being before the
Christians appeared —for our Lord was born about the forty-first year of
the reign of Augustus; but Ptolemy was much earlier, under whom the
Scriptures were interpreted;—\[since these things are so, I say,\] truly
these men are proved to be impudent and presumptuous, who would now show
a desire to make different translations, when we refute them out of
these Scriptures, and shut them up to a belief in the advent of the Son
of God. But *our* faith is stedfast, unfeigned, and the only true one,
having clear proof from these Scriptures, which were interpreted in the
way I have related; and the preaching of the Church is without
interpolation. For the apostles, since they are of more ancient date
than all these \[heretics\], agree with this aforesaid translation; and
the translation harmonizes with the tradition of the apostles. For
Peter, and John, and Matthew, and Paul, and the rest successively, as
well as their followers, did set forth all prophetical
\[announcements\], just as <span id="fr_3713"></span>[3714](#fn_3713)
the interpretation of the elders contains them.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p11"></span>4. <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p11.1"></span>For the one and the same Spirit of God, who
proclaimed by the prophets what and of what sort the advent of the Lord
should be, did by these elders give a just interpretation of what had
been truly prophesied; and He did Himself, by the apostles, announce
that the fulness of the times of the adoption had arrived, that the
kingdom of heaven had drawn nigh, and that *He* was dwelling within
those that believe on Him who was born Emmanuel of the Virgin. To this
effect they testify, \[saying,\] that before Joseph had come together
with Mary, while she therefore remained in virginity, “she was found
with child of the Holy Ghost;” <span
id="fr_3714"></span>[3715](#fn_3714) and that the angel Gabriel said
unto her, “The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which
shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God;” <span
id="fr_3715"></span>[3716](#fn_3715) and that the angel said to Joseph
in a dream, “Now this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaiah the prophet, Behold, a virgin shall be with
child.” <span id="fr_3716"></span>[3717](#fn_3716) But the elders have
thus interpreted what Esaias said: “And the Lord, moreover, said unto
Ahaz, Ask for thyself a sign from the Lord thy God out of the depth
below, or from the height above. And Ahaz said, I will not ask, and I
will not tempt the Lord. And he said, It is not a small thing <span
id="fr_3717"></span>[3718](#fn_3717) for you to weary men; and how does
the Lord weary them? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign;
Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son; and ye shall call His
name Emmanuel. Butter and honey shall He eat: before He knows or chooses
out things that are evil, He shall exchange them for what is good; for
before the child knows good or evil, He shall not consent to evil, that
He may choose that which is good.” <span
id="fr_3718"></span>[3719](#fn_3718) Carefully, then, has the Holy Ghost
pointed out, by what has been said, His birth from a virgin, and His
essence, that He is God (for the name Emmanuel indicates this). And He
shows that He is a man, when He says, “Butter and honey shall He eat;”
and in that He terms Him a child also, \[in saying,\] “before He knows
good and evil;” for these are all the tokens of a human infant. But that
He “will not consent to evil, that He may choose that which is
good,”—this is proper to God; that by the fact, that He shall eat butter
and honey, we should not understand that He is a mere man only, nor, on
the other hand, from the name Emmanuel, should suspect Him to be God
without flesh.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p17"></span>5. And when He says, “Hear, O house of
David,” <span id="fr_3719"></span>[3720](#fn_3719) He performed the part
of one indicating <span id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-Page_453"></span> that He whom God promised David that He
would raise up from the fruit of his belly (*ventris*) an eternal King,
is the same who was born of the Virgin, herself of the lineage of David.
<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p18.2"></span>For on this account also, He promised
that the King should be “of the fruit of his *belly*,” which was the
appropriate \[term to use with respect\] to a virgin conceiving, and not
“of the fruit of his *loins*,” nor “of the fruit of his *reins*,” which
expression is appropriate to a generating man, and a woman conceiving by
a man. In this promise, therefore, the Scripture excluded all virile
influence; yet it certainly is not mentioned that He who was born was
not from the will of man. But it has fixed and established “the fruit of
the *belly*,” that it might declare the generation of Him who should be
\[born\] from the Virgin, as Elisabeth testified when filled with the
Holy Ghost, saying to Mary, “Blessed art thou among women, and blessed
is the fruit of thy belly;” <span id="fr_3720"></span>[3721](#fn_3720)
the Holy Ghost pointing out to those willing to hear, that the promise
which God had made, of raising up a King from the fruit of \[David’s\]
belly, was fulfilled in the birth from the Virgin, that is, from Mary.
Let those, therefore, who alter the passage of Isaiah thus, “Behold, a
young woman shall conceive,” and who will have Him to be Joseph’s son,
also alter the form of the promise which was given to David, when God
promised him to raise up, from the fruit of his belly, the horn of
Christ the King. But they did not understand, otherwise they would have
presumed to alter even this passage also.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p20"></span>6. But what Isaiah said, “From the
height above, or from the depth beneath,” <span
id="fr_3721"></span>[3722](#fn_3721) was meant to indicate, that “He who
descended was the same also who ascended.” <span
id="fr_3722"></span>[3723](#fn_3722) But in this that he said, “The Lord
Himself shall give you a sign,” he declared an unlooked-for thing with
regard to His generation, which could have been accomplished in no other
way than by God the Lord of all, God Himself giving a sign in the house
of David. For what great thing or what sign should have been in this,
that a young woman conceiving by a man should bring forth,—a thing which
happens to all women that produce offspring? But since an unlooked-for
salvation was to be provided for men through the help of God, so also
was the unlooked-for birth from a virgin accomplished; God giving this
sign, but man not working it out.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p23"></span>7. <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p23.1"></span>On this account also, Daniel, <span
id="fr_3723"></span>[3724](#fn_3723) foreseeing His advent, said that a
stone, cut out without hands, came into this world. For this is what
“without hands” means, that His coming into this world was not by the
operation of human hands, that is, of those men who are accustomed to
stone-cutting; that is, Joseph taking no part with regard to it, but
Mary alone co-operating with the pre-arranged plan. For this stone from
the earth derives existence from both the power and the wisdom of God.
Wherefore also Isaiah says: “Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I deposit in
the foundations of Zion a stone, precious, elect, the chief, the
corner-one, to be had in honour.” <span
id="fr_3724"></span>[3725](#fn_3724) So, then, we understand that His
advent in human nature was not by the will of a man, but by the will of
God.

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p26"></span>8. <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p26.1"></span>Wherefore also Moses giving a type, cast
his rod upon the earth, <span id="fr_3725"></span>[3726](#fn_3725) in
order that it, by becoming flesh, might expose and swallow up all the
opposition of the Egyptians, which was lifting itself up against the
pre-arranged plan of God; <span id="fr_3726"></span>[3727](#fn_3726)
that the Egyptians themselves might testify that it is the finger of God
which works salvation for the people, and not the son of Joseph. For if
He were the son of Joseph, how could He be greater than Solomon, or
greater than Jonah, <span id="fr_3727"></span>[3728](#fn_3727) or
greater than David, <span id="fr_3728"></span>[3729](#fn_3728) when He
was generated from the same seed, and was a descendant of these men? And
how was it that He also pronounced Peter blessed, because he
acknowledged Him to be the Son of the living God? <span
id="fr_3729"></span>[3730](#fn_3729)

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p32"></span>9. But besides, if indeed He had been
the son of Joseph, He could not, according to Jeremiah, be either king
or heir. For Joseph is shown to be the son of Joachim and Jechoniah, as
also Matthew sets forth in his pedigree. <span
id="fr_3730"></span>[3731](#fn_3730) But Jechoniah, and all his
posterity, were disinherited from the kingdom; Jeremiah thus declaring,
“As I live, saith the Lord, if Jechoniah the son of Joachim king of
Judah had been made the signet of my right hand, I would pluck him
thence, and deliver him into the hand of those seeking thy life.” <span
id="fr_3731"></span>[3732](#fn_3731) And again: “Jechoniah is
dishonoured as a useless vessel, for he has been cast into a land which
he knew not. Earth, hear the word of the Lord: Write this man a
disinherited person; for none of his seed, sitting on the throne of
David, shall prosper, or be a prince in Judah.” <span
id="fr_3732"></span>[3733](#fn_3732) And again, God speaks of Joachim
his father: “Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Joachim his
father, king of Judea, There shall be from him none sitting upon the
throne of David: and his dead body shall be cast out in the heat of day,
and in the frost of night. And I will look upon him, and upon <span
id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span id="ix.iv.xxii-Page_454"></span> his
sons, and will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
upon the land of Judah, all the evils that I have pronounced against
them.” <span id="fr_3733"></span>[3734](#fn_3733) Those, therefore, who
say that He was begotten of Joseph, and that they have hope in Him, do
cause themselves to be disinherited from the kingdom, failing under the
curse and rebuke directed against Jechoniah and his seed. Because for
this reason have these things been spoken concerning Jechoniah, the
\[Holy\] Spirit foreknowing the doctrines of the evil teachers; that
they may learn that from his seed—that is, from Joseph—He was not to be
born but that, according to the promise of God, from David’s belly the
King eternal is raised up, who sums up all things in Himself, and has
gathered into Himself the ancient formation \[of man\]. <span
id="fr_3734"></span>[3735](#fn_3734)

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p38"></span>10. For as by one man’s disobedience
sin entered, and death obtained \[a place\] through sin; so also by the
obedience of one man, righteousness having been introduced, shall cause
life to fructify in those persons who in times past were dead. <span
id="fr_3735"></span>[3736](#fn_3735) And as the protoplast himself Adam,
had his substance from untilled and as yet virgin soil (“for God had not
yet sent rain, and man had not tilled the ground” <span
id="fr_3736"></span>[3737](#fn_3736) ), and was formed by the hand of
God, that is, by the Word of God, for “all things were made by
Him,” <span id="fr_3737"></span>[3738](#fn_3737) and the Lord took dust
from the earth and formed man; so did He who is the Word, recapitulating
Adam in Himself, rightly receive a birth, enabling Him to gather up Adam
\[into Himself\], from Mary, who was as yet a virgin. If, then, the
first Adam had a man for his father, and was born of human seed, it were
reasonable to say that the second Adam was begotten of Joseph. But if
the former was taken from the dust, and God was his Maker, it was
incumbent that the latter also, making a recapitulation in Himself,
should be formed as man by God, to have an analogy with the former as
respects His origin. Why, then, did not God again take dust, but wrought
so that the formation should be made of Mary? It was that there might
not be another formation called into being, nor any other which should
\[require to\] be saved, but that the very same formation should be
summed up \[in Christ as had existed in Adam\], the analogy having been
preserved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3707"></span>[451:3708](0010788.htm#fr_3707) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p1.5"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p2"></span> [Isa. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3708"></span>[451:3709](0010788.htm#fr_3708) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p3"></span> Epiphanius, in his *De Mensuris*, gives
an account of these two men. The former published his version of the Old
Testament in the year 181. The latter put forth his translation half a
century earlier, about 129 <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> This reference to the version of
Theodotion furnishes a note of date as to the time when Irenæus
published his work: it must have been subsequently to <span
class="upper"><span id="ix.iv.xxii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 181.

<span id="fn_3709"></span>[451:3710](0010788.htm#fr_3709) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p5"></span> The Greek text here is, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xxii-p5.1"></span>κρατῦναι τὴν ἀρχὴν
αὐτῶν,</span> translated into Latin by “possiderent regnum suum,”—words
which are somewhat ambiguous in both languages. Massuet remarks, that
“regnum *eorum*” would have been a better rendering, referring the words
to the *Jews*.

<span id="fn_3710"></span>[451:3711](0010788.htm#fr_3710) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p6"></span> The Greek text of this narrative has
been preserved by Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*, v. 8). Grabe considers it to
be faulty in this passage; so the Latin translation has been adopted
here. Eusebius has<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xxii-p6.1"></span>
ποιήσαντος τοῦ Θεοῦ ὄπερ ἐβούλετο</span>— *God having accomplished what
He intended*.

<span id="fn_3711"></span>[452:3712](0010788.htm#fr_3711) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p7"></span> \[See Justin Martyr, *To the Greeks*,
cap. xiii. The testimony of Justin naturalized this Jewish legend among
Christians.\]

<span id="fn_3712"></span>[452:3713](0010788.htm#fr_3712) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p8"></span> The Greek term is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>ἀνατάξασθαι,</span>
which the Latin renders “re memorare,” but Massuet prefers “digerere.”

<span id="fn_3713"></span>[452:3714](0010788.htm#fr_3713) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p10"></span> This is a very interesting passage, as
bearing on the question, From what source are the quotations made by the
writers of the New Testament derived? Massuet, indeed, argues that it is
of little or no weight in the controversy; but the passage speaks for
itself. Comp. Dr. Robert’s *Discussions on the Gospels*, part i. ch. iv.
and vii.

<span id="fn_3714"></span>[452:3715](0010788.htm#fr_3714) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p12"></span> [Matt. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3715"></span>[452:3716](0010788.htm#fr_3715) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p13"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3716"></span>[452:3717](0010788.htm#fr_3716) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p14"></span> [Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3717"></span>[452:3718](0010788.htm#fr_3717) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p15"></span> We here read “non pusillum” for “num
pusillum,” as in some texts. Cyprian and Tertullian confirm the former
reading.

<span id="fn_3718"></span>[452:3719](0010788.htm#fr_3718) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p16"></span> [Isa. vii.
10-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010)<span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3719"></span>[452:3720](0010788.htm#fr_3719) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p18"></span> [Isa. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3720"></span>[453:3721](0010788.htm#fr_3720) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p19"></span> [Luke i.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#042)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3721"></span>[453:3722](0010788.htm#fr_3721) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p21"></span> [Isa. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#011)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3722"></span>[453:3723](0010788.htm#fr_3722) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p22"></span> [Eph. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3723"></span>[453:3724](0010788.htm#fr_3723) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p24"></span> [Dan. ii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3724"></span>[453:3725](0010788.htm#fr_3724) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p25"></span> [Isa. xxviii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3725"></span>[453:3726](0010788.htm#fr_3725) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p27"></span> [Ex. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#009)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3726"></span>[453:3727](0010788.htm#fr_3726) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p28"></span> [Ex. viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3727"></span>[453:3728](0010788.htm#fr_3727) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p29"></span> [Matt.
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042)<span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3728"></span>[453:3729](0010788.htm#fr_3728) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p30"></span> [Matt. xxii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3729"></span>[453:3730](0010788.htm#fr_3729) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p31"></span> [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3730"></span>[453:3731](0010788.htm#fr_3730) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p33"></span> [Matt. i.
12-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#012)<span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3731"></span>[453:3732](0010788.htm#fr_3731) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p34"></span> [Jer.
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#025)<span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3732"></span>[453:3733](0010788.htm#fr_3732) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p35"></span> [Jer. xxii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p35.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_3733"></span>[454:3734](0010788.htm#fr_3733) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p36"></span> [Jer.
36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#031)<span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3734"></span>[454:3735](0010788.htm#fr_3734) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p37"></span> Harvey prefixes this last clause to
the following section.

<span id="fn_3735"></span>[454:3736](0010788.htm#fr_3735) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p39"></span> [Rom. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3736"></span>[454:3737](0010788.htm#fr_3736) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p40"></span> [Gen. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3737"></span>[454:3738](0010788.htm#fr_3737) <span
id="ix.iv.xxii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p41"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ix.iv.xxii-p41.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.—Christ assumed actual...](0010789)
