[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010711)  [Next](0010713) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xvi"></span> <span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-Page_339"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.—Sige relates to Marcus the generation of the twenty-four elements and of Jesus. Exposure of these absurdities.

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p1"></span>1. <span id="ix.ii.xvi-p1.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p1.2"></span><span id="ix.ii.xvi-p1.3"></span><span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p1.4"></span><span id="ix.ii.xvi-p1.5"></span>The all-wise
Sige then announced the production of the four-and-twenty elements to
him as follows:—Along with Monotes there coexisted Henotes, from which
sprang two productions, as we have remarked above, Monas and Hen, which,
added to the other two, make four, for twice two are four. And again,
two and four, when added together, exhibit the number six. And further,
these six being quadrupled, give rise to the twenty-four forms. And the
names of the first Tetrad, which are understood to be most holy, and not
capable of being expressed in words, are known by the Son alone, while
the father also knows what they are. The other names which are to be
uttered with respect, and faith, and reverence, are, according to him,
Arrhetos and Sige, Pater and Aletheia. Now the entire number of this
Tetrad amounts to four-and-twenty letters; for the name Arrhetos
contains in itself seven letters, Seige <span
id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) five, Pater five, and Aletheia
seven. If all these be added together—twice five, and twice seven—they
complete the number twenty-four. In like manner, also, the second
Tetrad, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia, reveal the same number of
elements. Moreover, that name of the Saviour which may be pronounced,
viz., Jesus \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>᾽Ιησοῦς</span>\], consists of six letters,
but His unutterable name comprises four-and-twenty letters. The name
*Christ the Son* <span id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854) (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>υἱὸς Χρειστός</span>)
comprises twelve letters, but that which is unpronounceable in Christ
contains thirty letters. And for this reason he declares that He is
*Alpha* and *Omega*, that he may indicate the dove, inasmuch as that
bird has this number \[in its name\].

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p4"></span>2. <span id="ix.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span><span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p4.2"></span>But Jesus, he affirms, has the following
unspeakable origin. From the mother of all things, that is, the first
Tetrad, there came forth the second Tetrad, after the manner of a
daughter; and thus an Ogdoad was formed, from which, again, a Decad
proceeded: thus was produced a Decad and an Ogdoad. The Decad, then,
being joined with the Ogdoad, and multiplying it ten times, gave rise to
the number *eighty*; and, again, multiplying eighty ten times, produced
the number *eight hundred*. Thus, then, the whole number of the letters
proceeding from the Ogdoad \[multiplied\] into the Decad, is eight
hundred and eighty-eight. <span id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855)
This is the name of Jesus; for this name, if you reckon up the numerical
value of the letters, amounts to eight hundred and eighty-eight. Thus,
then, you have a clear statement of their opinion as to the origin of
the supercelestial Jesus. Wherefore, also, the alphabet of the Greeks
contains eight Monads, eight Decads, and eight Hecatads <span
id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856) , which present the number eight
hundred and eighty-eight, that is, *Jesus*, who is formed of all
numbers; and on this account He is called *Alpha* and *Omega*,
indicating His origin from all. And, again, they put the matter thus: If
the first Tetrad be added up according to the progression of number, the
number ten appears. For one, and two, and three, and four, when added
together, form ten; and this, as they will have it, is Jesus. Moreover,
Chreistus, he says, being a word of eight letters, indicates the first
Ogdoad, and this, when multiplied by ten, gives birth to Jesus (888).
And Christ the Son, he says, is also spoken of, that is, the Duodecad.
For the name Son, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p6.1"></span>υἰός</span>) contains four letters, and
Christ (Chreistus) eight, which, being combined, point out the greatness
of the Duodecad. But, he alleges, before the *Episemon* of this name
appeared, that is Jesus the Son, mankind were involved in great
ignorance and error. But when this name of six letters was manifested
(the person bearing it clothing Himself in flesh, that He might come
under the apprehension of man’s senses, and having in Himself these six
and twenty-four letters), then, becoming acquainted with Him, they
ceased from their ignorance, and passed from death unto life, this name
serving as their guide to the Father of truth. <span
id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857) For the Father of all had resolved
to put an end to ignorance, and to destroy death. But this abolishing of
ignorance was just the knowledge of Him. And therefore that man
(Anthropos) was chosen according to His will, having been formed after
the image of the \[corresponding\] power above.

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p8"></span>3. As to the Æons, they proceeded from
the Tetrad, and in that Tetrad were Anthropos and Ecclesia, Logos and
Zoe. <span id="ix.ii.xvi-p8.1"></span>The powers, then, he declares, who
emanated from these, generated that Jesus who appeared upon the earth.
The angel Gabriel took the place of Logos, the Holy Spirit that of Zoe,
the Power of the Highest that of Anthropos, while the Virgin pointed out
the place of Ecclesia. And thus, by a special dispensation, there was
generated by Him, through Mary, that man, whom, as He passed through the
womb, the Father of all chose to \[obtain\] the knowledge of Himself by
means of the Word. And on His coming to the water \[of baptism\], there
descended on Him, in the form of a dove, <span id="page_340">p.
340</span> <span id="ix.ii.xvi-Page_340"></span> that Being who had
formerly ascended on high, and completed the twelfth number, in whom
there existed the seed of those who were produced contemporaneously with
Himself, and who descended and ascended along with Him. Moreover, he
maintains that power which descended was the seed of the Father, which
had in itself both the Father and the Son, as well as that power of Sige
which is known by means of them, but cannot be expressed in language,
and also all the Æons. And this was that Spirit who spoke by the mouth
of Jesus, and who confessed that He was the son of Man as well as
revealed the Father, and who, having descended into Jesus, was made one
with Him. And he says that the Saviour formed by special dispensation
did indeed destroy death, but that Christ made known the Father. <span
id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858) He maintains, therefore, that Jesus
is the name of that man formed by a special dispensation, and that He
was formed after the likeness and form of that \[heavenly\] Anthropos,
who was about to descend upon Him. After He had received that Æon, He
possessed Anthropos himself, and Logos himself, and Pater, and Arrhetus,
and Sige, and Aletheia, and Ecclesia, and Zoe.

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p10"></span>4. Such ravings, we may now well say, go
beyond *Iu, Iu, Pheu, Pheu,* and every kind of tragic exclamation or
utterance of misery. <span id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859) For who
would not detest one who is the wretched contriver of such audacious
falsehoods, when he perceives the truth turned by Marcus into a mere
image, and that punctured all over with the letters of the alphabet? The
Greeks confess that they first received sixteen letters from Cadmus, and
that but recently, as compared with the beginning, \[the vast antiquity
of which is implied\] in the common proverb: “Yesterday and
before;” <span id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860) and afterwards, in
the course of time, they themselves invented at one period the
aspirates, and at another the double letters, while, last of all, they
say Palamedes added the long letters to the former. Was it so, then,
that until these things took place among the Greeks, truth had no
existence? For, according to thee, Marcus, the body of truth is
posterior to Cadmus and those who preceded him— posterior also to those
who added the rest of the letters— posterior even to thyself! For thou
alone hast formed that which is called by thee the truth into an
\[outward, visible\] image.

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p13"></span>5. But who will tolerate thy nonsensical
Sige, who names Him that cannot be named, and expounds the nature of Him
that is unspeakable, and searches out Him that is unsearchable, and
declares that He whom thou maintainest to be destitute of body and form,
opened His mouth and sent forth the Word, as if He were included among
organized beings; and that His Word, while like to His Author, and
bearing the image of the invisible, nevertheless consisted of thirty
elements and four syllables? It will follow, then, according to thy
theory, that the Father of all, in accordance with the likeness of the
Word, consists of thirty elements and four syllables! Or, again, who
will tolerate thee in thy juggling with forms and numbers,—at one time
thirty, at another twenty-four, and at another, again, only six,—whilst
thou shuttest up \[in these\] the Word of God, the Founder, and Framer,
and Maker of all things; and then, again, cutting Him up piecemeal into
four syllables and thirty elements; and bringing down the Lord of all
who founded the heavens to the number eight hundred and eighty-eight, so
that He should be similar to the alphabet; and subdividing the Father,
who cannot be contained, but contains all things, into a Tetrad, and an
Ogdoad, and a Decad, and a Duodecad; and by such multiplications,
setting forth the unspeakable and inconceivable nature of the Father, as
thou thyself declarest it to be? And showing thyself a very Dædalus for
evil invention, and the wicked architect of the supreme power, thou dost
construct a nature and substance for Him whom thou callest incorporeal
and immaterial, out of a multitude of letters, generated the one by the
other. And that power whom thou affirmest to be indivisible, thou dost
nevertheless divide into consonants, and vowels, and semi-vowels; and,
falsely ascribing those letters which are mute to the Father of all
things, and to His Ennœa (thought), thou hast driven on all that place
confidence in thee to the highest point of blasphemy, and to the
grossest impiety. <span id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861)

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p15"></span>6. With good reason, therefore, and very
fittingly, in reference to thy rash attempt, has that divine elder <span
id="fr_2862"></span>[2863](#fn_2862) and preacher of the truth burst
forth in verse against thee as follows:—

> <span id="ix.ii.xvi-p16.1"></span>“Marcus, thou former of idols,
> inspector of portents,  
> Skill’d in consulting the stars, and deep in the black arts of
> magic,  
> Ever by tricks such as these confirming the doctrines of error,  
> Furnishing signs unto those involved by thee in deception,  
> Wonders of power that is utterly severed from God and apostate,  
> Which Satan, thy true father, enables thee still to accomplish,  
> By means of Azazel, that fallen and yet mighty angel,—  
> Thus making thee the precursor of his own impious actions.”  

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p17"></span>Such are the words of the saintly elder.
And I shall endeavour to state the remainder of their mystical system,
which runs out to great length, in brief compass, and to bring to the
light what <span id="page_341">p. 341</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-Page_341"></span> has for a long time been concealed. For
in this way such things will become easily susceptible of exposure by
all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[339:2854](0010712.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p1.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p2"></span> Manifestly to be so spelt here, as in
the sequel *Chreistus*, for Christus.

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[339:2855](0010712.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p3"></span> The text is here altogether uncertain,
and the meaning obscure.

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[339:2856](0010712.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p5"></span> The reading is exceedingly doubtful:
some prefer the number *eighty-eight*.

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[339:2857](0010712.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p6"></span> There were, as Harvey observes, three
extraneous characters introduced into the Greek alphabet for the sake of
numeration —the three *episema* for 6, 90, and 900 respectively. The
true alphabet, then, as employed to denote number, included eight units,
eight tens, and eight hundreds.

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[339:2858](0010712.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p7"></span> Or, according to the Greek text, “being
as the way to the Father;” comp. [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[340:2859](0010712.htm#fr_2858) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p9"></span> The text is here uncertain: we follow
that suggested by Grabe.

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[340:2860](0010712.htm#fr_2859) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p11"></span> \[Comp. cap. xi. 4, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[340:2861](0010712.htm#fr_2860) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p12"></span> Comp. [Gen. xxxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p12.1"></span>.
—We here follow the punctuation of Scaliger, now generally accepted by
the editors, though entirely different from the old Latin.

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[340:2862](0010712.htm#fr_2861) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p14"></span> \[Mosheim thinks this Marcus was a
lunatic.\]

<span id="fn_2862"></span>[340:2863](0010712.htm#fr_2862) <span
id="ix.ii.xvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xvi-p16"></span> \[Some think Pothinus.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.—Absurd interpretations...](0010713)
