[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010594)  [Next](0010596) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.cxxxiv"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.cxxxiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter CXXXIV.—The marriages of Jacob are a figure of the Church.

<span id="viii.iv.cxxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxxxiv-p1.1"></span><span
id="viii.iv.cxxxiv-p1.2"></span>“If, then, the teaching of the prophets
and of Himself moves you, it is better for you to follow God than your
imprudent and blind masters, who even till this time permit each man to
have four or five wives; and if any one see a beautiful woman and desire
to have her, they quote the doings of Jacob \[called\] Israel, and of
the other <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="viii.iv.cxxxiv-Page_267"></span> patriarchs, and maintain that it is
not wrong to do such things; for they are miserably ignorant in this
matter. For, as I before said, certain dispensations of weighty
mysteries were accomplished in each act of this sort. For in the
marriages of Jacob I shall mention what dispensation and prophecy were
accomplished, in order that you may thereby know that your teachers
never looked at the divine motive which prompted each act, but only at
the grovelling and corrupting passions. Attend therefore to what I say.
The marriages of Jacob were types of that which Christ was about to
accomplish. For it was not lawful for Jacob to marry two sisters at
once. And he serves Laban for \[one of\] the daughters; and being
deceived in \[the obtaining of\] the younger, he again served seven
years. Now Leah is your people and synagogue; but Rachel is our Church.
And for these, and for the servants in both, Christ even now serves. For
while Noah gave to the two sons the seed of the third as servants, now
on the other hand Christ has come to restore both the free sons and the
servants amongst them, conferring the same honour on all of them who
keep His commandments; even as the children of the free women and the
children of the bond women born to Jacob were all sons, and equal in
dignity. And it was foretold what each should be according to rank and
according to fore-knowledge. Jacob served Laban for speckled and
many-spotted sheep; and Christ served, even to the slavery of the cross,
for the various and many-formed races of mankind, acquiring them by the
blood and mystery of the cross. Leah was weak-eyed; for the eyes of your
souls are excessively weak. Rachel stole the gods of Laban, and has hid
them to this day; and we have lost our paternal and material gods. Jacob
was hated for all time by his brother; and we now, and our Lord Himself,
are hated by you and by all men, though we are brothers by nature. Jacob
was called Israel; and Israel has been demonstrated to be the Christ,
who is, and is called, Jesus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter CXXXV.—Christ is king of...](0010596)
