[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010790)  [Next](0010792) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv.xxv"></span>

### <span id="ix.iv.xxv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.—Recapitulation of the various arguments adduced against Gnostic impiety under all its aspects. The heretics, tossed about by every blast of doctrine, are opposed by the uniform teaching of the Church, which remains so always, and is consistent with itself.

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p1"></span>1. Thus, then, have all these men been
exposed, who bring in impious doctrines regarding our Maker and Framer,
who also formed this world, and above whom there is no other God; and
those have been overthrown by their own arguments who teach falsehoods
regarding the substance of our Lord, and the dispensation which He
fulfilled for the sake of His own creature man. But \[it has, on the
other hand, been shown\], that the preaching of the Church is everywhere
consistent, and continues in an even course, and receives testimony from
the prophets, the apostles, and all the disciples—as I have proved—
through \[those in\] the beginning, the middle, and the end, <span
id="fr_3780"></span>[3781](#fn_3780) and through the entire dispensation
of God, and that well-grounded system which tends <span
id="fr_3781"></span>[3782](#fn_3781) to man’s salvation, namely, our
faith; which, having been received from the Church, we do preserve, and
which always, by the Spirit of God, renewing its youth, as if it were
some precious deposit in an excellent vessel, causes the vessel itself
containing it to renew its youth also. For this gift of God has been
entrusted to the Church, as breath was to the first created man, <span
id="fr_3782"></span>[3783](#fn_3782) for this purpose, that all the
members receiving it may be vivified; and the \[means of\] communion
with Christ has been distributed throughout it, that is, the Holy
Spirit, the earnest of incorruption, the means of confirming our faith,
and the ladder of ascent to God. “For in the Church,” it is said, “God
hath set apostles, prophets, teachers,” <span
id="fr_3783"></span>[3784](#fn_3783) and all the other means through
which the Spirit works; of which all those are not partakers who do not
join themselves to the Church, but defraud themselves of life through
their perverse opinions and infamous behaviour. For where the Church is,
there is the Spirit of God; and where the Spirit of God is, there is the
Church, and every kind of grace; but the Spirit is truth. Those,
therefore, who do not partake of Him, are neither nourished into life
from the mother’s breasts, nor do they enjoy that most limpid fountain
which issues from the body of Christ; but they dig for themselves broken
cisterns <span id="fr_3784"></span>[3785](#fn_3784) out of earthly
trenches, and drink putrid water out of the mire, fleeing from the faith
of the Church lest they be convicted; and rejecting the Spirit, that
they may not be instructed.

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p7"></span>2. Alienated thus from the truth, they do
deservedly wallow in all error, tossed to and fro by it, thinking
differently in regard to the same things at different times, and never
attaining to a well-grounded knowledge, being more anxious to be
sophists of words than disciples of the truth. For they have not been
founded upon the one rock, but upon the sand, which has in itself a
multitude of stones. Wherefore they also imagine many gods, and they
always have the excuse of searching \[after truth\] (for they are
blind), but never succeed in finding it. For they blaspheme the Creator,
Him who is truly God, who also furnishes power to find \[the truth\];
imagining that they have discovered another god beyond God, or another
Pleroma, or another dispensation. Wherefore also the light which is from
God does not illumine them, because they have dishonoured and despised
God, holding Him of small account, because, through His love and
infinite benignity, He has come within reach of human knowledge
(knowledge, however, not with regard to His greatness, or with regard to
His essence—for that has no <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="ix.iv.xxv-Page_459"></span> man measured or handled—but after this
sort: that we should know that He who made, and formed, and breathed in
them the breath of life, and nourishes us by means of the creation,
establishing all things by His Word, and binding them together by His
Wisdom <span id="fr_3785"></span>[3786](#fn_3785) — this is He who is
the only true God); but they dream of a non-existent being above Him,
that they may be regarded as having found out the great God, whom
nobody, \[they hold,\] can recognise holding communication with the
human race, or as directing mundane matters: that is to say, they find
out the god of Epicurus, who does nothing either for himself or others;
that is, he exercises no providence at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3780"></span>[458:3781](0010791.htm#fr_3780) <span
id="ix.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p2"></span> Literally, “through the beginnings, the
means, and the end.” These three terms refer to the Prophets, the
Apostles, and the Church Catholic.

<span id="fn_3781"></span>[458:3782](0010791.htm#fr_3781) <span
id="ix.iv.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p3"></span> The Latin is “solidam operationem,”
which we know not how to translate, in accordance with the context,
except as above.

<span id="fn_3782"></span>[458:3783](0010791.htm#fr_3782) <span
id="ix.iv.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p4"></span> This seems to be the meaning conveyed by
the old Latin, “quemadmodum aspiratio plasmationi.”

<span id="fn_3783"></span>[458:3784](0010791.htm#fr_3783) <span
id="ix.iv.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028)<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3784"></span>[458:3785](0010791.htm#fr_3784) <span
id="ix.iv.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p6"></span> [Jer. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3785"></span>[459:3786](0010791.htm#fr_3785) <span
id="ix.iv.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.xxv-p8"></span> i.e., the Spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.—This world is ruled by...](0010792)
