[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010467)  [Next](0010469.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iv.vii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iv.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—The knowledge of truth to be sought from the prophets alone.

<span id="viii.iv.vii-p1"></span>“ ‘Should any one, then, employ a
teacher?’ I say, ‘or whence may any one be helped, if not even in them
there is truth?’

<span id="viii.iv.vii-p2"></span><span
id="viii.iv.vii-p2.1"></span><span id="viii.iv.vii-p2.2"></span>“ ‘There
existed, long before this time, certain men more ancient than all those
who are esteemed philosophers, both righteous and beloved by God, who
spoke by the Divine Spirit, and foretold events which would take place,
and which are now taking place. They are called prophets. These alone
both saw and announced the truth to men, neither reverencing nor fearing
any man, not influenced by a desire for glory, but speaking those things
alone which they saw and which they heard, being filled with the Holy
Spirit. <span id="viii.iv.vii-p2.3"></span>Their writings are still
extant, and he who has read them is very much helped in his knowledge of
the beginning and end of things, and of those matters which the
philosopher ought to know, provided he has believed them. For they did
not use demonstration in their treatises, seeing that they were
witnesses to the truth above all demonstration, and worthy of belief;
and those events which have happened, and those which are happening,
compel you to assent to the utterances made by them, although, indeed,
they were entitled to credit on account of the miracles which they
performed, since they both glorified the Creator, the God and Father of
all things, and proclaimed His Son, the Christ \[sent\] by Him: which,
indeed, the false prophets, who are filled with the lying unclean
spirit, neither have done nor do, but venture to work certain wonderful
deeds for the purpose of astonishing men, and glorify the spirits and
demons of error. But pray that, above all things, the gates of light may
be opened to you; for these things cannot be perceived or understood by
all, but only by the man to whom God and His Christ have imparted
wisdom.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—Justin by his colloquy...](0010469.md)
