[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010451)  [Next](0010453) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.iii.vii"></span>

### <span id="viii.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.—The world preserved for the sake of Christians. Man’s responsibility.

<span id="viii.iii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Wherefore God delays causing the confusion
and destruction of the whole world, by which the wicked angels and
demons and men shall cease to exist, because of the seed of the
Christians, who know that they are the cause of preservation in
nature. <span id="fr_1932"></span>[1933](#fn_1932) Since, if it were not
so, it would not have been possible for you to do these things, and to
be impelled by evil spirits; but the fire of judgment would descend and
utterly dissolve all things, even as formerly the flood left no one but
him only with his family who is by us called Noah, and by you Deucalion,
from whom again such vast numbers have sprung, some of them evil and
others good. <span id="viii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>For so we say that
there will be the conflagration, but not as the Stoics, according to
their doctrine of all things being changed into one another, which seems
most degrading. But neither do we affirm that it is by fate that men do
what they do, or suffer what they suffer, but that each man by free
choice acts rightly or sins; and that it is by the influence of the
wicked demons that earnest men, such as Socrates and the like, suffer
persecution and are in bonds, while Sardanapalus, Epicurus, and the
like, seem to be blessed in abundance and glory. The Stoics, not
observing this, maintained that all things take place according to the
necessity of fate. <span id="viii.iii.vii-p2.2"></span><span
id="viii.iii.vii-p2.3"></span><span id="viii.iii.vii-p2.4"></span>But
since God in the beginning made the race of angels and men with
free-will, they will justly suffer in eternal fire the punishment of
whatever sins they have committed. And this is the nature of all that is
made, to be capable of vice and virtue. For neither would any of them be
praiseworthy unless there were power to turn to both \[virtue and
vice\]. And this also is shown by those men everywhere who have made
laws and philosophized according to right reason, by their prescribing
to do some things and refrain from others. Even the Stoic philosophers,
in their <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="viii.iii.vii-Page_191"></span> doctrine of morals, steadily honour
the same things, so that it is evident that they are not very felicitous
in what they say about principles and incorporeal things. For if they
say that human actions come to pass by fate, they will maintain either
that God is nothing else than the things which are ever turning, and
altering, and dissolving into the same things, and will appear to have
had a comprehension only of things that are destructible, and to have
looked on God Himself as emerging both in part and in whole in every
wickedness; <span id="fr_1933"></span>[1934](#fn_1933) or that neither
vice nor virtue is anything; which is contrary to every sound idea,
reason, and sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[190:1933](0010452.htm#fr_1932) <span
id="viii.iii.vii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.vii-p2"></span> This is Dr. Donaldson’s rendering of
a clause on which the editors differ both as to reading and rendering.

<span id="fn_1933"></span>[191:1934](0010452.htm#fr_1933) <span
id="viii.iii.vii-p2.5"></span>

<span id="viii.iii.vii-p3"></span> Literally, “becoming (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>γινόμενον</span>) both
through the parts and through the whole in every wickedness.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.—All have been hated in...](0010453)
