[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010382)  [Next](0010384) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.x"></span>

### <span id="viii.ii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.—How God is to be served.

<span id="viii.ii.x-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>But we
have received by tradition that God does not need the material offerings
which men can give, seeing, indeed, that He Himself is the provider of
all things. And we have been taught, and are convinced, and do believe,
that He accepts those only who imitate the excellences which reside in
Him, temperance, and justice, and philanthropy, and as many virtues as
are peculiar to a God who is called by no proper name. And we have been
taught that He in the beginning did of His goodness, for man’s sake,
create all things out of unformed matter; and if men by their works show
themselves worthy of this His design, they are deemed worthy, and so we
have received—of reigning in company with Him, being delivered from
corruption and suffering. <span id="viii.ii.x-p1.2"></span>For as in the
beginning He created us when we were not, so do we consider that, in
like manner, those who choose what is pleasing to Him are, on account of
their choice, deemed worthy of incorruption and of fellowship with Him.
For the coming into being at first was not in our own power; and in
order that we may follow those things which please Him, choosing them by
means of the rational faculties He has Himself endowed us with, He both
persuades us and leads us to faith. And we think it for the advantage of
all men that they are not restrained from learning these <span
id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span id="viii.ii.x-Page_166"></span>
things, but are even urged thereto. For the restraint which human laws
could not effect, the Word, inasmuch as He is divine, would have
effected, had not the wicked demons, taking as their ally the lust of
wickedness which is in every man, and which draws variously to all
manner of vice, scattered many false and profane accusations, none of
which attach to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI.—What kingdom Christians...](0010384)
