[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010721)  [Next](0010723.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi"></span>

### <span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXV.—Doctrines of Carpocrates.

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Carpocrates, again, and his followers
maintain that the world and the things which are therein were created by
angels greatly inferior to the unbegotten Father. They also hold that
Jesus was the son of Joseph, and was just like other men, with the
exception that he differed from them in this respect, that inasmuch as
his soul was stedfast and pure, he perfectly remembered those things
which he had witnessed <span id="fr_2944"></span>[2945](#fn_2944.md) within
the sphere of the unbegotten God. On this account, a power descended
upon him from the Father, that by means of it he might escape from the
creators of the world; and they say that it, after passing through them
all, and remaining in all points free, ascended again to him, and to the
powers, <span id="fr_2945"></span>[2946](#fn_2945.md) which in the same way
embraced like things to itself. They further declare, that the soul of
Jesus, although educated in the practices of the Jews, regarded these
with contempt, and that for this reason he was endowed with faculties,
by means of which he destroyed those passions which dwelt in men as a
punishment \[for their sins\].

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p4"></span>2. The soul, therefore, which is like
that of Christ can despise those rulers who were the creators of the
world, and, in like manner, receives power for accomplishing the same
results. This idea has raised them to such a pitch of pride, that some
of them declare themselves similar to Jesus; while others, still more
mighty, maintain that they are superior to his disciples, such as Peter
and Paul, and the rest of the apostles, whom they consider to be in no
respect inferior to Jesus. For their souls, descending from the same
sphere as his, and therefore despising in like manner the creators of
the world, are deemed worthy of the same power, and again depart to the
same place. But if any one shall have despised the things in this world
more than he did, he thus proves himself superior to him.

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p5"></span>3. <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>They practise also magical arts and
incantations; philters, also, and love-potions; and have recourse to
familiar spirits, dream-sending demons, and other abominations,
declaring that they possess power to rule over, even now, the princes
and formers of this world; and not only them, but also all things that
are in it. These men, even as the Gentiles, have been sent forth by
Satan <span id="fr_2946"></span>[2947](#fn_2946.md) to bring dishonour upon
the Church, so that, in one way or another, men hearing the things which
they speak, and imagining that we all are such as they, may turn away
their ears from the preaching of the truth; or, again, seeing the things
they practise, may speak evil of <span id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-Page_351"></span> us all, who have in fact no fellowship
with them, either in doctrine or in morals, or in our daily conduct.
<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>But they lead a licentious life, <span
id="fr_2947"></span>[2948](#fn_2947.md) and, to conceal their impious
doctrines, they abuse the name \[of Christ\], as a means of hiding their
wickedness; so that “their condemnation is just,” <span
id="fr_2948"></span>[2949](#fn_2948.md) when they receive from God a
recompense suited to their works.

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p9"></span>4. <span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>So
unbridled is their madness, that they declare they have in their power
all things which are irreligious and impious, and are at liberty to
practise them; for they maintain that things are evil or good, simply in
virtue of human opinion. <span id="fr_2949"></span>[2950](#fn_2949.md) They
deem it necessary, therefore, that by means of transmigration from body
to body, souls should have experience of every kind of life as well as
every kind of action (unless, indeed, by a single incarnation, one may
be able to prevent any need for others, by once for all, and with equal
completeness, doing all those things which we dare not either speak or
hear of, nay, which we must not even conceive in our thoughts, nor think
credible, if any such thing is mooted among those persons who are our
fellow-citizens), in order that, as their writings express it, their
souls, having made trial of every kind of life, may, at their departure,
not be wanting in any particular. It is necessary <span
id="fr_2950"></span>[2951](#fn_2950.md) to insist upon this, lest, on
account of some one thing being still wanting to their deliverance, they
should be compelled once more to become incarnate. They affirm that for
this reason Jesus spoke the following parable:—“Whilst thou art with
thine adversary in the way, give all diligence, that thou mayest be
delivered from him, lest he give thee up to the judge, and the judge
surrender thee to the officer, and he cast thee into prison. Verily, I
say unto thee, thou shalt not go out thence until thou pay the very last
farthing.” <span id="fr_2951"></span>[2952](#fn_2951.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p12.3"></span><span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p12.4"></span>They
also declare the “adversary” is one of those angels who are in the
world, whom they call the Devil, maintaining that he was formed for this
purpose, that he might lead those souls which have perished from the
world to the Supreme Ruler. They describe him also as being chief among
the makers of the world, and maintain that he delivers such souls \[as
have been mentioned\] to another angel, who ministers to him, that he
may shut them up in other bodies; for they declare that the body is “the
prison.” Again, they interpret these expressions, “Thou shalt not go out
thence until thou pay the very last farthing,” as meaning that no one
can escape from the power of those angels who made the world, but that
he must pass from body to body, until he has experience of every kind of
action which can be practised in this world, and when nothing is longer
wanting to him, then his liberated soul should soar upwards to that God
who is above the angels, the makers of the world. In this way also all
souls are saved, whether their own which, guarding against all delay,
participate in all sorts of actions during one incarnation, or those,
again, who, by passing from body to body, are set free, on fulfilling
and accomplishing what is requisite in every form of life into which
they are sent, so that at length they shall no longer be \[shut up\] in
the body.

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p13"></span>5. And thus, if ungodly, unlawful, and
forbidden actions are committed among them, I can no longer find ground
for believing them to be such. <span
id="fr_2952"></span>[2953](#fn_2952.md) And in their writings we read as
follows, the interpretation which they give \[of their views\],
declaring that Jesus spoke in a mystery to His disciples and apostles
privately, and that they requested and obtained permission to hand down
the things thus taught them, to others who should be worthy and
believing. We are saved, indeed, by means of faith and love; but all
other things, while in their nature indifferent, are reckoned by the
opinion of men—some good and some evil, there being nothing really evil
by nature.

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p15"></span>6. <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>Others of them employ outward marks,
branding their disciples inside the lobe of the right ear. From among
these also arose Marcellina, who came to Rome under \[the episcopate
of\] Anicetus, and, holding these doctrines, she led multitudes astray.
They style themselves Gnostics. They also possess images, some of them
painted, and others formed from different kinds of material; while they
maintain that a likeness of Christ was made by Pilate at that time when
Jesus lived among them. <span id="fr_2953"></span>[2954](#fn_2953.md) They
crown these images, and set them up along with the images of the
philosophers of the world that is to say, with the images of Pythagoras,
and Plato, and Aristotle, and the rest. They have also other modes of
honouring these images, after the same manner of the Gentiles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2944"></span>[350:2945](0010722.htm#fr_2944.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p2"></span> \[I note again this “Americanism.”\]

<span id="fn_2945"></span>[350:2946](0010722.htm#fr_2945.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> Such seems to be the meaning of the
Latin, but the original text is conjectural.

<span id="fn_2946"></span>[350:2947](0010722.htm#fr_2946.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p6"></span> \[See cap. xxvii. 3.\]

<span id="fn_2947"></span>[351:2948](0010722.htm#fr_2947.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p7"></span> The text is here defective, but the
above meaning seems to be indicated by Epiphanius.

<span id="fn_2948"></span>[351:2949](0010722.htm#fr_2948.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p8"></span> [Rom. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008.md)<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2949"></span>[351:2950](0010722.htm#fr_2949.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p10"></span> \[[Isa. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>.
Horne Tooke derives our word *Truth* from what any one *troweth*.\]

<span id="fn_2950"></span>[351:2951](0010722.htm#fr_2950.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p11"></span> The text here has greatly puzzled the
editors. We follow the simple emendation proposed by Harvey.

<span id="fn_2951"></span>[351:2952](0010722.htm#fr_2951.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p12"></span> [Matt.
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#026.md)<span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>; [Luke
12:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#058.md),
[59](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#059.md)<span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2952"></span>[351:2953](0010722.htm#fr_2952.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p14"></span> The meaning is here very doubtful, but
Tertullian understood the words as above. If sinning were a *necessity*,
then it could no longer be regarded as evil.

<span id="fn_2953"></span>[351:2954](0010722.htm#fr_2953.md) <span
id="ix.ii.xxvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.xxvi-p16"></span> \[This censure of images as a Gnostic
peculiarity, and as a heathenish corruption, should be noted.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI.—Doctrines of...](0010723.md)
