[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010821)  [Next](0010823) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii"></span>

### <span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII—The sins of the men of old time, which incurred the displeasure of God, were, by His providence, committed to writing, that we might derive instruction thereby, and not be filled with pride. We must not, therefore, infer that there was another God than He whom Christ preached; we should rather fear, lest the one and the same God who inflicted punishment on the ancients, should bring down heavier upon us.

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p1"></span>1. <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>As I have heard from a certain
presbyter, <span id="fr_4173"></span>[4174](#fn_4173) who had heard it
from those who had seen the apostles, and from those who had been their
disciples, the punishment \[declared\] in Scripture was sufficient for
the ancients in regard to what they did without the Spirit’s guidance.
For as God is no respecter of persons, He inflicted a proper punishment
on deeds displeasing to Him. As in the case of David, <span
id="fr_4174"></span>[4175](#fn_4174) when he suffered persecution from
Saul for righteousness’ sake, and fled from King Saul, and would not
avenge himself of his enemy, he both sung the advent of Christ, and
instructed the nations in wisdom, and did everything after the Spirit’s
guidance, and pleased God. But when his lust prompted him to take
Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, the Scripture said concerning him, “Now,
the thing (*sermo*) which David had done appeared wicked in the eyes of
the <span class="upper"><span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p3.2"></span>Lord</span>;” <span
id="fr_4175"></span>[4176](#fn_4175) and Nathan the prophet is sent to
him, pointing out to him his crime, in order that he, passing sentence
upon and condemning himself, might obtain mercy and forgiveness from
Christ: “And \[Nathan\] said to him, There were two men in one city; the
one rich, and the other poor. The rich man had exceeding many flocks and
herds; but the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe-lamb, which he
possessed, and nourished up; and it had been with him and with his
children together: it did eat of his own bread, and drank of his cup,
and was to him as a daughter. And there came a guest unto the rich man;
and he spared to take of the flock of his own ewe-lambs, and from the
herds of his own oxen, to entertain the guest; but he took the ewe-lamb
of the poor man, and set it before the man that had come unto him. And
David’s anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to
Nathan, As the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall
surely die (*filius mortis est*): and he shall restore the lamb
fourfold, because he hath done this thing, and because he had no pity
for the poor man. And Nathan said unto him, Thou art the man who hast
done this.” <span id="fr_4176"></span>[4177](#fn_4176) And then he
proceeds with the rest \[of the narrative\], upbraiding him, and
recounting God’s benefits towards him, and \[showing him\] how much his
conduct had displeased the Lord. For \[he declared\] that works of this
nature were not pleasing to God, but that great wrath was suspended over
his house. David, however, was struck with remorse on hearing this, and
exclaimed, “I have sinned against the Lord;” and he sung a penitential
psalm, waiting for the coming of the Lord, who washes and makes clean
the man who had <span id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-Page_499"></span> been fast bound with \[the chain of\]
sin. In like manner it was with regard to Solomon, while he continued to
judge uprightly, and to declare the wisdom of God, and built the temple
as the type of truth, and set forth the glories of God, and announced
the peace about to come upon the nations, and prefigured the kingdom of
Christ, and spake three thousand parables about the Lord’s advent, and
five thousand songs, singing praise to God, and expounded the wisdom of
God in creation, \[discoursing\] as to the nature of every tree, every
herb, and of all fowls, quadrupeds, and fishes; and he said, “Will God
whom the heavens cannot contain, really dwell with men upon the
earth?” <span id="fr_4177"></span>[4178](#fn_4177) And he pleased God,
and was the admiration of all; and all kings of the earth sought an
interview with him (*quærebant faciem ejus*) that they might hear the
wisdom which God had conferred upon him. <span
id="fr_4178"></span>[4179](#fn_4178) The queen of the south, too, came
to him from the ends of the earth, to ascertain the wisdom that was in
him: <span id="fr_4179"></span>[4180](#fn_4179) she whom the Lord also
referred to as one who should rise up in the judgment with the nations
of those men who do hear His words, and do not believe in Him, and
should condemn them, inasmuch as she submitted herself to the wisdom
announced by the servant of God, while these men despised that wisdom
which proceeded directly from the Son of God. For Solomon was a servant,
but Christ is indeed the Son of God, and the Lord of Solomon. While,
therefore, he served God without blame, and ministered to His
dispensations, then was he glorified: but when he took wives from all
nations, and permitted them to set up idols in Israel, the Scripture
spake thus concerning him: “And King Solomon was a lover of women, and
he took to himself foreign women; and it came to pass, when Solomon was
old, his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God. And the foreign
women turned away his heart after strange gods. And Solomon did evil in
the sight of the Lord: he did not walk after the Lord, as did David his
father. And the Lord was angry with Solomon; for his heart was not
perfect with the Lord, as was the heart of David his father.” <span
id="fr_4180"></span>[4181](#fn_4180) The Scripture has thus sufficiently
reproved him, as the presbyter remarked, in order that no flesh may
glory in the sight of the Lord.

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p10"></span>2. <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p10.1"></span>It was for this reason, too, that the
Lord descended into the regions beneath the earth, preaching His advent
there also, and \[declaring\] the remission of sins received by those
who believe in Him. <span id="fr_4181"></span>[4182](#fn_4181) Now all
those believed in Him who had hope towards Him, that is, those who
proclaimed His advent, and submitted to His dispensations, the righteous
men, the prophets, and the patriarchs, to whom He remitted sins in the
same way as He did to us, which sins we should not lay to their charge,
if we would not despise the grace of God. For as these men did not
impute unto us (the Gentiles) our transgressions, which we wrought
before Christ was manifested among us, so also it is not right that we
should lay blame upon those who sinned before Christ’s coming. For “all
men come short of the glory of God,” <span
id="fr_4182"></span>[4183](#fn_4182) and are not justified of
themselves, but by the advent of the Lord,—they who earnestly direct
their eyes towards His light. And it is for our instruction that their
actions have been committed to writing, that we might know, in the first
place, that our God and theirs is one, and that sins do not please Him
although committed by men of renown; and in the second place, that we
should keep from wickedness. For if these men of old time, who preceded
us in the gifts \[bestowed upon them\], and for whom the Son of God had
not yet suffered, when they committed any sin and served fleshly lusts,
were rendered objects of such disgrace, what shall the men of the
present day suffer, who have despised the Lord’s coming, and become the
slaves of their own lusts? And truly the death of the Lord became \[the
means of\] healing and remission of sins to the former, but Christ shall
not die again in behalf of those who now commit sin, for death shall no
more have dominion over Him; but the Son shall come in the glory of the
Father, requiring from His stewards and dispensers the money which He
had entrusted to them, with usury; and from those to whom He had given
most shall He demand most. We ought not, therefore, as that presbyter
remarks, to be puffed up, nor be severe upon those of old time, but
ought ourselves to fear, lest perchance, after \[we have come to\] the
knowledge of Christ, if we do things displeasing to God, we obtain no
further forgiveness of sins, but be shut out from His kingdom. <span
id="fr_4183"></span>[4184](#fn_4183) And therefore it was that Paul
said, “For if \[God\] spared not the natural branches, \[take heed\]
lest He also spare not thee, who, when thou wert a wild olive tree, wert
grafted into the fatness of the olive tree, and wert made a partaker of
its fatness.” <span id="fr_4184"></span>[4185](#fn_4184)

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p15"></span>3. Thou wilt notice, too, that the
transgressions of the common people have been described in like manner,
not for the sake of those who did then transgress, but as a means of
instruction unto us, and that we should understand that it is one and
the same God against whom these <span id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-Page_500"></span> men sinned, and against whom certain
persons do now transgress from among those who profess to have believed
in Him. But this also, \[as the presbyter states,\] has Paul declared
most plainly in the Epistle to the Corinthians, when he says, “Brethren,
I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers were
under the cloud, and were all baptized unto Moses in the sea, and did
all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink: for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them; and the
rock was Christ. But with many of them God was not well pleased, for
they were overthrown in the wilderness. These things were for our
example (*in figuram nostri*), to the intent that we should not lust
after evil things, as they also lusted; neither be ye idolaters, as were
some of them, as it is written: <span
id="fr_4185"></span>[4186](#fn_4185) The people sat down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play. Neither let us commit fornication, as some
of them also did, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither
let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of
serpents. Neither murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and were
destroyed of the destroyer. But all these things happened to them in a
figure, and were written for our admonition, upon whom the end of the
world (*sæculorum*) is come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he
standeth, take heed lest he fall.” <span
id="fr_4186"></span>[4187](#fn_4186)

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p18"></span>4. Since therefore, beyond all doubt
and contradiction, the apostle shows that there is one and the same God,
who did both enter into judgment with these former things, and who does
inquire into those of the present time, and points out why these things
have been committed to writing; all these men are found to be unlearned
and presumptuous, nay, even destitute of common sense, who, because of
the transgressions of them of old time, and because of the disobedience
of a vast number of them, do allege that there was indeed one God of
these men, and that He was the maker of the world, and existed in a
state of degeneracy; but that there was another Father declared by
Christ, and that this Being is He who has been conceived by the mind of
each of them; not understanding that as, in the former case, God showed
Himself not well pleased in many instances towards those who sinned, so
also in the latter, “many are called, but few are chosen.” <span
id="fr_4187"></span>[4188](#fn_4187) As then the unrighteous, the
idolaters, and fornicators perished, so also is it now: for both the
Lord declares, that such persons are sent into eternal fire; <span
id="fr_4188"></span>[4189](#fn_4188) and the apostle says, “Know ye not
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, not
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit
the kingdom of God.” <span id="fr_4189"></span>[4190](#fn_4189) And as
it was not to those who are without that he said these things, but to
us, lest we should be cast forth from the kingdom of God, by doing any
such thing, he proceeds to say, “And such indeed were ye; but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
by the Spirit of our God.” And just as then, those who led vicious
lives, and put other people astray, were condemned and cast out, so also
even now the offending eye is plucked out, and the foot and the hand,
lest the rest of the body perish in like manner. <span
id="fr_4190"></span>[4191](#fn_4190) And we have the precept: “If any
man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an
idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an
one go not to eat.” <span id="fr_4191"></span>[4192](#fn_4191) And again
does the apostle say, “Let no man deceive you with vain words; for
because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the sons of
mistrust. Be not ye therefore partakers with them.” <span
id="fr_4192"></span>[4193](#fn_4192) And as then the condemnation of
sinners extended to others who approved of them, and joined in their
society; so also is it the case at present, that “a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump.” <span id="fr_4193"></span>[4194](#fn_4193)
And as the wrath of God did then descend upon the unrighteous, here also
does the apostle likewise say: “For the wrath of God shall be revealed
from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of those men who
hold back the truth in unrighteousness.” <span
id="fr_4194"></span>[4195](#fn_4194) And as, in those times, vengeance
came from God upon the Egyptians who were subjecting Israel to unjust
punishment, so is it now, the Lord truly declaring, “And shall not God
avenge His own elect, which cry day and night unto Him? I tell you, that
He will avenge them speedily.” <span
id="fr_4195"></span>[4196](#fn_4195) So says the apostle, in like
manner, in the Epistle to the Thessalonians: “Seeing it is a righteous
thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and
to you who are troubled rest with us, at the revealing of our Lord Jesus
Christ from heaven with His mighty angels, and in a flame of fire, to
take vengeance upon those who know not God, and upon those that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall also be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the
glory of His power; when He shall come to be glorified in <span
id="page_501">p. 501</span> <span id="ix.vi.xxviii-Page_501"></span> His
saints, and to be admired in all them who have believed in Him.” <span
id="fr_4196"></span>[4197](#fn_4196)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4173"></span>[498:4174](0010822.htm#fr_4173) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p2"></span> Polycarp, Papias, Pothinus, and
others, have been suggested as probably here referred to, but the point
is involved in utter uncertainty. \[Surely this testimony is a precious
intimation of the apostle’s meaning ([Rom. ii.
12-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p2.1"></span>), and the whole chapter is radiant with
the purity of the Gospel.\]

<span id="fn_4174"></span>[498:4175](0010822.htm#fr_4174) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p3"></span> [1 Sam.
xviii.](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#000)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4175"></span>[498:4176](0010822.htm#fr_4175) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p4"></span> [2 Sam. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#027)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4176"></span>[498:4177](0010822.htm#fr_4176) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p5"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p5.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_4177"></span>[499:4178](0010822.htm#fr_4177) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p6"></span> [1 Kings viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4178"></span>[499:4179](0010822.htm#fr_4178) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p7"></span> [1 Kings iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#034)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4179"></span>[499:4180](0010822.htm#fr_4179) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p8"></span> [1 Kings x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4180"></span>[499:4181](0010822.htm#fr_4180) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p9"></span> [1 Kings xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4181"></span>[499:4182](0010822.htm#fr_4181) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p11"></span> \[[1 Pet.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p11.1"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_4182"></span>[499:4183](0010822.htm#fr_4182) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p12"></span> [Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p12.1"></span>. \[Another testimony to the mercy of God
in the judgment of the unevangelized. There must have been some reason
for the secrecy with which “that presbyter’s” name is guarded. Irenæus
may have scrupled to draw the wrath of the Gnostics upon any name but
his own.\]

<span id="fn_4183"></span>[499:4184](0010822.htm#fr_4183) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p13"></span> [Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p13.1"></span>. \[Another testimony to the mercy of God
in the judgment of the unevangelized. There must have been some reason
for the secrecy with which “that presbyter’s” name is guarded. Irenæus
may have scrupled to draw the wrath of the Gnostics upon any name but
his own.\]

<span id="fn_4184"></span>[499:4185](0010822.htm#fr_4184) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p14"></span> [Rom.
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4185"></span>[500:4186](0010822.htm#fr_4185) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p16"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4186"></span>[500:4187](0010822.htm#fr_4186) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p17"></span> [1 Cor. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p17.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_4187"></span>[500:4188](0010822.htm#fr_4187) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p19"></span> [Matt. xx.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4188"></span>[500:4189](0010822.htm#fr_4188) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p20"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4189"></span>[500:4190](0010822.htm#fr_4189) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#010)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4190"></span>[500:4191](0010822.htm#fr_4190) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p22"></span> [Matt.
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4191"></span>[500:4192](0010822.htm#fr_4191) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p23"></span> [1 Cor. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4192"></span>[500:4193](0010822.htm#fr_4192) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p24"></span> [Eph.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#007)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4193"></span>[500:4194](0010822.htm#fr_4193) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p25"></span> [1 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4194"></span>[500:4195](0010822.htm#fr_4194) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p26"></span> [Rom. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4195"></span>[500:4196](0010822.htm#fr_4195) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p27"></span> [Luke
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4196"></span>[501:4197](0010822.htm#fr_4196) <span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi.xxviii-p28"></span> [2 Thess. i.
6-10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span
id="ix.vi.xxviii-p28.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII.—Those persons prove...](0010823)
