[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010080)  [Next](0010082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span> <span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_31"></span>

## <span id="iv.i-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note to the Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>\[<span
class="upper"><span id="iv.i-p1.2"></span>a.d.</span> 65–100–155.\]
<span class="upper"><span id="iv.i-p1.3"></span>The</span> Epistle of
Polycarp is usually made a sort of preface to those of Ignatius, for
reasons which will be obvious to the reader. Yet he was born later, and
lived to a much later period. They seem to have been friends from the
days of their common pupilage under St. John; and there is nothing
improbable in the conjecture of Usher, that he was the “angel of the
church in Smyrna,” to whom the Master says, “Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a crown of life.” His pupil Irenæus gives us
one of the very few portraits of an apostolic man which are to be found
in antiquity, in a few sentences which are a picture: “I could describe
the very place in which the blessed Polycarp sat and taught; his going
out and coming in; the whole tenor of his life; his personal appearance;
how he would speak of the conversations he had held with John and with
others who had seen the Lord. How did he make mention of their words and
of whatever he had heard from them respecting the Lord.” Thus he
unconsciously tantalizes our reverent curiosity. Alas! that such
conversations were not written for our learning. But there is a wise
Providence in what is withheld, as well as in the inestimable treasures
we have received.

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>Irenæus will tell us more concerning him, his
visit to Rome, his rebuke of Marcion, and incidental anecdotes, all
which are instructive. The expression which he applied to Marcion is
found in this Epistle. Other facts of interest are found in the
Martyrdom, which follows in these pages. His death, in extreme old age
under the first of the Antonines, has been variously dated; but we may
accept the date we have given, as rendered probable by that of the
Paschal question, which he so lovingly settled with Anicetus, Bishop of
Rome.

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>The Epistle to the Philippians is the more
interesting as denoting the state of that beloved church, the firstborn
of European churches, and so greatly endeared to St. Paul. It abounds in
practical wisdom, and is rich in Scripture and Scriptural allusions. It
reflects the spirit of St. John, alike in its lamb-like and its aquiline
features: he is as loving as the beloved disciple himself when he speaks
of Christ and his church, but “the son of thunder” is echoed in his
rebukes of threatened corruptions in faith and morals. Nothing can be
more clear than his view of the doctrines of grace; but he writes like
the disciple of St. John, though in perfect harmony with St. Paul’s
hymn-like eulogy of Christian love.

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>The following is the original <span
class="upper"><span id="iv.i-p4.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>:—

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>The </span>authenticity of the following Epistle
can on no fair grounds be questioned. It is abundantly established by
external testimony, and is also supported by the internal evidence.
Irenæus says (*Adv. Hær.*, iii. 3): “There is extant an Epistle of
Polycarp written to the Philippians, most satisfactory, from which those
that have a mind to do so may learn the character of his <span
id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="iv.i-Page_32"></span> faith,” etc.
This passage is embodied by Eusebius in his *Ecclesiastical History*
(iv. 14); and in another place the same writer refers to the Epistle
before us as an undoubted production of Polycarp (*Hist. Eccl.*, iii.
36). Other ancient testimonies might easily be added, but are
superfluous, inasmuch as there is a general consent among scholars at
the present day that we have in this letter an authentic production of
the renowned Bishop of Smyrna.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>Of Polycarp’s life little is known, but that
little is highly interesting. Irenæus was his disciple, and tells us
that “Polycarp was instructed by the apostles, and was brought into
contact with many who had seen Christ” (*Adv. Hær.*, iii. 3; Euseb.
*Hist. Eccl.*, iv. 14). There is also a very graphic account given of
Polycarp by Irenæus in his Epistle to Florinus, to which the reader is
referred. It has been preserved by Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl.*, v. 20).

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>The Epistle before us is not perfect in any of
the Greek <span class="upper"><span id="iv.i-p7.1"></span>mss.</span>
which contain it. But the chapters wanting in Greek are contained in an
ancient Latin version. While there is no ground for supposing, as some
have done, that the whole Epistle is spurious, there seems considerable
force in the arguments by which many others have sought to prove chap.
xiii. to be an interpolation.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>The date of the Epistle cannot be
satisfactorily determined. It depends on the conclusion we reach as to
some points, very difficult and obscure, connected with that account of
the martyrdom of Polycarp which has come down to us. We shall not,
however, probably be far wrong if we fix it about the middle of the
second century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle to the Philippians](0010082)
