[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0010096)  [Next](0010098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_37"></span>

## <span id="iv.iii-p0.1"></span>Introductory Note to the Epistle Concerning the Martyrdom of Polycarp

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span><span
class="upper"><span id="iv.iii-p1.2"></span>Internal</span> evidence
goes far to establish the credit which Eusebius lends to this specimen
of the martyrologies, certainly not the earliest if we accept that of
Ignatius as genuine. As an encyclical of one of “the seven churches” to
another of the same Seven, and as bearing witness to their aggregation
with others into the unity of “the Holy and Catholic Church,” it is a
very interesting witness, not only to an article of the creed, but to
the original meaning and acceptation of the same. More than this, it is
evidence of the strength of Christ perfected in human weakness; and thus
it affords us an assurance of grace equal to our day in every time of
need. When I see in it, however, an example of what a noble army of
martyrs, women and children included, suffered in those days “for the
testimony of Jesus,” and in order to hand down the knowledge of the
Gospel to these boastful ages of our own, I confess myself edified by
what I read, chiefly because I am humbled and abashed in comparing what
a Christian used to be, with what a Christian is, in our times, even at
his best estate.

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>That this Epistle has been interpolated can
hardly be doubted, when we compare it with the unvarnished specimen, in
Eusebius. As for the “fragrant smell” that came from the fire, many
kinds of wood emit the like in burning; and, apart from Oriental warmth
of colouring, there seems nothing incredible in the narrative if we
except “the dove” (chap. xvi.), which, however, is probably a corrupt
reading, <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) as suggested by our
translators. The blade was thrust into the martyr’s *left side*; and
this, opening the heart, caused the outpouring of a flood, and not a
mere trickling. But, though Greek thus amended is a plausible
conjecture, there seems to have been nothing of the kind in the copy
quoted by Eusebius. On the other hand, note the truly catholic and
scriptural testimony: “We love the martyrs, but the Son of God we
worship: it is impossible for us to worship any other.”

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span>Bishop Jacobson assigns more than fifty
pages to this martyrology, with a Latin version and abundant notes. To
these I must refer the student, who may wish to see this attractive
history in all the light of critical scholarship and, often, of
admirable comment.

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>The following is the original <span
class="upper"><span id="iv.iii-p5.1"></span>Introductory Notice</span>:—

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span><span class="upper"><span
id="iv.iii-p6.1"></span>The</span> following letter purports to have
been written by the Church at Smyrna to the Church at Philomelium, and
through that Church to the whole Christian world, in order to give a
succinct account of the circumstances attending the martyrdom of
Polycarp. It is the earliest of all the Martyria, and has generally been
accounted both the most interesting and authentic. Not a few, however,
deem it interpolated in several passages, and some refer it to a much
later date than the <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="iv.iii-Page_38"></span> middle of the second century, to which it
has been commonly ascribed. We cannot tell how much it may owe to the
writers (chap. xxii.) who successively transcribed it. Great part of it
has been engrossed by Eusebius in his *Ecclesiastical History* (iv. 15);
and it is instructive to observe, that some of the most startling
miraculous phenomena recorded in the text as it now stands, have no
place in the narrative as given by that early historian of the Church.
Much discussion has arisen respecting several particulars contained in
this Martyrium; but into these disputes we do not enter, having it for
our aim simply to present the reader with as faithful a translation as
possible of this very interesting monument of Christian antiquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_418"></span>[37:419](0010097.htm#fr_418) <span
id="iv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span> See an ingenious conjecture in Bishop
Wordsworth’s *Hippolytus and the Church of Rome*, p. 318, C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Martyrdom of Polycarp](0010098)
