[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc27008)  [Next](cc27010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>Chapter 1.

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Amos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** The words of Amos, who was among the
herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah
king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of
Israel, two years before the earthquake.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Verba Amos, qui fuit inter pastores
(vel, pecuarios) ex Tucua: quae vidit super Israel diebus Uzziah regis
Juhudah, et diebus Jarobeam filii Joas regis Israel, biennio ante motum
(vel <span id="iv.ii.i-p3.1"></span>χασμα) terrae. nominibus, quia de
sensu Prophetae satis constabit. Nunc venio ad inscriptionem libri.)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p6"></span>Amos boasts not here, in speaking of his
own words, that he adduced anything as from himself, but avows himself
to be only the minister of God; for he immediately adds that he received
them by a vision. God himself raised up the Prophets and employed their
labor; And, at the same time, guided them by his Spirit, that they might
not announce anything but what had been received from him, but
faithfully deliver what had proceeded from him alone. These two things
then, well agree together, — that the prophecies which follow were the
words of Amos and that they were words revealed to him from above; for
the word <span id="iv.ii.i-p6.1"></span>חזה, *chese,* which Amos uses,
properly means, to see by revelation;  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) and these revelations were called
prophecies.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p8"></span>But he says, that he *was among the
shepherds of Tekoa.* This was a mean towns and had been shortly before
surrounded by walls and had ever been previously a village. He then
mentions not his country, because it was celebrated, or as though he
could derive thereby more authority or renown: but, on the contrary he
calls himself a Tekoan, because God drew him forth from an obscure
place, that he might set him over the whole kingdom of Israel. They are
therefore mistaken, as I think, who suppose that Amos was called one of
the shepherds on account of his riches, and the number of his flocks;
for when I weigh every thing, I see not how could this be. I indeed
allow that <span id="iv.ii.i-p8.1"></span>נקדים, *nukodim* are not only
shepherds who do the work, but men possessing flocks, carrying on a
large business; for the king of Moab is said to have been a <span
id="iv.ii.i-p8.2"></span>נקד, *nukod*, and that he fed large flocks; but
it was by hired shepherds. As to the Prophets I do not see how this can
be applied to him; for Tekoa was not a place famous for wealth; and as I
have said, it was a small town, and of no opulence. I do not then doubt,
but that Amos, by saying that he was a shepherd, pours contempt on the
pride of the king of Israel, and of the whole people; for as they had
not deigned to hear the Prophets of God, a keeper of sheep was sent to
them.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p9"></span>It must be further noticed, that he is not
called a shepherd of Tekoa, but *from Tekoa;* and interpreters have not
observed this preposition. We shall see in chapter seven, that though
Amos sprang from the tribe of Judah, he yet dwelt in the kingdom of
Israel: for the priest, after he had slandered him before the king, bade
him to go elsewhere, and to eat his own bread, and not to disturb the
peace of the country. He therefore dwelt there as a stranger in a land
not his own. Had he been rich, and possessing much wealth, he would have
surely dwelt at home: why should he change his place? Since then it
appears evident, that he was a sojourner in the land of Israel, he was,
no doubt, one of the common people. So that his low condition (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p9.2"></span>*ignobilitias*—ignobility) was intended for
this purpose, — that God might thereby repress the arrogance of the king
of Israel, and of the whole people; for we know how much inflated they
were on account of the fruitfulness of their land and their riches.
Hence Amos was set over them as a Prophet, being a shepherd, whom God
had brought from the sheepfolds.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p10"></span>The time also is to be observed, when he
is said to have seen these prophecies; it was *in the days of Uzziah
king of Judah, two years before the earth-quake, and in the days of
Jeroboam, the son of Joash.* What the state of that time was, I
described in explaining the prophecies of Hosea. Sacred history relates
that the kingdom of Israel flourished under the second Jeroboam; for
though he was an ungodly and wicked man, yet God spared then his people,
and caused that not only the ten tribes should remain entire, but also
that Jeroboam should enlarge his kingdom; for he had recovered some
cities which had been lost. The state of the people was then tranquil,
and their prosperity was such as filled them with pride, as it commonly
happens. Uzziah also so reigned over the tribe of Judah, that nothing
adverse prevailed there. Shortly after followed the earthquake. The time
this earthquake happened, sacred history does not mention. But Josephus
says, that it was when Uzziah seized on the priestly office, and was
smitten with leprosy. He therefore makes that stroke of leprosy and the
earthquake to be at the same time. But Amos, as well as other Prophets,
spoke of it as a thing well known: thus Zechariah, after the people’s
return, refers to it in chapter 14: (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p10.2"></span>[Zec
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.i-p10.2"></span>),

<span id="iv.ii.i-p11"></span>‘There shall be to you a terror,  
such as was in the earthquake under king Uzziah.’

<span id="iv.ii.i-p12"></span>He states not the year, but it was then
commonly known.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p13"></span>Then the Prophet meant nothing more than
to show by this event, that he denounced God’s vengeance on the
Israelites, when they were in prosperity, and were immersed, as it were,
in their pleasures. And satiety, as it ever happens, made them
ferocious; hence he was not well received; but his authority is hereby
more confirmed to us; for he did not flatter the people in their
prosperity, but severely reproved them; and he also predicted what could
not be foreseen by human judgment, nay, what seemed to be altogether
improbable. Had he not then been endued with the heavenly Spirit, he
could not have foretold future calamities, when the Jews, as I have
already said, as well as the Israelites, and others, promised themselves
all kinds of prosperity; for God then spared the kingdom of Israel and
the kingdom of Judah, nor did he execute his judgment on neighboring
nations.

<span id="iv.ii.i-p14"></span>We must now observe this also, that the
words which he *saw* were *concerning Israel.* We hence learn, as I have
already said that the Prophet was specifically appointed for the
Israelites, though born elsewhere. But how and on what occasion he
migrated into the kingdom of Israel, we know not; and as to the subject
in hand, it matters not much: but it is probable, as I have said before,
that this was designedly done, that God might check the insolence of the
people, who flattered themselves so much in their prosperity. Since,
then, the Israelites had hitherto rejected God’s servants, they were now
constrained to hear a foreigner and a shepherd condemning them for their
sins, and exercising the office of a judge: he who proclaims, an
impending destruction is a celestial herald. This being the case, we
hence see that God had not in vain employed the ministry of this
Prophet; for he is wont to choose the weak things of the world to
confound the strong, (<span id="iv.ii.i-p14.1"></span>[1Co
1:26-2:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ii.i-p14.1"></span>) and he takes Prophets and teachers from the
lowest grade to humble the dignity of the world, and puts the invaluable
treasure of his doctrine in earthly vessels, that his power, as Paul
teaches us, may be made more evident (<span
id="iv.ii.i-p14.2"></span>[2Co
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.i-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.i-p15"></span>But there was a special reason as to the
Prophet Amos; for he was sent on purpose severely to reprove the ten
tribes: and, as we shall see, he handled them with great asperity. For
he was not polite, but proved that he had to do with those who were not
to be treated as men, but as brute beasts; yea, worse in obstinacy than
brute beasts; for there is some docility in oxen and cows, and
especially in sheep, for they hear the voice of their shepherd, and
follow where he leads them. The Israelites were all stubbornness, and
wholly untamable. It was then necessary to set over them a teacher who
would not treat them courteously, but exercise towards them his native
rusticity. Let us now proceed; for of the kingdom of Uzziah and of
Jeroboam the son of Joash, the second of that name, we have spoken on
the in <span id="iv.ii.i-p15.2"></span>[Hosea
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.i-p15.2"></span>.
It now follows —

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** And he said, The Lord will roar
from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the habitations of
the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Carmel shall wither.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et dixit, Jehova e Sion ruget, et e
Jerusalem edet (vel, emittet) vocem suam; et lugebunt (vel, disperibunt)
habitacula pastorum; et arescet (vel, pudefiet) vertex Carmeli.  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p9"></span>He employs here the same words which we
explained yesterday in the Lecture on Joel; but for another purpose. By
saying, ‘Jehovah from Zion shall roar,’ Joel intended to set forth the
power of God, who had been for a time silent, as though he was not able
to repel his enemies. As God was then despised by the ungodly, Joel
declares that he had power, by which he could instantly break down and
destroy all his enemies and defend his Church and chosen people. But now
Amos, as he addresses the Israelites, does here defend the pure worship
of God from all contempt and declares to the Israelites, that how much
soever they wearied themselves in their superstitions they still
worshipped their own devices; for God repudiated all the religion they
thought they had. There is, then, to be understood an implied or
indirect contrast between mount Zion and the temples which the first
Jeroboam built in Dan and Bethel. The Israelites imagined that they
worshipped the God of their father Abraham; and there were in those
places greater displays (<span id="iv.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>*pompae* —
pomps) than at Jerusalem. But the Prophet Amos pours contempt on all
these fictitious forms of worship; as though he said, “Ye indeed boast
that the God of Abraham is honored and worshipped by you; but ye are
degenerate, ye are covenant breakers, ye are perfidious towards God; he
dwells not with you, for the sanctuaries, which you have made for
yourselves, are nothing but brothels; God has chosen no habitation for
himself, except mount Zion; there is his perpetual rest: *Roar* then
*will Jehovah from Zion.”*

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p10"></span>We now see what the Prophet had in view:
for he not only shows here, that God was the author of his doctrine, but
at the same time distinguishes between the true God and the idols, which
the first Jeroboam made, when by this artifice he intended to withdraw
the ten tribes from the house of David and wholly to alienate them from
the tribe of Judah: it was then that he set up the calves in Dan and
Bethel. The Prophet now shows that all these superstitions are condemned
by the true God: *Jehovah* then *shall roar from Zion, he will utter his
voice from Jerusalem.* He no doubt wished here to terrify the
Israelites, who thought they had peace with God. Since, then, they
abused his long-suffering, Amos now says that they would find at length
that he was not asleep. “When God then shall long bear with your
iniquities, he will at last rise up for judgment.”

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p11"></span>By roaring is signified, as we said
yesterday, the terrible voice of God; but the Prophet here speaks of
God’s voice, rather than of what are called actual judgments really
executed, that the Israelites might learn that the examples of
punishments which God executes in the world happen not by chance, or at
random, but proceed from his threatening; in short, the Prophet
intimates that all punishments which God inflicts on the ungodly and the
despisers of his word, are only the executions of what the Prophets
proclaimed, in order that men, should there be any hope of their
repentance, might anticipate the destruction which they hear to be nigh.
The Prophet then commends here very highly the truth of what God
teaches, by saying that it is not what vanishes, but what is
accomplished; for when he destroys nations and kingdoms, it comes to
pass according to prophecies: *God* then *shall utter his voice from
Jerusalem*

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p12"></span>Then it follows, *And mourn shall the
habitations of shepherds* <span id="iv.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>אבל, *abel,*
means to mourn, and also to be laid waste, and to perish. Either sense
will well suit this place. If we read, *mourn,* *etc*., then we must
render the following thus, *and ashamed shall be the head,* or top, *of
Carmel.* But if we read, *perish,* *etc*., then the verb <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p12.2"></span>בש *besh* must be translated, *wither;* and
as we know that there were rich pastures on Carmel, I prefer this second
rendering: *wither* then *shall the top of Carmel;* and the first clause
must be taken thus, *and perish shall the habitations of shepherds*

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p13"></span>As to what is intended, we understand the
Prophet’s meaning to be, that whatever was pleasant and valuable in the
kingdom of Israel would now shortly perish, because God would *utter his
voice from Zion* The meaning then is this, — “Ye now lie secure, but God
will soon, and even suddenly, put forth his power to destroy you; and
this he will do, because he denounces on you destruction now by me, and
will raise up other Prophets to be heralds of his vengeance: this will
God execute by foreign and heathen nations; but yet your destruction
will be according to these threatening which ye now count as nothing. Ye
indeed think them to be empty words; but God will at length show that
what he declares will be fully accomplished.”

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p14"></span>With respect to *Carmel,* there were two
mountains of this name; but as they were both very fertile, there is no
need to take much trouble to inquire of which Carmel the Prophet speaks.
Sufficient is what has been said, — that such a judgment is denounced on
the kingdom of Israel as would consume all its fatness; for as we shall
hereafter see, and the same thing has been already stated by the Prophet
Hosea, there was great fertility as to pastures in that kingdom.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p15"></span>We must, at the same time, observe, that
the Prophet, who was a shepherd, speaks according to his own character,
and the manner of life which he followed. Another might have said,
‘Mourn shall the whole country, tremble shall the palaces,’ or something
like this; but the Prophet speaks of mount Carmel, and of the
habitations of shepherds, for he was a shepherd. His doctrine no doubt
was despised, and many profane men probably said, “What! he thinks that
he is still with his cows and with his sheep; he boasts that he is God’s
prophet, and yet he is ever engrossed by his stalls and his sheepfolds.”
It is then by no means improbable, but that he was thus derided by
scornful men: but he purposely intended to blunt their petulance, by
mingling with what he said as a Prophets those kinds of expressions
which savored of his occupation as a shepherd. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Thus saith the LORD; For three
transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I will not turn away *the
punishment* thereof; because they have threshed Gilead with threshing
instruments of iron:

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Sic dixit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus Damasci et super quatuor non ero propitius ei; quia
trituraverunt serris (vel, tribulis ferreis) Gilead.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**4.** But I will send a fire into the
house of Hazael, which shall devour the palaces of Benhadad.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**4.** Et mittam ignem in domum Chasael,
et vorabit palatia Ben-Adad.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span>**5.** I will break also the bar of
Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven, and him
that holdeth the sceptre from the house of Eden: and the people of Syria
shall go into captivity unto Kir, saith the Lord.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span>**5.** Et confringam vectem Damasci et
excidam habitatorem ex Bikath-Aven (vel, ex planitie Aven, vel,
molestiae vel, doloris: alii vertunt, ex templo idoli) et tenentem
sceptrum e domo Eden (alii appellative accipiunt, e domo voluptatis;) et
transferetur populus Syriae Kirah (in Kir) dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span>It is singular that Amos said that his
words were concerning Israel, and that he should now turn to speak of
Damascus and the country of Syria. This seems inconsistent; for why does
he not perform the office committed to him? why does he not reprove the
Israelites? why does he not threaten them? why does he not show their
sins? and why does he speak of the destruction then nigh to the people
of Syria? But it is right here to consider what his design was. He shows
briefly, in the last verse, that ruin was nigh the Israelites; for God,
who had hitherto spared them, was now resolved to ascend his tribunal.
But now, that he might better prepare the Israelites, he shows that God,
as a judge, would call all the neighboring nations to an account. For
had the Prophet threatened the Israelites only, they might have thought
that what they suffered was by chance, when they saw the like things
happening to their neighbors: “How is it credible that these evils and
calamities have flowed from God’s vengeance, since the Idumeans, the
Moabites, the Ammonites, the Syrians, and the Sidonians, are implicated
in these evils in common with ourselves? For if God’s hand pursues us,
it is the same with them: and if it is fate, that with blind force
exercises its rule over the Moabites, the Idumeans, and the Syrians, the
same thing, doubtless, is to be thought of our case.” Thus all the
authority of the Prophet must have lost its power, except the Israelites
were made to know that God is the judge of all nations.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>We must also bear in mind, that the
kingdom of Israel was laid waste, together with other neighboring
countries, as war had spread far and wide; for the Assyrian, like a
violent storm, had extended through the whole of that part of the world.
Not only, then, the Israelites were distressed by adversities at that
time, but all the nations of which Amos prophesied. It was hence
necessary to add the catalogue which we here find, that the Israelites
might have as many confirmations respecting God’s vengeance, as the
examples which were presented to their eyes, in the dire calamities
which everywhere prevailed. This is to be borne in mind. And then the
Prophet regarded another thing: If the Idumeans, the Moabites, the
Syrians, and Ammonites, were to be treated so severely, and the Prophet
had not connected the Israelites with them, they might have thought that
they were to be exempted from the common punishments because God would
be propitious to them; for hypocrites ever harden themselves the more,
whenever God spares them: “See, the Ammonites and the Moabites are
punished; the Idumeans, the Syrians, and other nations, are visited with
judgment: God then is angry with all these; but we are his children, for
he is indulgent to us.” But the Prophet puts here the Israelites in the
same bundle with the Moabites, the Idumeans, and other heathen nations;
as though he said, “God will not spare your neighbors; but think not
that ye shall be exempt from his vengeance, when they shall be led to
punishment; I now declare to you that God will be the judge of you all
together.”

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>We now apprehend the design of the
Prophet. He wished here to set before the eyes of the Israelites the
punishment of others to awaken them, and also to induce them to examine
themselves for we often see, that those who are intractable and
refractory in their disposition, when directly addressed are not very
attentive; but when they hear of the sins of others, and especially when
they hear something of punishment, they will attend. The Prophet
therefore designed by degrees to lead the Israelites to a teachable
state of mind, for he knew them to be torpid in their indulgences, and
also blinded by presumption, so that they could not be easily brought
under the yoke: hence he sets before them the punishment which was soon
to fall on neighboring nations.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span>We must yet observe that there was
another reason I do not throw aside what I have already mentioned; but
the Prophet no doubt had this also in view, — that God would punish the
Syrians, because they cruelly raged against the Israelites especially
against Gilead and its inhabitants. As God, then, would inflict so
grievous a punishment on the Syrians, because they so cruelly treated
the inhabitants of Gilead, what was to be expected by the Israelites
themselves who had been insolent towards God, who had violated his
worship who had robbed him of his honor, who had in their turn destroyed
one another! For, as we shall hereafter see, there was among them no
equity, no humanity; they had forgotten all reason. Since, then, the
Israelites were such, how could they hope that so many and so detestable
crimes should go unpunished, when they saw that the Syrians, though
uncircumcised, were not to be spared, because they so cruelly treated
professed enemies, on whom they lawfully made war?

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>I now come to the words of the Prophet:
*Thus saith Jehovah, For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four,
will not be propitious to it;* literally, *I will not convert it*  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) *:* but I take this actively that God
would not turn himself to mercy, or that he would not be propitious to
Damascus. We know that Damascus was the capital of Syria; And the
Prophet here, by mentioning a part for the whole, threatens the whole
people, and summons all the Syrians to God’s tribunal, because they had
inhumanely treated, as we shall see, the city of Gilead. But he says,
God will *not be propitious for three and four transgressions of
Damascus.* Some take this meaning, “For three transgressions I have been
propitious, for four I will not be.” But there is no need of adding
anything to the Prophet’s words; for the most suitable sense here is
that for the many sins of Damascus God would not be propitious to it:
and the Prophet, I have no doubt, intended by the two numbers to set
forth the irreclaimable perverseness of the Syrians. Seven in Scripture
is an indefinite number, and is taken, as it is well known, to express
what is countless. By saying then, *three and four transgressions,* it
is the same as if he had said seven: but the Prophet more strikingly
intimates the progress the Syrians made in their transgressions, until
they became so perverse that there was no hope of repentance. This then
is the reason, that God declares that he would no more forgive the
Syrians, inasmuch as without measure or limit they burst forth into
transgressions and ceased not, though a time for change was given them.
This is the true meaning. And the Prophet repeats the same form of
speech in speaking of Gaza, of Amman, of Edom, and of other nations.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span>Let us learn from this place, that God,
whom the world regards as too cruel, when he takes vengeance on sins,
shows really and by sure proof the truth of what he declares so often of
himself in Scripture, and that is, that he bears long and does not
quickly take vengeance: though men are worthy to perish yet the Lord
suspends his judgments. We have a remarkable proof of this in these
prophecies; for the Prophet speaks not only of one people but of many.
Hence God endured many transgressions not only in the Syrians, but also
in other nations: there was not then a country in which a testimony to
God’s forbearance did not exist. It hence appears, that the world
unjustly complains of too much rigor, when God takes vengeance, for he
ever waits till iniquity, as it was stated yesterday, reaches its
highest point.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span>There is besides presented to us here a
dreadful spectacle of sins among so many nations. At the same time, when
we compare that age with ours, it is certain that greater integrity
existed then: all kinds of evils so overflow at this day, that compared
with the present, the time of Amos was the golden age; and yet we hear
him declaring here, that the people of Judah and of Israel, and all the
other nations, were monstrously wicked, so that God could not bring them
to repentance. For he testifies not here in vain, that he would punish
wickedness wholly obstinate since they had not turned to him, who had
advanced to the number seven; that is, who had sinned, as it has been
before stated, without measure or limits: and this ought also to be
noticed in the Prophet’s words; but I cannot now proceed farther.

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou seest us
to be of a disposition so hard and rebellious, that we are not, without
great difficulty, drawn to thee, — O grant, that we may at least be
subdued by the threatenings thou daily denouncest on us, and be so
subdued, that being also drawn by thy word, we may give up ourselves to
thee, and not only suffer ourselves to be constrained by punishments and
collections, but also obey thee with a willing mind, and most readily
offer ourselves to thee as a sacrifice of obedience, so that being ruled
by the Spirit of thy Son, we may at length attain that blessed rest,
which has been prepared for us by the same thy Son our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Fiftieth

<span id="iv.ii.v-p2"></span>We explained in yesterday’s Lecture, that
what the Prophet means by the three and four transgressions of Damascus,
is perverse and incurable wickedness; for God here declares that he had
borne long enough with the sins of Damascus, and that now he is in a
manner forced to proceed to extreme rigor, seeing that there was no hope
of amendment. But what follows may seem strange; for immediately the
Prophet subjoins, *Because they have threshed Gilead with iron wains,*
or *serrated machines*. He records here only one wickedness: where,
then, were the seven of which he spoke? The answer may be easily given.
By naming the three and four sins of Damascus, he means not different
kinds of sins, but rather the perverseness which we have mentioned; for
they had been extremely rebellious against God, and God had suspended
his vengeance, till it became evident that they were unhealable. It was,
therefore, not necessary to mention here seven different sins; for it
was enough that Damascus, which means the kingdom of Syria, was held
bound by such a degree of obstinacy, that no remedy could be applied to
its transgressions; for it had for a long time tried the patience of
God.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p3"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p4"></span>Now the Prophet subjoins, *I will send fire
unto the house of Hazael, which will devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.*
The Prophet speaks still of the kingdom of Syria; for we know that both
Ben-hadad and Hazael were kings of Syria. But Jerome is much mistaken,
who thinks that Ben-hadad was here put in the second place, as if he had
been the successor of Hazael,  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)
while sacred history relates that Hazael came to Elisha when Ben-hadad
was ill in his bed, (<span id="iv.ii.v-p5.3"></span>[2Ki
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.v-p5.3"></span>;)
and he was sent to request an answer. Now the Prophet declared that
Hazael would be the king of Syria, and declared this not without tears;
for he pitied his own people, of which this Syrian would be the
destroyer. After he returned home, he strangled Ben-hadad, and took to
himself the royal dignity. But it is common enough in Scripture to speak
of a thing present, and then, as in this place, to add what has past, *I
will send fire into the house of Hazael, and this fire will devour the
palaces of Ben-hadad;* as though he said, “I will destroy the kingdom of
Syria, I will consume it as with burning.” But he first names the house
of Hazael, and then the palaces of Ben-hadad; as though he said, “No
ancientness shall preserve that kingdom from being destroyed.” For,
metaphorically, under the word fire, he designates every kind of
consumption; and we know how great is the violence of fire. It is then
as though he said, that no wealth, no strength, no fortifications, would
stand in the way to prevent the kingdom of Syria from being destroyed.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p6"></span><span id="iv.ii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p7"></span>He then adds, *I will break in pieces the
bar of Damascus* The Prophet confirms what he had already said; for
Damascus, being strongly fortified, might have seemed unassailable. By
bar, the Prophet, mentioning a part for the whole, meant strongholds and
everything which could keep out enemies. Nothing, then, shall prevent
enemies from taking possession of the city of Damascus. How so? Because
the Lord will break in pieces its bars.

<span id="iv.ii.v-p8"></span>It is then added, *I will cut off,* or
*destroy*, *the inhabitant from Bikoth Aven,* or from the plain of Aven.
It is uncertain whether this was the proper name of a place or not,
though this is probable; and yet it means a plain, derived from a verb,
which signifies to cut into two, or divide, because a plain or a valley
divides or separates mountains; hence a valley or plain is called in
Hebrew a division. Now, we know that there were most delightful plains
in the kingdom of Syria, and even near Damascus. *Aven* also may have
been the name of a place, though it means in Hebrew *trouble* or
laborer. But whatever it may have been, the Prophet no doubt declares
here, that all the plains nigh Damascus, and in the kingdom of Syria,
would be deprived of their inhabitants. *I will* then *destroy the
inhabitant from the plain of Aven, and the holder of the scepter from
the house of Eden,* or from the house of pleasure. This also may have
been the name of a place, and from its situation a region, which, by its
pleasantness greatly delighted its inhabitants. But the Prophet, I have
no doubt, alludes, in these two words, to *trouble* and *pleasure*
*Removed, he says, shall be the people of Syria* *into Kir.* The purport
of this is, that the kingdom of Syria would be wasted, so that the
people would be taken into Assyria; for the Prophet declares that the
Assyrians would be the conquerors, and remove the spoils into their own
kingdom, and lead away the people as captives; for the word city, as a
part for the whole, is put here for the whole land. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** Thus saith the Lord; For three
transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I will not turn away *the
punishment* thereof; because they carried away captive the whole
captivity, to deliver *them* up to Edom:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Sic dicit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus Gazae et super quatuor, non ero propitius ei, quia
transtulerunt captivitatem perfectam, ut concluderent in Edom:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p4"></span>**7.** But I will send a fire on the wall
of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces thereof:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p5"></span>**7.** Et mittam ignem in murum Gazae, qui
devorabit palatia ejus:

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p6"></span>**8.** And I will cut off the inhabitant
from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I will
turn mine hand against Ekron: and the remnant of the Philistines shall
perish, saith the Lord God.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p7"></span>**8.** Et excidam habitatorem de Azoto et
tenentem sceptrum de Ascalon; et convertam (vel, reducam) manum meam
super Ekron, et peribunt reliquiae Philistinorum, dicit Dominus Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p10"></span>Amos directs here his discourse against
Gaza, which the Philistine occupied. It was situated in the tribe of
Judah, towards the sea; but as the Anakims were its inhabitants, the
Philistine kept possession of it. Then the Jews had these enemies as
<span id="iv.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>ακτωρηκους, *(guardians of the shore),*
who had a greater opportunity of doing harm from being so near: and we
may learn from the Prophet’s words, that the Philistines, who dwelt at
Gaza, when they saw the Israelites oppressed by their enemies, joined
their forces to foreign allies, and that the Jews did the same. God then
now denounces punishment on them.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p11"></span>As to the word, Gaza, some think that it
was given to the city, because Cambyses, when warring with the
Egyptians, had deposited there his money and valuable furniture; and
because the Persian call a treasure, *gaza;* but this is frivolous. We
indeed know that the Greek translators ever put <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p11.1"></span>γ *(gamma)* for an <span
id="iv.ii.vi-p11.2"></span>ע, *(oin)*; as of Omorrha they make Gomorrha,
so of Oza they make Gaza. Besides, the city had this name before the
time of Cambyses. It was then more probably thus called from its
strength: and that the Greeks rendered it Gaza was according to their
usual practice, as I have said as to other words. But there were two
Gazas; when the first was demolished, the inhabitants built another near
the sea. Hence Luke, in <span id="iv.ii.vi-p11.3"></span>[Ac
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026)<span id="iv.ii.vi-p11.3"></span>
says, that Gaza was a desert; and he thus makes a difference between
Gaza on the sea-side and the old one, which had been previously
demolished. But Amos speaks of the first Gaza; for he threatens to it
that destruction, through which it happened that the city was removed to
the shores of the Mediterranean.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p12"></span>I come now to the Prophet’s words: “God,
he says, *will not be propitious to Gaza for three and four
transgressions,* as the Philistine had so provoked God, that they were
now wholly unworthy of pardon and mercy. I reminded you in yesterday’s
Lecture, that there is presented to us here a sad spectacle, but yet
useful; for we here see so many people in such a corrupted state, that
their wickedness was become to God intolerable: but at this day the
state of things in the world is more corrupt, for iniquity overflows
like a deluge. Whatever then men may think of their evils, the Lord from
heaven sees how great and how irreclaimable is their obstinacy. It is
nothing that some throw blame on others, or look for some alleviation,
since all are ungodly and wicked: for we see that God here declares that
he would, at the same time, take vengeance on many nations. The Idumeans
might then have objected, and said, that their neighbors were nothing
better; others might have made the same excuse; every one might have had
his defense ready, if such a pretext availed, that all were alike
implicated in the same guilt and wickedness. But we see that God appears
here as a judge against all nations. Let us not then be deceived by vain
delusions, when we see that others are like us; let every one know that
he must bear his own burden before God: *I will not* then *be propitious
for three and for four transgressions*

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p13"></span>*Because they carried away,* he says, *a
complete captivity* The Prophet records here a special crime, — that the
Gazites took away Jews and Israelites, and removed them as captives into
Idumea, and confined them there. I have already said that it was not the
Prophet’s design to enumerate all their sins, but that he was content to
mention one crime, that the Israelites might understand that they were
involved in a heavier guilt, because they had grievously offended both
God and men. If then so severe a vengeance was to be taken on Gaza, they
ought to have known, that a heavier vengeance awaited them, because they
were guilty of more and greater sins. But he says that they had effected
a complete captivity, inasmuch as they had spared neither women, nor
children, nor old men; for *captivity* is called *perfect* or complete,
when no distinction is made, but when all are taken away
indiscriminately, without any selection. They then carried away a
complete captivity, so that no pity either for sex or for age touched
them: *that they might shut them up,* he says, *in Edom.*

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p14"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p15"></span>Now follows a denunciation of punishment,
— that *God would send a fire on the wall of Gaza, to devour its
palaces.* And it hence appears that Gaza was a splendid town, and
sumptuously built; and for this reason the Prophet speaks of its
palaces. He shows, at the same time, that neither strength nor wealth
would prevent God from executing the punishment which the Gazites
deserved. He names also other cities of Palestine, even *Ascalon* and
*Azdod,* or *Azotus,* and *Ecron.* These cities the Philistine then
possessed. The Prophet then intimates, that wheresoever they might flee,
there would be no safe place for them; for the Lord would expose as a
prey to enemies, not only Gaza, but also all the other cities. We may
conclude that Ascalon was the first city; for there was the royal
residence, though Gaza was the capital of the whole nation; it might yet
be that the pleasantness of its situation, and other attractions, might
have induced the king to reside there, though it was not the metropolis;
*Him* then *who holds the scepter I will cut off from Ascalon.* He at
last concludes, that all the remnants of Palestine would be destroyed.
Now, whenever God denounces destruction on the Jews, he ever gives some
hope, and says that the remnant would be saved: but here the Prophet
declares that whatever remained of that nation would be destroyed; for
God purposed to destroy them altogether, and also their very name.

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p17"></span>He therefore adds, that *Jehovah Lord*
had spoken, *saith the Lord Jehovah* This was added for confirmation;
for the Philistine were then in possession of many and strong defenses,
so that they boldly laughed to scorn the threatening of the Prophet. He
therefore brings forward here the name of God. Now follows the
prediction respecting Tyrus: —

<span id="iv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p2"></span>**9.** Thus saith the Lord; For three
transgressions of Tyrus, and for four, I will not turn away *the
punishment* thereof; because they delivered up the whole captivity to
Edom, and remembered not the brotherly covenant:

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p3"></span>**9.** Sic dicit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus Tyri et super quatuor non ero ei propitius, quia concluserunt
captivitatem perfectam in Edom, et non recordati sunt foederis fratrum:

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p4"></span>**10.** But I will send a fire on the
wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the palaces thereof.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p5"></span>**10.** Et mittam ignem in murum Tyri,
qui comedet palatia ejus.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p8"></span>He uses nearly the same words respecting
Tyrus which he did respecting Gaza, and charges it with the same sin,
which was that of removing the Jews from their country, as refugees and
exiles, into Idumea, and of selling them as captives to the Idumeans. As
of all the rest, he declares the same of Tyrus, that they had not
lightly sinned, and that therefore no moderate chastisement was
sufficient; for they had for a long time abused God’s forbearance, and
had become stubborn in their wickedness.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p9"></span>But what he says, that *they had not been
mindful of the covenant of brethren,* some refer to Hiram and David; for
we know that they had a brotherly intercourse, and called each other by
the name of brothers; so great was the kindness between them. Some then
think that the Tyrians are here condemned for having forgotten this
covenant; for there ought to have remained among them some regard for
the friendship which had existed between the two kings. But I know not
whether this is too strained a view: I rather incline to another, and
that is, that the Syrians delivered up the Jews and the Israelites to
the Idumeans, when yet they knew them to be brethren: and they who
implicate themselves in a matter of this kind are by no means excusable.
When I see one conspiring for the ruin of his own brother, I see a
detestable and a monstrous thing; if I abhor not a participation in the
same crime, I am involved in the same guilt. When therefore the Syrians
saw the Idumeans raging cruelly against their brethren, for they were
descended from the same family, they ought doubtless to have shown to
the Idumeans how alienated they were from all humanity and how
perfidious they were against their own brethren and relatives. Now the
Prophet says, that they *had been unmindful of the covenant of
brethren,* because they made themselves assistants in so great and
execrable a crime as that of carrying away Jews into Idumea, and of
shutting them up there, when they knew that the Idumeans sought nothing
else but the entire ruin of their own brethren. This seems to be the
real meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p10"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p11"></span>But he adds, that *God would send a fire
on the wall of Tyrus to consume its palaces.* When this happened, cannot
with certainty be known: for though Tyrus was demolished by Alexander,
as Gaza also was, these cities, I doubt not, suffered this calamity long
before the coming of Alexander of Macedon; and it is probable, as I have
already reminded you, that the Assyrians laid waste these countries, and
also took possession of Tyrus, though they did not demolish that city;
for in Alexander’s time there was no king there, it had been changed
into a republic; the people were free, and had the chief authority.
There must then have been there no small changes, for the state of the
city and its government were wholly different from what they had been.
We may then conclude that Tyrus was laid waste by the Assyrians, but
afterwards recovered strength, and was a free city in the time of
Alexander the Great. Let us now proceed: for I dwell not on every word,
as we see that the same expressions are repeated by the Prophet.

<span id="iv.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
1:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>**11.** Thus saith the Lord; For three
transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not turn away *the
punishment* thereof; because he did pursue his brother with the sword,
and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and he
kept his wrath for ever:

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>**11.** Sic dicit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus Edom et super quatuor non ero ei propitius, quia persequutus
est gladio fratrem suum, et violavit misericordias suas, et diripuit in
seculum ira ejus, et indignationem servavit perpetuo:

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p4"></span>**12.** But I will send a fire upon
Teman, which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p5"></span>**12.** Et mittam ignem in Theman, qui
comedet palatia Bozrah.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p8"></span>The Prophet now passes to the Idumeans
themselves. He had denounced ruin on the uncircumcised nations who
delivered up the Jews into their hands: but they deserved a much heavier
punishment, because their crime was much more atrocious. The Idumeans
derived their origin, as it is well known, from their common father
Isaac and bore the same symbol of God’s covenant, for they were
circumcised. Since nearness of blood, and that sacred union, could not
make them gentle to the Jews, we hence perceive how brutal was their
inhumanity. They were then unworthy of being forgiven by God, when he
became so severe a judge against heathen nations. But the Prophet says
now, that the Idumeans had sinned more than their neighbors, and that
their obstinacy was unhealable and that hence they could no longer be
borne, for they had too long abused God’s forbearance, who had withheld
his vengeance until this time.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p9"></span>He charges them with this crime, that
*they pursued their brother with the sword.* There is here an anomaly of
the number, for he speaks of the whole people. Edom then pursued his
brother, that is, the Jews. But the Prophet has intentionally put the
singular number to enhance their crime: for he here placed here, as it
were, two men, Edom and Jacob, who were really brothers, and even twins.
Was it not then a most execrable ferocity in Edom to pursue his own
brother Jacob? He then sets before us here two nations as two men, that
he might more fully exhibit the barbarity of the Idumeans in forgetting
their kindred, and in venting their rage against their own blood. *They
have* then *pursued their brother with the sword;* that is, they have
been avowed enemies, for they had joined themselves to heathen nations.
When the Assyrians came against the Israelites, the Idumeans put on
arms: and this, perhaps, happened before that war; for when the Syrians
and Israelites conspired against the Jews, it is probable that the
Idumeans joined in the same alliance. However this may have been, the
Prophet reproaches them with cruelty for arming themselves against their
own kindred, without any regard for their own blood.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *They have
destroyed their own compassions;* some render the words, “their own
bowels;” and others in a strained and improper manner transfer the
relative to the sons of Jacob, as though the Prophet had said, that Edom
had destroyed the compassions, which were due, on account of their near
relationship, from the posterity of Jacob. But the sense of the Prophet
is clearly this, — that they destroyed their own compassions, which
means, that they put off all sense of religion, and cast aside the first
affections of nature. He then calls those the compassions of Edom, even
such as he ought to have been influenced by: but as he had thrown aside
all regard for humanity, there was not in him that compassion which he
ought to have had.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p11"></span>He then adds, *His anger has
perpetually raged* He now compares the cruelty of the Idumeans to that
of wild beasts; for they raged like fierce wild animals, and spared not
their own blood. They then raged perpetually, even endlessly, and
*retained their indignation perpetually.* The Prophet seems here to
allude to Edom or Esau, the father of the nation; for he cherished long,
we know, his wrath against his brother; as he dared not to kill his
brother during his father’s life. Hence he said, I will wait till my
father’s death, then I will avenge myself, (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>[Ge
27:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>) Since Esau then nourished this cruel
hatred against his brother Jacob, the prophet here charges his posterity
with the same crime; as though he had said, that they were too much like
their father, or too much retained his perverse disposition, as they
cherished and ever retained revenge in their hearts, and were wholly
implacable. There may have been other causes of hatred between the
Idumeans and the posterity of Jacob: but they ought, notwithstanding,
whatever displeasure there may have been, to have forgiven their
brethren. It was a monstrous thing past endurance, when a regard for
their own blood did not reconcile those who were, by sacred bonds,
connected together. We now perceive the object of the Prophet: and we
here learn, that the Idumeans were more severely condemned than those
mentioned before, and for this reason, — because they raged so cruelly
against their own kindred.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p12"></span><span id="iv.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p13"></span>He says in the last place, *I will send
fire on Teman, to consume the palaces of Bozrah* By fire he ever means
any kind of destruction. But he compares God’s vengeance to a burning
fire. We know that when fire has once taken hold, not only on a house,
but on a whole city, there is no remedy. So now the Prophet says, that
God’s vengeance would be dreadful, that it would consume whatever hatred
there was among them: *I will* then *send fire on Teman*; which, as it
is well known, was the first city of Idumea. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iv.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Amos
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p2"></span>**13.** Thus saith the Lord; For three
transgressions of the children of Ammon, and for four, I will not turn
away *the punishment* thereof; because they have ripped up the women
with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border:

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p3"></span>**13.** Sic dicit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus filiorum Ammon, et super quatuor non ero ei propitius; quia
secuerunt gravidas (praegnantes) Gilead, ut propagarent suum terminum:

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p4"></span>**14.** But I will kindle a fire in the
wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces thereof, with shouting
in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind:

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p5"></span>**14.** Et accendam ignem in muro Rabbah,
qui vorabit palatia ejus in clamore (vel, jubilo) in die proelii, in
turbine die tempestatis:

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p6"></span>**15.** And their king shall go into
captivity, he and his princes together, saith the LORD.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p7"></span>**15.** Et transibit rex eorum in
captivitatem, ipse et principes ejus simul, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p10"></span>He now prophesies against the Ammonites,
who also derived their origin from the same common stock; for they were
the posterity of Lot, as it is well known; and Lot was counted as the
son of Abraham, as Abraham, having taken him with him from his country
brought him up, no doubt, as his own son. Then Abraham was the common
father of the Jews and of the Ammonites. Now, when the children of
Ammon, without any regard to relationship, joined their forces to those
of enemies, and conspired together, their cruelty admitted of no excuse.
And there is no doubt but that they were guilty of many other crimes;
but God, by his Prophet, enumerates not all the sins for which he had
purposed to punish them, and only points out distinctly, as in passing,
but one sin, and generally declares, that such people were utterly past
hope, for they had hardened themselves in their wickedness.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p11"></span>He therefore says of the children of
Ammon, that they *rent the pregnant women* Some take <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>הרות, *erut,* for <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p11.2"></span>הרים, *erim*, mountains; but I see not what
can induce them, unless they think it strange that pregnant women were
rent, that the Ammonites might extend further their borders; and for
this ends it would be more suitable to regard the word as meaning
mountains; as though he said, “They have cut through mountains, even the
earth itself; there has been no obstacle through which the Ammonites
have not made their way: an insatiable cupidity has so inflamed them,
that they have rent the very mountains, and destroyed the whole order of
nature.” Others take mountains metaphorically for fortified cities; for
when one seeks to take possession of a kingdoms cities stand in his way
like mountains. But this exposition is too strained.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p12"></span>Now, since <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>הרות, *erut,* mean women with child, the
word, I doubt not, is to be taken in its genuine and usual sense, as we
see it to be done in Hosea. \[<span id="iv.ii.ix-p12.2"></span>[Ho
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p12.2"></span>.\] But why does the Prophet say, that the
Ammonites had rent pregnant women? It is to show, that their cupidity
was so frantic, that they abstained not from any kind of cruelty. It is
possible that one be so avaricious as to seek to devour up the whole
earth, and yet be inclined to clemency. Alexander, the Macedonian,
though a bloody man, did yet show some measure of kindness: but there
have been others much more cruel; as the Persian, of whom Isaiah speaks,
who desired not money, but shed blood, (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p12.3"></span>[Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p12.3"></span>) So the Prophet says here of the Ammonites,
that they not only, by unlawful means, extended their borders, used
violence and became robbers who spoiled others of their property, but
also that they did not spare even women with child. Now this is the
worst thing in the storming of towns. When a town has wearied out an
enemy, both pregnant women, and children, and infants may, through fury,
be destroyed: but this is a rare thing, and never allowed, except under
peculiar circumstances. He then reproaches the Ammonites, not only for
their cupidity, but also for having committed every kind of cruelty to
satisfy their greediness: *they have* then *torn asunder women with
child, that they might extend their borders.*

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p13"></span><span id="iv.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p14"></span>*I will therefore kindle a fire in the
wall of* <span id="iv.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>רבה*, Rabe, which shall devour
its palaces,* (the Prophet adds nothing new, I shall therefore go on,)
*and this by tumult,* or *by clamour, in the day of war.* The Prophet
means that enemies would come and suddenly lay waste the kingdom of
Ammon; and that this would be the case, as a sudden fire lays hold on
wood, in the day of war; that is as soon as the enemy attacked them, it
would immediately put them to fight, and execute the vengeance they
deserved, *by a whirlwind in the day of tempest* By these figurative
terms the Prophet intimates that the calamity destructive to the
Ammonites, would be sudden.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p16"></span>He finally adds, *And their king shall go
into captivity, he and his princes together* As <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p16.1"></span>מלכם, *melcam,* was an idol of the people,
some regard it here as a proper name; but he says, <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p16.2"></span>מלכם הוא ושריו, *melcam eva ushariu*, ‘their
king, he and his princes;’ hence the Prophet, no doubt, names the king
of Ammon, for he joins with him his princes. He says then that the ruin
of the kingdom would be such, that the king himself would be led captive
by the Assyrians. This prediction was no doubt fulfilled, though there
is no history of it extant.

<span id="iv.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
designed, by so many examples, to teach the world the fear of thy name,
we may improve under thy mighty hand, and not abuse thy forbearance, nor
gather for ourselves a treasure of dreadful vengeance by our obstinacy
and irreclaimable wickedness, but seasonably repent while thou invites
us, and while it is the accepted time, and while thou offerest to us
reconciliation, that being brought to nothing in ourselves, we may
gather courage through grace, which is offered to us through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-first

<span id="iv.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p2"></span>**1.** Thus saith the LORD; For three
transgressions of Moab, and for four, I will not turn away *the
punishment* thereof; because he burned the bones of the king of Edom
into lime:

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p3"></span>**1.** Sic dicit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus Moab et super quatuor non convertam eum (vel, non convertam
me, sicut prius diximus,) quia ipse combussitossa regis Edom in calcem:

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p4"></span>**2.** But I will send a fire upon Moab,
and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth: and Moab shall die with
tumult, with shouting, *and* with the sound of the trumpet:

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p5"></span>**2.** Et mittam ignem in Moab qui
comedet palatia, (<span id="iv.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>קריות, alii vertunt
urbium appellative: sed magis arbitror esse proprium nomen loci) et
morietur in tumultu Moab, in strepitu, in clangore tubae.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p6"></span>**3.** And I will cut off the judge from
the midst thereof, and will slay all the princes thereof with him, saith
the Lord.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p7"></span>**3.** Et excidam judicem e medio ejus,
et omnes principes ejus occidam cum eo, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p10"></span>Now Amos prophesies here against the
Moabites, and proclaims respecting them what we have noticed respecting
the other nations, — that the Moabites were wholly perverse, that no
repentance would be hoped for, as they had added crimes to crimes, and
reached the highest pitch of wickedness; for, as we have said, the
number, seven, imports this. The Prophet then charges the Moabites here
with perverseness: and hence we learn that God’s vengeance did not come
hastily upon them, for their wickedness was intolerable since they thus
followed their crimes. But he mentions one thing in particular, — that
*they had burnt the bones of the king of Edom.*

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p11"></span>Some take bones here for courage, as
though the Prophet had said, that the whole strength of Edom had been
reduced into ashes: but this is a strained exposition; and its authors
themselves confess that they are forced to it by necessity, when yet
there is none. The comment given by the Rabbis does not please them, —
that *the body of a certain king had been burnt,* and then that the
Moabites had strangely applied the ashes for making a cement instead of
lime. Thus the Rabbis trifle in their usual way; for when an obscure
place occurs, they immediately invent some fable; though there be no
history, yet they exercise their wit in fabulous glosses; and this I
wholly dislike: but what need there is of running to allegory, when we
may simply take what the Prophet says, that the body of the king of Edom
had been burnt: for the Prophet, I doubt not, charges the Moabites with
barbarous cruelty. To dig up the bodies of enemies, and to burn their
bones, — this is an inhuman deed, and wholly barbarous. But it was more
detestable in the Moabites, who had some connection with the people of
Edom; for they descended from the same family; and the memory of that
relationship ought to have continued, since Abraham brought up Lot, the
father of the Moabites; and thus the Moabites were under an obligation
to the Idumeans. If then any humanity existed in them, they ought to
have restrained their passions, so as not to treat so cruelly their
brethren. Now, when they exceeded all moderation in war, and raged
against dead bodies, and burnt the bones of the dead, it was, as I have
said, an extremely barbarous conduct. The meaning then is, that the
Moabites could no longer be borne with; for in this one instance, they
gave an example of savage cruelty. Had there been a drop of humanity in
them, they would have treated more kindly their brethren, the Idumeans;
but they burnt *into lime,* that is, into ashes, *the bones of the king
of Edom*, and thereby proved that they had forgotten all humanity and
justice. We now understand the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p12"></span><span id="iv.ii.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p13"></span>He therefore adds a threatening, *I will
send a fire on Moab, which shall devour the palaces of* <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p13.1"></span>קריות*, Koriut* We have stated that what the
Prophet means by these modes of speaking is that God would consume the
Moabites by a violent punishment as by a burning fire, that fortified
places could not hinder him from executing his vengeance, and that
though they were proud of their palaces, yet these would avail them
nothing.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p14"></span>And he subjoins, *Moab shall die with
tumult, with noise, with the sound of the trumpet;* that is, I will send
strong enemies, who will come and make no peace with the Moabites, but
will take possession of every place, and of fortified cities, by force
and by the sword. For what the Prophet means by tumult, by shouting, by
the sound of the trumpet, is, that the Moabites would not come under the
power of their enemies by certain agreements and compacts, as when a
voluntary surrender is made, which usually mitigates the hostile rage of
enemies; no, he says, it shall not be so; for their enemies shall have
not only their wealth but their lives also.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p15"></span><span id="iv.ii.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p16"></span>He finally adds, *And I will cut off the
judge from the midst of her, and will slay her princes, saith Jehovah.*
God here declares, that the kingdom of the Moabites and the people shall
be no more; for we know that men cannot exist as a body without some
civil government. Wherever then there is an assemblage of men, there
must be princes to rule and govern them. Hence, when God declares that
there would be no more a judge among the Moabites, it is the same thing
as if he had said, that their name would be blotted out; for had the
people of Moab continued, some princes must have necessarily, as we have
said, remained among them. When princes then are destroyed, the people
must also perish, for there is no security for them. The Prophet then
denounces not here a temporary punishment on the Moabites, but utter
ruin, from which they were never to rise. This is the meaning. Let us
now proceed —

<span id="iv.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p2"></span>**4.** Thus saith the LORD; For three
transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away *the
punishment* thereof; because they have despised the law of the Lord, and
have not kept his commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after
the which their fathers have walked:

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**4.** Sic dicit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus Jehudah, et super quatuor non convertam cum; quia spreverunt
(vel, abjecerunt) legem Jehovae, et statuta ejus non custodierunt; et
errare eos fecerunt mendacia sua, post quae ambulaverunt patres ipsorum:

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p4"></span>**5.** But I will send a fire upon
Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p5"></span>**5.** Et mittam ignem in Jehudah, qui
devorabit palatia Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p8"></span>Amos turns now his discourse to the
tribe of Judah, and to that kingdom, which still continued in the family
of David. He has hitherto spoken of heathen and uncircumcised nations:
what he said of them was a prelude of the destruction which was nigh the
chosen people; for when God spared not others who had through ignorance
sinned, what was to become of the people of Israel, who had been taught
in the law? For a servant, knowing his master’s will, and doing it not,
is worthy of many stripes, (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>[Lu
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>) God could not, then, forgive the children
of Abraham, whom he had adopted as his peculiar people, when he
inflicted each grievous punishments on heathen nations, whose ignorance,
as it is commonly thought by men, was excusable. It is indeed true, that
all who sin without law will justly perish, as Paul says in <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p8.2"></span>[Ro
2:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p8.2"></span>, but when a comparison is made between the
children of Israel and the wretched heathens, who were immersed in
errors, the latter were doubtless worthy of being pardoned, when
compared with that people who had betrayed their perverseness, and, as
it were, designedly resolved to bring on themselves the vengeance of
God.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p9"></span>The Prophet then having hitherto spoken
of the Gentiles, turns his discourse now to the chosen people, the
children of Abraham. But he speaks of the tribe of Judah, from which he
sprang, as I said at the beginning; and he did this, lest any one should
charge him with favoring his own countrymen: he had, indeed, migrated
into the kingdom of Israel; but he was there a stranger. We shall now
see how severely he reproved them. Had he, then, been silent as to the
tribe of Judah, he might have been subject to calumny; for many might
have said, that there was a collusion between him and his own countrymen
and that he concealed their vices, and that he fiercely inveighed
against their neighbors, through a wicked emulation, in order to
transfer the kingdom again into the family of David. Hence, that no such
suspicion might tarnish his doctrine, the Prophet here summons to
judgment the tribe of Judah, and speaks in no milder language of the
Jews than of other nations: for he says, that they, through their
stubbornness, had so provoked God’s wrath, that there was no hope of
pardon; for such was the mass of their vices, that God would now justly
execute extreme vengeance, as a moderate chastisement would not be
sufficient. We now then understand the Prophet’s design.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p10"></span>I come now to the words: *For they have
despised,* he says, *the law of Jehovah.* Here he charges the Jews with
apostasy; for they had cast aside the worship of God, and the pure
doctrine of religion. This was a crime the most grievous. We hence see,
that the Prophet condemns here freely and honestly as it became him, the
vices of his own people, so that there was no room for calumny, when he
afterwards became a severe censor and reprover of the Israelites; for he
does not lightly touch on something wrong in the tribe of Judah, but
says that they were apostates and perfidious, having cast aside the law
of God. But it may be asked, why the Prophet charges the Jews with a
crime so atrocious, since religion, as we have seen in the Prophecies of
Hosea, still existed among them? But to this there is a ready answer:
the worship of God was become corrupt among them, though they had not so
openly departed from it as the Israelites. There remained, indeed,
circumcision among the Israelites; but their sacrifices were pollutions,
their temples were brothels: they thought that they worshipped God; but
as a temple had been built at Bethel contrary to God’s command, the
whole worship was a profanation. The Jews were somewhat purer; but they,
we know, had also degenerated from the genuine worship of God. Hence the
Prophet does not unjustly say here, that they had despised the law of
God.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p11"></span>But we must notice the explanation
which immediately follows, — *that they kept not his statutes.* The way
then by which Amos proves that the Jews were covenant-breakers, and that
having repudiated God’s law, they had fallen into wicked superstitions,
is by saying, that they kept not the precepts of God. It may, however,
appear that he treats them here with too much severity; for one might
not altogether keep God’s commands either through ignorance or
carelessness, or some other fault, and yet be not a covenant-breaker or
an apostate. I answer, — That in these words of the Prophet, not mere
negligence is blamed in the Jews; but they are condemned for designedly,
that is, knowingly and willfully departing from the commandments of God,
and devising for themselves various modes of worship. It is not then to
keep the precepts of God, when men continue not under his law, but
audaciously contrive for themselves new forms of worship; they regard
not what God commands, but lay hold on anything pleasing that comes to
their minds. This crime the Prophet now condemns in the Jews: and hence
it was that they had despised the law of God. For men should never
assume so much as to change any thing in the worship of God; but due
reverence for God ought to influence them: were they persuaded of this —
that there is no wisdom but what comes from God — they would surely
confine themselves within his commands. Whenever then they invent new
and fictitious forms of worship, they sufficiently show that they regard
not what the Lord wills, what he enjoins, what he forbids. Thus, then,
they despise his law, and even cast it away.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p12"></span>This is a remarkable passage; for we
see, first, that a most grievous sin is condemned by the Prophet, and
that sin is, that the Jews confined not themselves to God’s law, but
took the liberty of innovating; this is one thing: and we also learn how
much God values obedience, which is better, as it is said in another
place, than all sacrifices, (<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>) And that we may not think this a light or
a trifling sin, let us notice the expression — that they despised the
law of God. Every one ought to dread this as the most monstrous thing;
for we cannot despise the law of God without insulting his majesty. And
yet the Holy Spirit declares here, that we repudiate and reject the law
of God, except we wholly follow what it commands, and continue within
the limits prescribed by it. We now perceive what the Prophet means.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p13"></span>But he also adds, that *their own lies
deceived* or *caused them to go astray.* He here confirms his preceding
doctrine; for the Jews had ever a defense ready at hand, that they did
with good intent what the Prophet condemned in them. They, forsooth!
sedulously worshipped God, though they mixed their own leaven, by which
their sacrifices were corrupted: it was not their purpose to spend their
substance in vain, to undergo great expenses in sacrifices, and to
undertake much labor, had they not thought that it was service
acceptable to God! As then the pretense of good intention, (as they
say,) ever deceives the unbelieving, the Prophet condemns this pretense,
and shows it to be wholly fallacious, and of no avail. “It is nothing,”
he says, “that they pretend before God some good intention; their own
lies deceive them.” And Amos, no doubt, mentions here these lies, in
opposition to the commands of God. As soon then as men swerve from God’s
word, they involve themselves in many delusions, and cannot but go
astray; and this is deserving of special notice. We indeed see how much
wisdom the world claims for itself: for as soon as we invent anything we
are greatly delighted with it; and the ape, according to the old
proverb, is ever pleased with its own offspring. But this vice
especially prevails, when by our devices we corrupt and adulterate the
worship of God. Hence the Prophet here declares, that whatever is added
to God’s word, and whatever men invent in their own brains is a lie:
“All this,” he says, “is nothing but imposture.” We now see of what
avail is good intention: by this indeed men harden themselves; but they
cannot make the Lord to retract what he has once declared by the mouth
of his Prophet. Let us then take heed to continue within the boundaries
of God’s word, and never to leap over either on this or on that side;
for when we turn aside ever so little from the pure word of God, we
become immediately involved in many deceptions.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p14"></span>It then follows, *After which have
walked their fathers;* literally it is, *Which their fathers have walked
after them:*  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) but we have given the
sense. The Prophet here exaggerates their sin, the insatiable rage of
the people; for the children now followed their fathers. This vice, we
know, prevailed in all ages among the Jews; leaving the word of God,
they ever followed their own dreams, and the delusions of Satan. Since
God had now often tried to correct this vice by his Prophets, and no
fruit followed, the Prophet charges them here with hardness, and by this
circumstance enhances the sin of the Jews: “It is nothing new,” he says,
“for children to imitate their fathers, and to be wholly like them: they
are then the bad eggs of bad ravens.” So also said Stephen,

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p16"></span>‘Ye are hard and uncircumcised in
heart, and resist the Holy Spirit, as your fathers also did formerly,’
(<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>[Ac
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p17"></span>We now understand the intention of the
Prophet.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p18"></span>But we hence learn of what avail is the
subterfuge resorted to by the Papists, when they boast of antiquity. For
they set up against the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, this shield,
— that theirs is the old religion, that they have not been the first
founders, but that they follow what has been handed down to them from
early times, and observed for many ages. When the Papists boastingly
declare all this, they think that they say enough to put God to silence,
and wholly to reject his Word. But we see how frivolous is this sort of
caviling, and how worthless before God: for the Prophet does not concede
to the Jews the example of the fathers as an excuse, but sets forth
their sin as being greater because they followed their perfidious
fathers, who had forsaken the Law of the Lord. The same thing is also
said by Ezekiel,

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p19"></span>‘After the precepts of your fathers
walk not,’  
(<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.2"></span>[Eze
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p20"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p21"></span>We now see what sort of crime is that
of which the Prophet speaks. At last a threatening follows, “The Lord
saith, Fire will I send on Judah, which shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem.’ But all this we have already explained. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iv.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p2"></span>**6.** Thus saith the LORD; For three
transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away *the
punishment* thereof; because they sold the righteous for silver, and the
poor for a pair of shoes;

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p3"></span>**6.** Sic dicit Jehova, Super tribus
sceleribus Israel et super quatuor non convertam cum (vel, ad eum,) quia
emerunt (vel, vendiderunt: quidam enim deducunt a <span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p3.1"></span>כרת, et putant <span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p3.2"></span>מ esse literam formalem nominis: alii autem
deducunt a <span id="iv.ii.xiv-p3.3"></span>מכר quod est vendere vel
mercari; sed sensus Prophetae eodem redit, quia intelligit quasi ad
nundinationem expositos fuisse justos; ideoque proestabit vertere,
pretium ipsorum; quasi diceret, commercium non secus ac de merce voenale
fuisse habitum; quoniam ergo emerunt) justum pro argento, et miserum pro
calceamentis.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet here assails the Israelites,
to whom he had been sent, as we have said at the beginning. He now omits
every reference to other nations; for his business was with the
Israelites to whom he was especially appointed a teacher. But he wished
to set before them, as in various mirrors, the judgment of God, which
awaited them, that he might the more effectually awaken them: and he
wished also to exhibit in the Jews themselves an example of the extreme
vengeance of God, though there was greater purity among them, at least a
purer religion, and more reverence for God prevailed as yet among them.
He in this way prepared the Israelites, that they might not obstinately
and proudly reject his doctrine. He now then addresses them, and says
that they continued unmoved in their many sins. The import of the whole
is, that if the Moabites, the Idumeans, the Tyrians, the Sidonians, and
other nations, and that if the Jews as well as these were irreclaimable
in their obstinacy, so that their diseases were incurable, and their
wickedness such as God could no longer endure, the Israelites were also
in the same condition; for they also continued perverse in their
wickedness, and provoked God, and repented not, though God had waited
long, and exhorted them to repent.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p7"></span>It is now meet for us to bear in mind
what we have before said, — that if impiety was so rampant in that age,
and the contempt of God so prevailed, that men could not be restored to
a sane mind, and if iniquity everywhere overflowed, (for Amos accuses
not a few people, but many nations,) let us at this day beware, lest
such corruptions prevail among us; for, certainly, the world is now much
worse than it was then: nay, since the Prophet says here, that both the
Israelites and the Jews were wholly irreclaimable in their obstinacy,
there is no excuse for us at this day for deceiving ourselves with an
empty name, because we have the symbol of faith, having been baptized;
and in case we have other marks, which seem to belong to the Church of
God, let us not think that we are therefore free from guilt, if we allow
ourselves that unruliness condemned here by the Prophet both in the
Israelites and in the Jews; for they had become hardened against all
instructions, against all warnings. Let, then, these examples rouse our
attention, lest we, like them, harden ourselves so much as to constrain
the Lord to execute on us extreme vengeance.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8"></span>Let us now especially observe what the
Prophet lays to the charge of Israel. He begins with their cruel deeds;
but the whole book is taken up with reproofs; there is to the very end a
continued accusation as to those crimes which then prevailed among the
people of Israel. He does not then point out only one particular crime,
as with respect to the other nations; but he scrutinizes all the vices
of which the people were guilty, as though he would thoroughly anatomize
them. But these we shall notice in their proper order.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p9"></span>Now as to the first thing, the Prophet
says, that *the just* among the Israelites *was sold for silver, yea,
for shoes.* It may be asked, Why is it that he does not begin with those
superstitions, in which they surpassed the Jews? for if God had resolved
to destroy Jerusalem and his own temple, because they had fallen away
into superstitious and spurious modes of worship, how much more ought
such a judgment to have been executed on the Israelites, as they had
perverted the whole law, and had become wholly degenerate; and even
circumcision was nothing but a profanation of God’s covenant? Why, then,
does not the Prophet touch on this point? To this I answer, — That as
superstition had now for many years prevailed among them, the Prophet
does not make this now his subject; but we shall hereafter see, that he
has not spared these ungodly deprivations which had grown rampant among
the Israelites. He indeed sharply arraigns all their superstitions; but
he does this in its suitable place. It was now necessary to begin with
common evils; and this was far more opportune than if he had at first
spoken of superstitions; for they might have said, that they did indeed
worship God. He therefore preferred condemning the Jews for alienating
themselves from the pure commandments of God; and as to the Israelites,
he reproves here their gross vices. But after having charged them with
cruelty, shameless rapacity, and many lusts, after having exposed their
filthy abominations, he then takes the occasion, as being then more
suitable of exclaiming against superstitions. This order our Prophet
designedly observed, as we shall see more fully from the connection of
his discourse.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p10"></span>I now return to the words, that *they
sold the just for silver, and the poor for shoes.* He means that there
was no justice nor equity among the Israelites, for they made a sale of
the children of God: and it was a most shameful thing, that there was no
remedy for injuries. For we hence, no doubt, learn, that the Prophet
levels his reproof against the judges who then exercised authority. The
just, he says, is sold for silver: this could not apply to private
individuals, but to judges, to whom it belonged to extend a helping hand
to the miserable and the poor, to avenge wrongs, and to give to every
one his right. It is then the same as though the Prophet had said, that
unbridled licentiousness reigned triumphant among the Israelites, so
that just men were exposed as a prey, and were set, as it were, on sale.
He says, first, that they were *sold for* *silver,* and then he adds
*for* *shoes:* and this ought to be carefully observed; for when once
men begin to turn aside from the right course, they abandon themselves
to evil without any shame. When an attempt is first made to draw aside a
man that is just and upright and free from what is corrupt, he is not
immediately overcome; though a great price may be offered to him, he
will yet stand firm: but when he has sold his integrity for ten pieces
of gold, he may afterwards be easily bought, as the case is usually will
women. A woman, while she is pure, cannot be easily drawn away from her
conjugal fidelity: she may yet be corrupted by a great price; and when
once corrupted, she will afterwards prostitute herself, so that she may
be bought for a crust of bread. The same is the case with judges. They,
then, who at first covet silver, that is, who cannot be corrupted except
by a rich and fat bribe, will afterwards barter their integrity for the
meanest reward; for there is no shame any more remaining in them. This
is what the Prophet points out in these words, — That they sold the just
for silver; that is, that they sold him for a high price, and then that
they were corrupted by the meanest gift, that if one offered them a pair
of shoes, they would be ready without any blush of shame to receive such
a bribe.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p11"></span>We now then see the crime of which Amos
accused the Israelites. They could not raise an objection here, which
they might have done, if he touched their superstitions. He wished
therefore to acquire authority by reprobating first their manifest and
obvious crimes. He afterwards, as it has been stated, speaks in its
proper place, of that fictitious worship, which they, after having
rejected the Law of God, embraced. It follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p2"></span>**7.** That pant after the dust of the
earth on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the meek: and a
man and his father will go in unto the *same* maid, to profane my holy
name:

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p3"></span>**7.** Anhelantes super pulverem terrae ad
caput inopum, viam miserorum (vel, pauperum) deflectere facient: vir et
pater ejus ingredientur ad puellam ut profanent nomen sanctum meam (vel,
nomen sanctitatis meae.)

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p6"></span>Here Amos charges them first with
insatiable avarice; they panted for the heads of the poor on the dust of
the earth. This place is in my judgment not well understood. <span
id="iv.ii.xv-p6.1"></span>שאף, *shaph,* means to pant and to breathe,
and is taken often metaphorically as signifying to desire: hence some
render the words, “They desire the heads of the poor to be in the dust
of the earth;” that is, they are anxious to see the innocent cast down
and prostrate on the ground. But there is no need of many words to
refute this comment; for ye see that it is strained. Others say, that in
their cupidity they cast down the miserable into the dust; they
therefore think that a depraved cupidity is connected with violence, and
they put the lust for the deed itself.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p7"></span>But what need there is of having recourse
to these extraneous meanings, when the words of the Prophet are in
themselves plain and clear enough? He says that they *panted for the
heads of the poor on the ground;* as though he had said, that they were
not content with casting down the miserable, but that they gaped
anxiously, until they wholly destroyed them. There is then nothing to be
changed or added in the Prophet’s words, which harmonize well together,
and mean, that through cupidity they panted for the heads of the poor,
after the poor had been cast down, and were laid prostrate in the dust.
The very misery of the poor, whom they saw to be in their power, and
lying at their feet, ought to have satisfied them: but when such an
insatiable cupidity still inflamed them, that they panted for more
punishment on the poor and the miserable, was it not a fury wholly
outrageous? We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning: He points out again
what he has said in the former verse, — that the Israelites were given
to rapacity, avarice, and cruelty of every kind.

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p8"></span>He adds at last, *and the way of the
miserable they pervert.* He still inveighs against the judges; for it
can hardly comport with what belongs to private individuals, but it
properly appertains to judges to pervert justice, and to violate equity
for bribery; so that he who had the best cause became the loser, because
he brought no bribe sufficiently ample. We now see what was the
accusation he alleged against the Israelites. But there follows another
charge, that of indulgence in lusts.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, almighty God, that since we see so
grievous punishments formerly executed on unbelievers who had never
tasted of the pure knowledge of thy word, we may be warned by their
example, so as to abstain from all wickedness, and to continue in pure
obedience to thy word; and that, as thou hast made known to us that thou
hatest all those superstitions and depravations by which we turn aside
from thy word, — O grant, that we may ever be attentive to that role
which has been prescribed to us by thee in the Law, as well as in the
Prophets and in the Gospel, so that we may constantly abide in thy
precepts, and be wholly dependent on the words of thy month, and never
turn aside either to the right hand or to the left, but glorify thy
name, as thou has commanded us, by offering to thee a true, sincere, and
spiritual worship, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-second

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p2"></span>It follows, in the seventh verse, that
*the son and the father entered in into the same maid.* The Prophet here
charges the people of Israel with the unbridled lusts which prevailed
then among them; which were promiscuous and even incestuous. It is, we
know, a detestable monstrosity when a father and a son have connection
with the same woman; for the common feeling of mankind abhors such
flagitousness. But the Israelites were so much addicted to their own
lusts, that the father and the son had the same woman in common; as
indeed it must happen when men allow themselves excessive indulgences. A
strumpet will, indeed, readily admit a son and a father without any
difference, for she has no shame; and no fear of God restrains abandoned
women given up to filthiness. It hence becomes a common thing for a
father and a son to pollute themselves by an incestuous concubinage. But
it is no diminution of guilt before God, when men, blinded by their
lusts, make no difference, and without any discrimination, and without
any shame, follow their own sinful propensities. Whenever this happens,
it certainly proves that there is no fear of God, and that even the
common feeling of nature is extinct. Hence the Prophet now justly
condemns in the Israelites this crime, that the father and the son
entered in into the same woman.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p3"></span>An amplification of this crime is also
added, — that they thus *polluted the holy name of God.* We indeed know
that the people of Israel were chosen for this end — that the name of
God might be supplicated by them; and well known is that declaration,
often repeated by Moses,

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p4"></span>‘Be ye holy, for I am holy’ (<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>[Le
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p5"></span>Hence the children of Israel could not
defile themselves without polluting at the same time the name of God,
which was engraven on them. God then complains here of this profanation;
for the children of Israel not only contaminated themselves, but also
profaned whatever was sacred among them, inasmuch as the name of God was
exposed to reproach, when the people thus gave way to their filthy
lusts. We now understand what the Prophet means. It follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p2"></span>**8.** And they lay *themselves* down
upon clothes laid to pledge by every altar, and they drink the wine of
the condemned *in* the house of their god.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p3"></span>**8.** Et super vestes oppignoratas
accubuerunt prope omne altare, et vinum damnatorum biberunt in domo Dei
sui.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet again inveighs against
the people’s avariciousness, and addresses his discourse especially to
the chief men; for what he mentions could not have been done by the
common people, as the lower and humbler classes could not make feasts by
means of spoils gained by judicial proceedings. The Prophet then
condemns here, no doubt, the luxury and rapacity of men in high
stations. *They lie down, he says, on pledged clothes nigh every altar.*
God had forbidden, in his law, to take from a poor man a pledge, the
need of which he had for the support of life and daily use, (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>[Ex
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p6.1"></span>) For instance, it was prohibited by the
law to take from a poor man his cloak or his coat, or to take the
covering of his bed, or any thing else of which he had need. But the
Prophet now accuses the Israelites, that they took away pledges and
clothes without any distinction, and lay down on them nigh their altars.
This belonged to the rich.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p7"></span>Then follows another clause, which,
strictly speaking, must be restricted to the judges and governors, *They
have drunk the wine of the condemned in the house,* or *in the temple*,
*of their God* This may also be understood of the rich, who were wont to
indulge in luxury by means of ill-gotten spoils: for they litigated
without cause; and when they gained judgment in their favor, they
thought it lawful to fare more sumptuously. This expression of the
Prophet may therefore be extended to any of the rich. But he seems here
to condemn more specifically the cruelty and rapaciousness of the
judges. We now then perceive what the Prophet had in view by saying,
that *they lay down on pledged garments.*

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p8"></span>He then says that *they drank wine*
derived *from fines,* which had been laid on the condemned. But this
circumstance, that is added, ought to be observed, — that they *lay down
near altars and drank* in the very temple: for the Prophet here laughs
to scorn the gross superstition of the Israelites, that they thought
that they were discharging their duty towards God, provided they came to
the temple and offered sacrifices at the altar. Thus, indeed, are
hypocrites wont to appease God, as if one by puppets played with a
child. This has been a wickedness very common in all ages, and is here
laid to the charge of the Israelites by the Prophet: they dared with an
open front to enter the temple, and there to bring the pledged garments,
and to feast on their spoils. Hypocrites do ever make a den of thieves
of God’s temple, (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>[Mt
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>) for they think that all things are lawful
for them, provided they put on the appearance, by external worship, of
being devoted to God. Since, then, the Israelites promised themselves
impunity and took liberty to sin, because they performed religious
ceremonies, the Prophet here sharply reproves them: they even dared to
make God a witness of their cruelty by bringing pledged garments and by
blending their spoils with their sacrifices, as though God had a
participation with robbers.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p9"></span>We hence see that rapaciousness and
avarice are not alone condemned here by the Prophet, but that the gross
superstition of the Israelites is also reprobated, because they thought
that there would be no punishment for them, though they plundered and
robbed the poor, provided they reserved a part of the spoil for God, as
though a sacrifice from what had been unjustly got were not an
abomination to him.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p10"></span>But it may be asked, Why does the
Prophet thus condemn the Israelites for they had no sacred temple; and
we also know (as it has been elsewhere stated) that the temples, in
which they thought that they worshipped God, were filthy brothels, and
full of all obscenity. How is it, then, that the Prophet now so sharply
inveighs against them, because they mingled their spoils with their
impure sacrifices? To this the answer is, That he had regard to their
views, and derided the grossness of their minds, that they thus
childishly trifled with the God whom they imagined for themselves. We
say the same at this day to the Papists, — that they blend profane with
sacred things, when they prostitute their masses, and also when they
trifle with God in their ceremonies. It is certain that whatever the
Papists do is an abomination; for the whole of religion is with them
adulterated: but they yet cease not to wrong God, whose name they
pretend to profess. Such also were then the Israelites: though they
professed still to worship God, they were yet sacrilegious; though they
offered sacrifices to the calves in Dan and in Bethel, they yet
reproached God, for they ever abused his name. This, then, is the crime
the Prophet now condemns in them. But what I have said must be
remembered, — that this blind assurance is reprehended in the
Israelites, that they thought spoils to be lawful provided they
professed to worship God: but they thus rendered double their crime, as
we have said; for they tried to make God the associate of robbers,
mingling as they did their pollutions with their sacrifices. Let us
proceed —

<span id="iv.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p2"></span>**9.** Yet destroyed I the Amorite before
them, whose height *was* like the height of the cedars, and he *was*
strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots
from beneath.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p3"></span>**9.** Et ego exterminavi Amorrhaeum a
facie ipsorum, cujus proceritas erat sicut proceritas cedrorum, et qui
fortis erat sicut quercus; et perdidi fructum ejus superne et radicem
ejus subtus.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p4"></span>**10.** Also I brought you up from the
land of Egypt, and led you forty years through the wilderness, to
possess the land of the Amorite.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p5"></span>**10.** Et ego eduxi vos e terra Egypti,
et deduxi vos (ambulare feci vos ad verbum) in deserto per quadraginta
annos ad possidendam terram Amorrhaei.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p6"></span>**11.** And I raised up of your sons for
prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. *Is it* not even thus, O
ye children of Israel? saith the Lord

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p7"></span>**11.** Et suscitavi ex filiis vestris
prophetas, et ex juvenibus vestris Nazaraeos: annon etiam hoc, filii
Israel? dicit Jehovah.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p8"></span>**12.** But ye gave the Nazarites wine to
drink; and commanded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p9"></span>**12.** Et propinastis Nazaraeis vinum,
et super prophetis mandastis, dicendo, Non prophetabitis.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p11"></span><span id="iv.ii.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p12"></span>God expostulates here with the
Israelites for their ingratitude. He records the benefits he had before
conferred on that people; and then shows how unworthily and
disgracefully they had conducted themselves; for they forgot their many
blessings and proudly despised God, and acted as if they were like other
nations, and not bound to God for the singular benefit of adoption. The
sum then is that God here complains that he had ill bestowed his
blessings; and he reproves the people for their impiety, inasmuch as
they did not lead a holier life after having been freely redeemed.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p13"></span>He says first*, I have exterminated the
Amorite before their face.* God shows here that he was disgracefully
defrauded by the Israelites, for whose sake he had previously destroyed
the Amorites. For why were the Amorites exterminated, but that God would
cleanse the land, and also, that he might give there a dwelling to his
own people, that he might be purely worshipped? Then the people of
Israel ought to have given up themselves wholly to the service of God;
but as they neglected to do this, they frustrated the purpose of God,
who had expelled the Amorites from that land, yea, and entirely
destroyed them. The first complaint then is, that the children of Israel
were nothing better than the Amorites, though God had given them the
land, which was taken from its natives, that they might dwell in it, and
on the condition, that his name should be there worshipped. Hence the
Prophets say elsewhere, that they were Amorites. They ought to have been
a new people; but as they followed the examples of others, in what did
they differ from them? They are therefore called their posterity. But
the Prophet speaks not here so severely; he only reproves the
Israelites, because they differed in nothing from the Amorites, whom
they knew to have been destroyed that they might be introduced into
their place, and succeed to their inheritance.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p14"></span>It is then added, that the *Amorites
were tall* in stature, and also that they were *strong* men. By these
words the Prophet intimates that the Amorites were not conquered by the
people’s valor, but by the wonderful power of God. We indeed know that
they were dreaded by the people of Israel, for they were like giants.
Then the Prophet speaks here of their height and strength, that the
Israelites might consider that they overcame them not by their own
valor, but that the land was given them by a miracle, for they had to do
with giants, on whom they could hardly dare to look. It was then God who
prostrated the cedars and the oaks before his people. We hence learn,
that the Israelites could not boast of their own strengths as though
they took possession of the land, because by means of war they ejected
their enemies; for this was done by the singular kindness of God. They
could not indeed have contended with their enemies, had not that been
fulfilled which the Lord had so often foretold, ‘For you, while still, I
will fight,’ (<span id="iv.ii.xix-p14.1"></span>[Ex
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p14.1"></span>) We now perceive the Prophet’s intention.
But we may hence farther learn, that the Israelites had not possessed
the land, because they were more excellent than the Amorites, its
ancient inhabitants; but because it so pleased God. There was therefore
no reason for the people of Israel to be proud on account of any
excellency. It hence appears that they, who did not consider this
remarkable kindness done to them, were more than doubly ungrateful to
God.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p15"></span>He says that their *fruit above and root
below were destroyed.* By this metaphor God enlarges on what he said
before, that the Amorites had been exterminated, so that none of them
remained. “I have demolished,” he says, or, “I have entirely destroyed
the root beneath and the fruit above; I have extinguished the very name
of the nation.” And yet the Israelites were not better, though the
Amorites were thus destroyed; but having succeeded in their place, they
became like them: this was utterly inexcusable. The more severe God’s
vengeance had been towards the Amorites, the more ought the Israelites
to have extolled his favor: but when with closed eyes they passed by so
remarkable a testimony of God’s paternal love, it appears that they were
extremely wicked and ungrateful.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii.xix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p17"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *I have made you
to ascend from the land of Egypt; I have made you to walk in the desert
for forty years, in order to possess the land of the Amorite.* The
circumstances here specified are intended to confirm the same thing,
that God had miraculously redeemed his people. Men, we know, for the
most part extenuate the favors of God; nay, this evil is innate in us.
This is the reason why the Prophet so largely describes and extols the
redemption of the people. Hence he says now that they had been *led out
of the land of Egypt.* And they ought to have remembered what had been
their condition in Egypt; for there they were most miserably oppressed.
When therefore that coming out was set before them, it was the same as
if God had reminded them how shamefully they had been treated, and how
hard had been their bondage in Egypt. That beginning ought to have
humbled them, and also to have stimulated them to the cultivation of
piety. When now they proudly exulted against God, when no recollection
of their deliverance laid hold on them, this vice is justly laid to
their charge by the Prophet: “See,” he says, “*I have brought you forth
from the land of Egypt;* what were ye then? what was your nobility? what
was your wealth or riches? what was your power? For the Egyptians
treated you as the vilest slaves; your condition then was extremely
ignominious; ye were as lost, and I redeemed you: and now buried is the
recollection of so illustrious a kindness, which deserved to be for ever
remembered.”

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p18"></span>He afterwards adds, *I have made you to
walk,* *etc*. The Prophet here reminds them of the desert, that the
Israelites might know that God might have justly closed up against them
an entrance into the land, though he had promised it for an inheritance
to Abraham. For how was it that the Lord led them about for so long a
time, except that they, as far as they could, had denied God, and
rendered themselves unworthy of enjoying the promised land? Then the
Prophet indirectly blames the Israelites here for having been the cause
why God detained them for forty years without introducing them
immediately into the promised land; which might have easily been done,
had they not closed the door against themselves by their ingratitude.
This is one reason why the Prophet now speaks of the forty years. And
then, as God had in various ways testified his kindness towards the
Israelites, he had thus bound them the more to himself; but an ungodly
forgetfulness had buried all his favors. God daily rained manna on them
from heaven; he also gave them drink from a dry rock; he guided them
during the day by a pillar of cloud, and in the night by fire: and we
also know how often God bore with them, and how many proofs he gave them
of his forbearance. The Prophet, then, by speaking here of the forty
years, meant to counsel the Israelites to call to mind the many favors,
by which they were bound to God, while they were miraculously led by him
for forty years in the desert.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p19"></span><span id="iv.ii.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p20"></span>He now subjoins, *I have raised from
your sons Prophets, and Nazarites from your young or strong men,* (for
<span id="iv.ii.xix-p20.1"></span>בחרים, *becharim*, as we have
elsewhere said, are called by the Hebrews chosen men;) then from your
youth or chosen men have I raised Nazarites. *Was it not so, O children
of Israel?* or certainly it was so: for the particle <span
id="iv.ii.xix-p20.2"></span>אף, *aph,* sometimes is a simple
affirmation, and sometimes an addition. *Is not then all this true, O
children of Israel? saith Jehovah*. God first reminds them that he had
raised up Prophets from their sons. It if a remarkable proof of God’s
love, that he deigns to guide his people by Prophets: for if God were to
speak himself from heaven, or to send his angels down, it would
apparently be much more dignified; but when he so condescends as to
employ mortal men and our own brethren, who are the agents of his
Spirit, in whom he dwells, and by whose mouth he speaks, it cannot
indeed be esteemed as highly as it deserves, that the Lord should thus
accommodate himself to us in so familiar a manner. This is the reason
why he now says, that he had *raised up Prophets from their sons.* They
might have objected and said, that he had introduced the Law, and that
then the heaven was moved, and that the earth shook: but he speaks of
his daily favor in having been pleased to speak continually to his
people, as it were, from mouth to mouth, and this by men: I have raised
up, he says, Prophets from your sons; that is, “I have chosen angels
from the midst of you.” The Prophets are indeed, as it were, celestial
ambassadors, and God commands them to be heard, the same as if he
himself appeared in a visible form. Since then he choose angels from the
midst of us, is not this an invaluable favor? We hence see how much
force is contained in this reproof, when the Lord says, that Prophets
had been chosen from his own people.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p21"></span>And he mentions also the Nazarites. It
appears sufficiently evident from <span id="iv.ii.xix-p21.1"></span>[Nu
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p21.1"></span>, why God appointed Nazarites. Nothing is
more difficult, we know, than to induce men to follow a common rule; for
they ever seek something new; and hence have arisen so many devices, so
many additions, in short, so many leavenings by which God’s worship is
corrupted; for each wishes to be more holy than another, and affects
some singularity. In case then any one had a wish to consecrate himself
to God beyond what was commonly required, the Lord instituted a peculiar
observance, that the people might not attempt any thing without at least
his permission. Hence, when any one wished to consecrate himself to God,
though they were all holy, he yet observed certain regulations: he
abstained from wine; he allowed his hair to grow; in a word, he observed
those ceremonial rites which we find in the chapter already referred to.
God now reminds the Israelites that he had omitted nothing calculated to
preserve them pure and holy, and entire in his worship.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p22"></span>After having related these two things,
he asks them, *Is not all this true?* The facts were indeed well known:
then the question, it may be said, was superfluous. But the Prophet
designedly asked the Israelites the question here — Is it not so? that
he might more deeply touch their hearts. We indeed often despise things
well known, and we see how many heedlessly allow what they hear, and
pass by things without any thought. Such must have been the torpidity of
the Israelites; they might have confessed without disputing that all
this was true, — that the Lord had raised up Prophets from their
children, and that he had given to them that peculiar service of which
we have spoken; but they mighty at the same time, have contemptuously
overlooked the whole, had not this been added: “What do ye mean, O
Israelites? ye do indeed see that nothing has been left undone by me to
retain you in my service: how then is it now, that your lust leads you
away from me, and that having shaken off the yoke, ye grow thus wanton
against me?” We now perceive why the Prophet inserted this clause, for
it was necessary that the Israelites should be more sharply roused, that
being convicted, they might acknowledge their guilt.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p23"></span><span id="iv.ii.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p24"></span>But it now follows, *Ye have to the
Nazarites quaffed wine, and on the Prophets ye have laid a command, that
they should not prophesy* God complains here that the service which he
had instituted had been violated by the people. It seems indeed a light
offense, that wine had been given to the Nazarites; for the kingdom of
God, we know, is not meat and drink, (<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p24.1"></span>[1Co
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.xix-p24.1"></span>)
though this saying of Paul was not yet made known, it was yet true in
all ages. It was then lawful for the Nazarites to drink wine, provided
they used moderation. To this the simple answer is that it was lawful to
drink wine, for they of their own accord undertook to abstain from it.
In similar manner God forbade the priests to drink wine or strong drink
whenever they entered the temple. God indeed did not wish to be served
with this kind of ceremony; but his intention was to show, by such a
rite, that a greater temperance is required in priests than in the
people in general. His purpose then to withdraw them from the common
mode of living, when they entered the temple; for they were as mediators
between God and his people: they ought then to have consecrated
themselves in a special manner. We now see that the priests were
reminded by this external symbol, that greater holiness was required in
them than in the people. The same thing must be also said of the
Nazarites. The Nazarites might drink wine; but during the time they
consecrated themselves to God, they were not allowed to drink wine, that
they might thereby acknowledge that they were in a manner separated from
the common habits of men, and were come nearer to God. We now understand
why it was not lawful for the Nazarites to drink wine.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p25"></span>But it is frivolous for the Papists to
pretend this example, and to introduce it in defense of their
superstitions, and of their foolish and rash vows, which they undertake
without any regard to God: for God expressly sanctioned and confirmed
whatever the Nazarites did under the law. Let the Papists show a proof
for their monastic vows, and foolish rites, by which they now trifle
with God. We also know that there is a great difference between the
Nazarites and the Papal monks; for the monks vow perpetual celibacy;
others vow abstinence from flesh during life; and these things are done
foolishly and rashly. They indeed think that the worship of God consists
in these trifles. They promise what is not in their own power; for they
renounce marriage, when they know not whether they are endued with the
gift of chastity. And to abstain from flesh all their life is more
foolish still, because they make this to be a part of God’s service. I
do, at the same time, wonder that they bring forward this example, since
there are none so holy under the Papacy as to abstain from wine. As for
the Carthusians and other monks of the holier sort, they seem determined
to take revenge on abstinence from flesh, for they choose the sweetest
and the liveliest wine; as though they intended to get a compensation
for the loss and deprivation they undergo, when they pledge to God their
abstinence from flesh, by reserving the best wine for themselves. These
things are extremely ludicrous. Besides it is a sufficient reply if we
adduce what I have already said, that the Nazarites did nothing under
the law but what God in his word approved and sanctioned.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p26"></span>Since God then so sharply and severely
reproved the Israelites for giving wine to the Nazarites, what must be
expected now, when we transgress the chief commandments of God, when we
corrupt his whole spiritual worship? It seemed apparently but a venial
sin, so to speak, in the Nazarites to drink wine. Had they become wanton
or robbed, or had they done wrong to their brethren, or committed
forgery, the charge against them would have doubtless been much more
atrocious. Yet the Prophet does not now abstain from bitterly
complaining that they drank wine. Then, since God would have us to
worship him in a spiritual manner, a much heavier charge lies against
us, if we violate his spiritual worship. As, for instance, if we now
pollute the sacraments, if we corrupt the purity of divine worship, if
we treat his word with scorn, yea, if we transgress as to these main
points of religion, much less is our excuse. Let us then remember that
the Prophet here reproves the Israelites for giving wine to the
Nazarites.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p27"></span>He then adds, that they *commanded the
Prophets not to prophesy.* It is certain that the Prophets were not
forbidden to speak, at least expressly forbidden: but when the liberty
of teaching faithfully as they ought to do is taken away from God’s
servants, and a command to this effect is given them, it is the same
thing as to reject wholly their doctrine. The Israelites wished Prophets
to be among them; and yet they could not endure their plain reproofs.
But when they had polluted the worship of God, when their whole conduct
became dissolute, the Prophets sharply inveighed against them: this
freedom could not be endured by the Israelites; they wished to be spared
and flattered. What then the Prophet now lays to their charge is that
they forbade God’s servants to declare the word freely and honestly as
God had commanded them. Hence he says, *On the Prophets they have laid a
charge, that they should not prophesy.*

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p28"></span>This evil reigns in the world at this
day. It would indeed be an execrable audacity wholly to reject the
Lord’s word; this is what even ungodly men dare not openly to do: but
they wish at the same time some middle course to be adopted, that God
might not fully exercise authority over them. They then would gladly put
restraint on the Holy Spirit, so as not to allow him to speak but within
certain limitations: “See, we willingly allow thee some things, but this
we cannot bear: so much asperity is extremely odious.” And under the
Papacy at this day the liberty of prophesying is wholly suppressed: and
among us how many there are who wish to impose laws on God’s servants
beyond which they are not to pass? But we see what the Prophet says
here, — that the word of God is repudiated when the freedom of teaching
is restrained, and men wish to be flattered, and desire their sins to be
covered, and cannot bear free admonitions.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p29"></span>Let us also notice the word *command,*
which the Prophet uses. <span id="iv.ii.xix-p29.1"></span>צוה, *tsue,*
means to order, to command, or to determine, in an authoritative manner.
The Prophet then does not expostulate with them, because there were many
who clamored, who murmured against the Prophets, as it is always the
case; but he rather condemns the audacity of the chief men for daring to
consult how they might silence the Prophets, and not allow them the free
liberty of teaching, as we find it to be done even now. For not only in
taverns and lurking-places do the ungodly clamor when their sins are
severely reproved, but they also go forth publicly and complain that too
much liberty is allowed the ministers of the word, and that some course
ought to be adopted to make them speak more moderately. It is then this
sacrilege that the Prophet now rebukes, when he says, that the ungodly
*commanded the Prophets, that they should not prophecy,* as though they
made a law, as though they wished to proclaim a decree, that the
Prophets should not speak so boldly and so freely. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#013)<span id="iv.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p2"></span>**13.** Behold, I am pressed under you, as
a cart is pressed *that is* full of sheaves.

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p3"></span>**13.** Ecce ego angustians (vel,
angustiatus, constrictus, vel, constringens) in loco vestro (vel, sub
vobis,) sicuti constringitur plaustrum quod plenum est manipulo (id est,
manipulis.)

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p6"></span>The verb <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p6.1"></span>עיק, *oik,* in Hebrew is often transitive, and
it is also a neuter. This place then may admit of two interpretations.
The first is, that God was pressed under the Israelites, as a wagon
groans under too much weight; and so God expostulates by Isaiah, that he
was weighed down by the Israelites, ‘Ye constrain me,’ he says, ‘to
labor under your sins’ (<span id="iv.ii.xx-p6.2"></span>[Isa
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.xx-p6.2"></span>)
The sense then, that God was pressed down under them, may be viewed as
not unsuitable: and yet the more received interpretation is this,
“Behold, I will bind you fast as a wagon is bound.” I am, however, more
inclined to take the first meaning, — that God here reprehends the
Israelites, because he had been pressed down by them: for <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p6.3"></span>תחתיכם, *tacheticam,* properly signifies,
“Under you,” which some render, but strainedly, “Is your place:” for
when the verb is transitive, they say, that <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p6.4"></span>תחתיכם, *tacheticam,* must be rendered “In
your place:” but this is frigid and forced; and the whole passage will
run better, if we say, “I am bound fast under you, as though ye were a
wagon full of sheaves;  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) ” that is,
“Ye are to me intolerable.” For God carried that people on his
shoulders; and when they loaded him with the burden of iniquities, it is
no wonder that he said that they were like a wagon — a wagon filled with
many sheaves: “Ye are light as wind, but ye are also to me very
burdensome, and I am forced at length to shake you off:” and this he
afterwards shows.

<span id="iv.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
not only redeemed us by the blood of thy only begotten Son, but also
guides us during our earthly pilgrimage, and suppliest us with whatever
is needful, — O grant, that we may not be unmindful of so many favors,
and turn away from thee and follow our sinful desires, but that we may
continue bound to thy service, and never burden thee with our sins, but
submit ourselves willingly to thee in true obedience, that by glorifying
thy name we may carry thee both in body and soul, until thou at length
gatherest us into that blessed kingdom which has been obtained for us by
the blood of thy Son. Amen.

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifty-third

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p2"></span>**14.** Therefore the flight shall
perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force,
neither shall the mighty deliver himself:

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p3"></span>**14.** Peribit fuga a veloce, et
fortis non roborabit vires suas, et robustus non servabit (non
liberabit) animam suam:

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p4"></span>**15.** Neither shall he stand that
handleth the bow; and *he that is* swift of foot shall not deliver
*himself*: neither shall he that rideth the horse deliver himself.

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p5"></span>**15.** Et tenens arcum non stabit, et
velox pedibus suis non liberabit, neque ascensor equi liberabit animam
suam.

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p6"></span>**16.** And *he that is* courageous
among the mighty shall flee away naked in that day, saith the Lord

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p7"></span>**16.** Et qui robustus est corde suo
inter fortes nudus fugiet die illa, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p10"></span>I explained yesterday the verse, in
which the Prophet says, in the name of God, that the people were like a
grievous and heavy burden, as though they were a wagon laden with many
sheaves. I stated that the Prophet’s words are differently explained by
many interpreters, who give this view, — that God compares himself to a
loaded wagon, under which the people were to be crushed. But no
necessity constrains us to take the same verb in two senses, active and
neuter, as they do; and then the comparison seems not quite suitable;
and farther, it is better, as I have said, to say, that God complains,
that he was loaded and pressed down under the people, than to render
<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>תחתיכם, *tacheticm,* “In your
place;” for this is wholly a strained rendering. But most suitable is
the Prophet’s meaning, when understood as the complaint of God, that it
was a grievous thing to bear the burdens of the people, when he saw that
they were men of levity, and, at the same time, burdensome.

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p11"></span>Hence the Prophet now denounces
vengeance such as they deserved; and he says first, *Perish shall flight
from the swift,* *etc.*, that is, no one will be so swift as to escape
by fleeing; and the *valiant* shall do nothing by fighting; for it is to
confirm strength when one resists an adversary and repels assaults. The
valiant, therefore, shall fight with no advantage; and then, *The strong
shall not deliver his own life: he who holds the bow shall not stand;*
that is, he who is equipped with a bow, and repels his enemy at a
distance, shall not be able to stand in his place. *He who is swift on
foot shall not be able to flee, nor he who mounts a horse;* which means
that whether footmen or horsemen, they shall not, by their celerity, be
able to escape death. And, lastly, he who is stout and intrepid in heart
among the valiant shall *flee away naked,* being content with life
alone, and only anxious to provide for his own safety.

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p12"></span>The Prophet intimates by all these
words, that so grievous would be the slaughter of the people, that it
would be a miracle if any should escape.

<span id="iv.ii.xxiii-p13"></span>We now then see how severely the
prophet at the very beginning handled this people. He no doubt observed
their great obduracy: for he would not have assailed them so sharply at
first, had they not been for a long time rebellious and had despised all
warnings and threatening. Amos was not the first who addressed them; but
the Israelites had hardened themselves against all threatenings before
he came to them. It therefore behaved him sharply to reprove them, as
God treats men according to their disposition. I come now to the third
chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc27009.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.ii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p7"></span> There is an incongruity in our language in
saying, “The words of Amos, which he *saw*.” To see words, except when
written, is no proper expression. To avoid this, *Newcome* has
paraphrased the passage thus, — “Which had come to him in a vision.”
There would be no necessity for this, had we a suitable term for
“words,” which in Hebrew has the same latitude of meaning with <span
id="iv.ii.i-p7.1"></span>λογος in Greek. Dathius renders it, <span
id="iv.ii.i-p7.2"></span>*Effata,* oracles. They were the things, the
matters, the events, which the Prophet saw, or were discovered to him in
a supernatural manner. The faculty of sight seems to have been used,
because scenes were presented often to the prophets, when these
communications were made to them; and then seeing became the term to
designate these divine revelations, when nothing but messages, either of
mercy or of judgment, were conveyed to the prophets. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc27009.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span> Rendered literally from the Hebrew, this
verse is a fine specimen of sublime simplicity: the poetical inversion
of words is preserved: —  
And he said,—

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span>Jehovah from Zion will roar,  
And from Jerusalem will he send forth his voice;  
Then mourn with the inhabitants of shepherds,  
And wither will the top of Carmel.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span>The roarings of lions are dreadful to
shepherds. God’s voice is either of mercy or of judgment; it is the
latter here, and evidently that of drought, (<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>[Am 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>,) as the withering of Carmel was to be the
effect. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc27009.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span> <span id="iv.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>Eam
non restituam — ‘I will not restore it.’ — *Bishop Lowth*. Of all
commentators, Dathius gives the best explanation of the first part of
this verse. His remarks are these: — “There is here mentioned a *fourth*
sin, for which God would no longer defer punishment. The *three* sins,
which had preceded the fourth, signify all those sins which they had
besides committed, a definite number being put for a number indefinite.”
But as to the phrase, <span id="iv.ii.iii-p15.2"></span>לא אשיבנו, <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p15.3"></span>non avertam illud — ‘I will not turn it
away,’ so as to forgive it, that is, the fourth sin, he seems not to
have been so felicitous; for the reference is evidently to Damascus. It
will admit of either these renderings, — “I will not restore it,” that
is, to favor; or “I will not turn away from it,” so as to let it go
unpunished. The whole verse I would render thus: —

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span>*Thus saith Jehova,* —*  
For three transgressions of Damascus,  
Yea, for the fourth, I will not turn away from it;  
For it threshed Gelead with iron wains.*

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span>Literally, it is, “*they* threshed;” for
it is usual with the prophets, when speaking of a city or people, to
pass from the singular to the plural number. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc27009.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.ii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p5"></span> There were two Ben-hadads: the one whom
Hazael strangled, <span id="iv.ii.v-p5.1"></span>[2Ki
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#015)<span id="iv.ii.v-p5.1"></span>;
and his son who succeeded him, <span id="iv.ii.v-p5.2"></span>[2Ki
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.v-p5.2"></span>.
But ben-hadad seems to have been the name of many of the kings of Syria,
as Pharaoh was the common name of the kings of Egypt. Hence *the palaces
of Ben-ha-dad* were probably those built by several kings of that name.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc27009.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p15"></span> This is one of the peculiarities of
the Hebrew language — the use of two pronouns, the one before, and the
other after the verb; and the preposition, when necessary, is given with
the latter, and not the former. There is a similar peculiarity in the
Welsh, exactly the same and of common occurrence. There are several
instances of likeness between the two languages, and even an identity of
idiom, and that in those things in which they differ from other
languages. In the present instance the Welsh is literally, word for
word, the Hebrew — <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>*y shai yr aeth
eich tadau ar eu hol* — which your fathers have gone after them. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc27009.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p6.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7"></span> This verse has caused great labor to
commentators; and many have been the views given. The first difficulty
is in the words rendered in our version, “under you.” <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p7.1"></span>תחת and with the *Iod* commonly added when
there is a suffix, often occurs, and means on doubt, an place, a spot, a
standing, as in the following passages: <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p7.2"></span>[Exod.
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023), [Exod.
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#029)<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7.3"></span>[1Sa
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7.4"></span>[Hab
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#016)<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7.4"></span>;
and this seems to be its meaning here. Then the second difficulty is
about “the cart” or wagon. Some consider it to be the vehicle to carry
corn; and others, the machine to thresh it as Newcome and others do: but
this view is not consistent with the other expressions used in this
clause.

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p8"></span>A critic, quoted by Poole, evidently gives
the meaning in these words, <span id="iv.ii.xx-p8.1"></span>Sensus est,
q.d. Ego vos in eas angustas adducam, unde vos ipsos mimime expedire
valeatis — “The sense is, as though he said, I will bring you to those
straits, from which ye will by no means be able to deliver yourselves.”
I would then translate the verse thus: —

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p9"></span>*Behold, I will confine* you *in your
place,  
As a wagon confines its load*—*the sheaves;  
*or word for word,  
*As a wagon confines the filling of it* — *the sheaf.*

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p10"></span>The rendering of the last line by Newcome
is certainly not what the original will bear; his translation of the
whole verse is this: —

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p11"></span>Therefore*, behold I will press your
place,  
As a loaded corn-wain presseth its sheaves.*

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p12"></span>It is not pressing or crushing that
corresponds with the contents of the following verses, but confining and
reducing to straits from which they could not escape. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc27010)
