[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc27015)  [Next](cc27017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix-p1"></span>Chapter 9

<span id="iv.ix.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** I saw the Lord standing upon the
altar: and he said, Smite the lintel of the door, that the posts may
shake: and cut them in the head, all of them; and I will slay the last
of them with the sword: he that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and
he that escapeth of them shall not be delivered.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Vidi Dominum stantem super altare,
et dixit, Percute superliminare et coommovebunter postes, et affliget
(vel, afflige, in modo imperativo) in capite omnes, et novissimum
ipsorum (vel, posteritatem) gladio occidam; non effuget ex ipsis
fugiens, neque evadet ex ipsis qui evadit.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.i-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.i-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms the threatening which
we have already explained; for he says that the people would be soon
removed, as there was now no hope of repentance. But it must first be
observed, that he speaks not here of the profane temples which Jeroboam
the first had built in Dan and in Bethel, but of the true and lawful
temple; for it would not have been befitting that this vision should
have been made to the Prophet in one of those profane temples, from
which, we know, God was far away. Had God appeared in Dan or Bethel, it
would have been an indirect approbation of superstition. They are then
mistaken who think that the vision was given to the Prophet in any other
place than on mount Zion, as we have shown in other places. For the
Prophets say not, that God had spoken either in Dan or in Bethel, nor
had there been any oracle announced from these places; for God designed
in every way to show that he had nothing to do with those profane rites
and abominations. It is then certain that God appeared to his Prophet on
mount Zion, and on the lawful altar.  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

<span id="iv.ix.i-p8"></span>Let us now see the design of the vision.
The greater part of interpreters think that the destruction of the
kingdom and of the priesthood is predicted here, at the time when
Zedekiah was taken and led ignominiously into exile, and when his
children were killed, and when afterwards the temple was erased and the
city demolished. But this prediction, I doubt not, ought to be extended
much farther, even to the many calamities which immediately followed, by
which at length the whole people were destroyed. I therefore do not
confine what is here said to the demolition of the city and of the
temple. But the meaning of the Prophet is the same as though he had
said, that the Israelites as well as the Jews in vain boasted of their
descent and of other privileges with which they had been honored: for
the Lord had resolved to destroy them, and also the temple, which they
employed as a cloak to cover their iniquities. We now then understand
the intention of the Prophet. But this also must be noticed, — that if
the Lord spared not his own temple, which he had commanded to be built,
and in which he had chosen a habitation for himself, those profane
temples, which he had ever despised, could not possibly escape
destruction. We now see the design of this prophecy, which is the last,
with the exception of the promise that is given, of which we shall speak
in its proper place.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p9"></span>He says then that he *saw* *God standing on
the altar.* The Prophet might have heard what follows without a vision;
but God then, we know, was wont to sanction his predictions by visions,
as we find in <span id="iv.ix.i-p9.1"></span>[Nu
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.i-p9.1"></span>.
God then not only intended to commit to his Prophet what he was to
proclaim, but also to add authority to his doctrine; and the vision was
as it were the seal, which the Israelites as well as the Jews knew to be
a proof, that what the Prophet declared by his mouth proceeded from
heaven.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p10"></span>It now follows, *Smite the lintel* <span
id="iv.ix.i-p10.1"></span>כפתור, *caphtur,* is, I think, called the
cover which is on the top of the posts of the temple; for the Hebrews
call <span id="iv.ix.i-p10.2"></span>כפתורים, *caphturim,* apples. As
then they painted there pomegranates and flowers, the Hebrew doctors
think that the part which is above the two posts of the temple is called
<span id="iv.ix.i-p10.3"></span>כפתור, *caphtur*. But that part of the
entrance might have taken its name from its round form. However this may
be, they called the highest part of the porch of the temple <span
id="iv.ix.i-p10.4"></span>כפתוד, *caphtur*. Now the posts sustained that
which they commonly called the lintel. God then says, *Strike the
lintel, and let the posts be moved,* or *let them shake, let the whole
gate of the temple shake*. Then he adds, And strike and break *all on
the head,* or *on the head of all*. This verb is differently read by
interpreters. Correctly, according to the rule of grammar, it ought to
be read in the third person, *and it will dash to the ground* But some
however, render it thus, “and dash to the ground”, or break, because he
had said before, Smite. As to the meaning, it matters not much for an
explanation immediately follows. Now as to what he says, “on the head”,
and as to the word <span id="iv.ix.i-p10.5"></span>אחריתם, *achritam*,
which follows, some by the head understand the priests and the rulers of
the people, which view I am inclined to embrace; but when they explain
<span id="iv.ix.i-p10.6"></span>אחרית, *achrit,* to mean posterity or
children, it does not seem to suit this place; for it ought rather as I
think, to he referred to the common people. As then the Prophet had
spoken of the head, he now adds the people in general. The Hebrews call
whatever follows or comes after by <span
id="iv.ix.i-p10.7"></span>אחרית, *achrit*. They indeed understand
posterity by it, but it is a word that has variety of meaning: for it is
taken for end, for a footstep, in short, for anything that comes after.
 <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)

<span id="iv.ix.i-p23"></span>It is easy now to gather the meaning of
the Prophet: A vision was exhibited to him which showed that it was
decreed by God himself to smite both the chiefs and the common people:
and since God begins with his temple, how can profane men hope for
pardon, who had deserted the true and pure worship of God? They were all
apostates: how then could they have hoped that God would be placable to
them, inasmuch as he had broken down his own temple?

<span id="iv.ix.i-p24"></span>He now adds, *I will slay with the sword,*
*etc*. We see then that this vision is to be referred to the stroke
which was shortly after to be inflicted. I will slay then with the sword
whatever follows, that is, the common people.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p25"></span>He afterwards says, *Flee away from them
shall not he who fleeth, nor shall he escape from them who escapeth;*
that is though they may think that flight is possible, their expectation
will deceive them, for I shall catch them. Had the Prophet said that
there would be to them no means of fleeing away, he would not have
spoken with so much severity; but when he says, that when they fled, he
would catch them, that when they thought that they had escaped, there
would be no safety to them, he says what is much more grievous. In
short, he cuts off all hope from the Israelites, that they might
understand that they were certain to perish, because God had hitherto
tried in vain to restore them to the right way. Inasmuch then as they
had been wholly incurable, they now hear that no hope remained for them.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p26"></span>And since the Prophet denounces such and
so dreadful a destruction of an elect people, and since the vision was
exhibited to him in the temples there is no reason for us to trust in
our outward profession, and to wait till God’s judgments come, as we see
many are doing in our day, who are wholly careless, because they think
that no evil can happen to them, inasmuch as they bear the name of God.
But the Prophet here shows, that God sits in his temple, not only to
protect those whom he has adopted as his people and peculiar possession,
but also to vindicate his own honor, because the Israelites had
corrupted his worship; and the Jews also had departed from true
religion. Since then impiety everywhere prevailed, he now shows that God
sits there as the punisher of sins, that his people may know that they
are not to tolerate those evils, which for a time he does not punish, as
though he had forgotten his office, or that he designs his favor to be
the cover of their iniquity; but because he designs by degrees to draw
to repentance those, who are healable, and at the same time to take away
every excuse frown the reprobate. Let us proceed —

<span id="iv.ix.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Though they dig into hell, thence
shall mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I
bring them down:

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Si foderint ad sepulchrum (vel, ad
infernum,) inde manus mea educet vos; et si ascenderint in coelos, inde
detraham eos;

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p4"></span>**3.** And though they hide themselves in
the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and though
they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I
command the serpent, and he shall bite them:

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p5"></span>**3.** Et si occultaverint se in fastigio
(vel, culmine) Carmeli, inde scrutabor et extraham eos; et si absconditi
fuerint ab oculis meis (ad verbum, e regione oculorum meorum) in
profundo (vel, pavimento, in fundo ipso) maris, inde mandabo serpenti ut
mordeat eos:

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p6"></span>**4.** And though they go into captivity
before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay
them: and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p7"></span>**4.** Et si profecti fuerint in
captivitatem coram inimicis suis, inde mandabo gladio ut occidat eos; et
ponam oculum meum super eos in malum et non in bonum.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p9"></span><span id="iv.ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p10"></span>Here the Prophet denounces horrible
punishments; but not without reason, for there was astonishing torpidity
in that people, as there is usually in all hypocrites when they have any
shadow of excuse. They were then the only elect people in the whole
world. When, therefore, they thought that they excelled others and that
they were endued with singular privileges beyond all other nations, this
glory inebriated them, and they imagined that God was in a manner bound
to them, as we have seen in other places. This, then, was the reason why
the Prophet in so many ways enlarged on the judgment of God on
hypocrites; it was, that they might be terrified by the vehemence and
severity of his words.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p11"></span>Hence he says*, If they dig for
themselves passages to hell,* that is, to the center of the earth, for
<span id="iv.ix.ii-p11.1"></span>שאול, *shaul,* is here put for the
center; *thence shall my hand draw them forth;* and then, *If they
ascend to heaven, thence I will draw them down,* saith the Lord; *If
they hide themselves in deserts, if they flee to the top of Carmel, I
will trace them out:* in short, they shall find no corner either in
heaven, or on the earth, or in the sea, where they can be hid from my
sight. There is no need here to understand by heavens high citadels, as
the Chaldean paraphraser explains it: it is a frigid paraphrase. But the
Prophet speaks in an hyperbolical language of the center of the earth,
of the heavens, and of the deep of the sea; as though he had said,
“Should all the elements open themselves for hiding-places, yet the
Israelites shall in vain try to escape, for I will follow them when sunk
in the depth of the sea, I will draw them down from heaven itself; there
shall, in a word, be no hiding-place for them either above or below.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p12"></span>We now understand the Prophet’s meaning;
and an useful warning may be hence gathered, — that when God threatens
us, we in vain seek subterfuges, as his hand extends itself to the
lowest deep as well as to heaven; as it is said in <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
139:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p12.1"></span>,

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p13"></span>‘Where shall I flee from thy presence, O
Lord?  
If I ascend into heaven, thou art there;  
if I descend to the grave, thou art present;  
if I take the wings of the dawn, (or, of the morning star,)  
and dwell in the extremities of the sea,  
there also shall thy hand lead me.’

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p14"></span>The Prophet speaks not in that psalm, as
some have very absurdly philosophized, of the unlimited essence of God;
but he rather shows, that we are always in his sight. So then we ought
to feel assured that we cannot escape, whenever God designs to make a
scrutiny as to our sins, and to summon us to his tribunal.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p15"></span>But we must at the same time remember,
that the Prophet has not employed a superfluous heap of words; there is
not here one syllable which is not important though at the first view it
seems to be otherwise. But the Holy Spirit, as I have already reminded
you, knowing our heedlessness, does here shake off all our
self-flatteries. There is in us, we know, an innate torpor by nature, so
that we despise all threatenings, or at least we are not duly moved by
them. As the Lord sees us to be so careless, he rouses us by his goads.
Whenever then Scripture denounces punishment on us, let us at the same
time learn to join with it what the Prophet here relates; “Thou hast to
do with God, what can’t thou effect now by evasions? though thou
climbest to heaven, the Lord can draw thee down; though thou descendent
to the abyss, God’s hand will thence draw thee forth; if thou seekest a
hiding-place in the lowest depths, he will thence also bring thee forth
to the light; and if thou hidest thyself in the deep sea, he will there
find thee out; in a word, wherever thou betakest thyself, thou canst not
withdraw thyself from the presence and from the hand of God.” We hence
see the design of all these expressions, and that is, that we may not
think of God as of ourselves, but that we may know that his power
extends to all hiding-places. But these words ought to be subjects at
meditations though it be sufficient for our purpose to include in few
words what the Prophet had in view. But as we are so entangled in our
vain confidences, the Prophet, as I have said, has not in vain used so
many words.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.ix.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p17"></span>Now as to what he says, *I will command
the serpent to bite them,* some understand by <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p17.1"></span>נחש, *nuchesh,* not a serpent on hand, but
the whale, or some other marine animal, as the leviathan, which is
mentioned in Scripture; and we may learn from other parts of Scripture
that “nachash” means not only a serpent, but also a whale or some animal
living in the sea. In a word, God intimates, that he would be armed
everywhere, whenever he should resolve to punish his adversaries, and
that in all elements are means in readiness, by which he can destroy the
wicked, who seek to escape from his hand.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p18"></span><span id="iv.ix.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p19"></span>Now when he says, *If they go into
captivity among their enemies, I will there command the sword to slay
them,* some interpreters confine this part to that foolish flight, when
a certain number of the people sought to provide for their safety by
going down into Egypt. Johanan followed them, and a few escaped, (<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p19.1"></span>[Jer
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.ii-p19.1"></span>)
but according to what Jeremiah had foretold, when he said, ‘Bend your
necks to the king of Babylon, and the Lord will bless you; whosoever
will flee to Egypt shall perish;’ so it happened: they found this to be
really true, though they had ever refused to believe the prediction.
Jeremiah was drawn there contrary to the wish of his own mind: he had,
however, pronounced a curse on all who thought that it would be an
asylum to them. But the Lord permitted him to be drawn there, that he
might to his last breath pronounce the Woe, which they had before heard
from his mouth. But I hardly dare thus to restrict these expressions of
the Prophet: I therefore explain them generally, as meaning, that exile,
which is commonly said to be a civil death, would not be the end of
evils to the Israelites and to the Jews; for even when they surrendered
themselves to their enemies, and suffered themselves to be led and drawn
away wherever their enemies pleased, they could not yet even in this way
preserve their life, because the Lord would command the sword to pursue
them even when exiles. This, in my view, is the real meaning of the
Prophet.

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p20"></span>He at last subjoins, *I will set my eyes
on them for evil, and not for good.* There is a contrast to be
understood in this clause: for the Lord had promised to be a guardian to
his people, according to what is said in <span
id="iv.ix.ii-p20.1"></span>[Ps
121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ix.ii-p20.1"></span>,

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p21"></span>‘Behold, he who guards Israel neither
sleeps nor slumbers.’

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p22"></span>As hypocrites ever lay hold on the
promises of God without repentance and faith, without any religious
feeling, and afterwards turn them to support their vain boasting, the
Prophet therefore says here, that the eye of God would be upon them, not
indeed in his wonted manner to protect them, as he had done from the
beginning, but, on the contrary, to accumulate punishment on punishment:
it was the same thing as though he said, “As I have hitherto watched
over the safety of this people, whom I have chosen for myself, so I will
hereafter most sedulously watch, that I may omit no kind of punishment,
until they be utterly destroyed.”

<span id="iv.ix.ii-p23"></span>And this sentence deserves to be
specially noticed; for we are reminded, that though the Lord does not
indeed spare unbelievers, he yet more closely observes us, and that he
will punish us more severely, if he sees us to be obstinate and
incurable to the last. Why so? Because we have come nearer to him, and
he looks on us as his family, placed under his eyes; not that anything
is hid or concealed from him, but the Scripture speaks after the manner
of men. While God then favors his people with a gracious look, he yet
cannot endure hypocrites; for he minutely observes their vices, that he
may the more severely punish them. This then is the substance of the
whole. It follows —

<span id="iv.ix.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p2"></span>**5.** And the Lord God of hosts *is* he
that toucheth the land, and it shall melt, and all that dwell therein
shall mourn: and it shall rise up wholly like a flood; and shall be
drowned, as *by* the flood of Egypt.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Et Dominus Jehova exercituum
percutiet terram, et contremiscet; et lugebunt omnes habitantes in ea,
et ascendet sicut fluvius tota, et submergetur sicut a fluvio Egypti.

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet repeats here nearly the same
words with those we explained yesterday: he used then the similitude of
a flood, which he again mentions here. But as the first clause is
capable of various explanations, I will refer to what others think, and
then to what I deem the most correct view. This sentence, that the earth
trembles, when it is smitten by God, is usually regarded as a general
declaration; and the Prophets do often exalt the power of God in order
to fill us with fear, and of this we shall see an instance in the next
verse. Yet I doubt not but that this is a special threatening. *The Lord
Jehovah,* then, he says, *will smite the land, and it will tremble.*

<span id="iv.ix.iii-p7"></span>Then follows the similitude of which we
spoke yesterday, *Mourn shall all who dwell in it;* and then, *It will
altogether ascend as a river* Here he intimates that there would be a
deluge, so that the face of the earth would not appear. Ascend then
shall the land as a river. The ascent of the earth would be nothing else
but inundation, which would cover its surface. He afterwards adds, “and
it shall be sunk”; that is, every convenience for dwelling: this is not
to be understood strictly, as I have said, of the land, but is rather to
be referred to men, or to the use which men make of the earth. *Sunk*
then *shall it be as by the river of Egypt* We have said that Egypt
loses yearly its surface, when the Nile inundates it. But as the
inundation of the river is given to the Egyptians for fertilizing the
land and of rendering its produce more abundant, so the Prophet here
declares that the land would be like the sea, so that there would no
longer be any habitation. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p2"></span>**6.** *It is* he that buildeth his
stories in the heaven, and hath founded his troop in the earth; he that
calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of
the earth: The LORD *is* his name.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p3"></span>**6.** AEdificans in coelis ascensiones
suas, et coagmentationem suam super terram fundans (qui fundat,) qui
vocat aquas maris et effundit eas super faciem terrae, Jehova nomen
ejus.  <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60)

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.ix.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p10"></span>The Prophet describes now in general
terms the power of God, that he might the more impress his hearers, and
that they might not heedlessly reject what he had previously threatened
respecting their approaching ruin; for he had said, ‘Lo, God will smite
the land, and it shall tremble.’ This was special. Now as men received
with deaf ears those threatening, and thought that God in a manner
trifled with them, the Prophet added, by way of confirmation, a striking
description of the power of God; as though he said, “Ye do hear what God
denounces: now, as he has clothed me with his own authority, and
commanded me to terrify you by setting before you your punishment, know
ye that you have to do with God himself, whose majesty ought to make you
all, and all that you are, to tremble: for what sort of Being is this
God, whose word is regarded by you with contempt? God is he *who builds
for himself chambers*  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) *in the
heavens, who founds his jointings*  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62)
(some render it *bundles*) *in the earth, who calls the waters of the
sea, and pours them on the face of the earth”;* in a word, He is
Jehovah, whose being is in himself alone: and ye exist only through his
powers and whenever he pleases, he can with-draw his Spirits and then
vanish must this whole world, of which ye are but the smallest
particles. Since then He alone is God, and there is in you but a
momentary strength, and since this great power of God, the evidences of
which he affords you through the whole order of nature, is so
conspicuous to you, how is it that ye are so heedless?” We now perceive
why the Prophet exalts in so striking a manner the power of God.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p16"></span>First, in saying that God *builds for
himself* his ascendings (<span id="iv.ix.iv-p16.1"></span>*ascensiones*)
*in the heavens,* he alludes no doubt, to the very structure of the
heavens; for the element of air, we know, rises upwards, on account of
its being light; and then the element of fire comes nearer to what
heaven is; then follow the spheres as then the whole world above the
earth is much more favorable to motion, this is the reason why the
Prophet says that God has his ascents in the heavens. God indeed stands
in no need of the heavens or of the air as an habitation, for he is
contained in no place, being one who cannot be contained: but it is
said, for the sake of men, that God is above all heavens: he is then
located in his own elevated throne. But he says that he founds for
himself his jointing on the earth, for this part of the world is more
solid, the element of earth being grosser and denser, and therefore more
firm. So also the waters, though lighter than the earth, approach it
nearest. God then builds in the heavens. It is a mechanism which is in
itself wonderful: when one raises to heaven his eyes, and then looks on
the earth, is he not constrained to stand amazed? The Prophet then
exhibits here before our eyes the inconceivable power of God, that we
may be impressed by his words, and know with whom we have to do, when he
denounces punishment.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p17"></span>He further says, *Who calls the waters of
the sea, and pours them on the face of the earth* This change is in
itself astonishing; God in a short time covers the whole heaven: there
is a clear brightness, in a moment clouds supervene, which darken the
whole heaven, and thick waters are suspended over our heads. Who could
say that the whole sky could be so suddenly changed? God by his own
command and bidding does all this alone. *He calls* then *the waters of
the sea, and pours them down* Though rains, we know, are formed in great
measure by vapors from the earth, yet we also know that these vapors
arise from the sea, and that the sea chiefly supplies the dense
abundance of moisture. The Prophet then, by taking a part for the whole,
includes here all the vapors, by which rain is formed. He calls them the
waters of the sea; God by his own power alone creates the rain, by
raising vapors from the waters; and then he causes them to descend on
the whole face of the earth. Since then the Lord works so wonderfully
through the whole order of nature, what do we think will take place,
when he puts forth the infinite power of his hand to destroy men, having
resolved to execute the extreme judgment which he has decreed?

<span id="iv.ix.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.v-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.ix.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
showed to us by evidences so remarkable that all things are under thy
command, and that we, who live in this world through thy favor, are as
nothing, for thou couldest reduce us to nothing in a moment, — O grant,
that being conscious of thy power, we may reverently fear thy hand, and
be wholly devoted to thy glory; and as thou kindly offerest thyself to
us as a Father, may we be drawn by this kindness, and surrender
ourselves wholly to thee by a willing obedience, and never labor for any
thing through life but to glorify thy name, as thou hast redeemed us
through thy only begotten Son, that so we may also enjoy through him
that eternal inheritance which is laid up for us in heaven. Amen.

<span id="iv.ix.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-eighth

<span id="iv.ix.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p2"></span>**7.** *Are* ye not as children of the
Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? saith the Lord. Have not I
brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from
Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Annon sicut filii AEthiopum vos
mihi, filii Israel, dicet Jehova? Annon Israel ascendere feci e terra
AEgypti? Et Philistim ex Cappadocia? Et Syrios e Kir?

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet shows here to the Israelites
that their dignity would be no defense to them, as they expected. We
have indeed seen in many places how foolish was the boasting of that
people. Though they were more bound to God than other nations, they yet
heedlessly boasted that they were a holy nation, as if indeed they had
something of their own, but as Paul says, they were nothing. God had
conferred on them singular benefits; but they were adorned with the
plumes of another. Foolish then and absurd was their glorying, when they
thought themselves to be of more worth in the sight of God than other
nations. But as this foolish conceit had blinded them, the Prophet says
now, “Whom do you think yourselves to be? *Ye are to me as the children
of the Ethiopians* I indeed once delivered you, not that I should be
bound to you, but rather that I should have you bound to me, for ye have
been redeemed through my kindness.” Some think that the Israelites are
compared to the Ethiopians, as they had not changed their skin, that is,
their disposition; but this view I reject as strained. For the Prophet
speaks here more simply, namely, that their condition differed nothing
from that of the common class of men: “Ye do excel, but ye have nothing
apart from me; if I take away from you what is mine, what will you have
then remaining?” The emphasis is on the word, *to me,* What are ye *to
me?* For certainly they excelled among men; but before God they could
bring nothing, since they had nothing of their own: nay, the more
splendidly God adorned them, the more modestly and humbly they ought to
have conducted themselves, seeing that they were bound to him for so
many of his favors. But as they had forgotten their own condition,
despised all the Prophets and felicitated themselves in their vices, he
says, *Are ye not to me as the children of the Ethiopians,* as foreign
and the most alien nations? for what that is worthy of praise can I find
in you? If then I look on you, what are ye? I certainly see no reason to
prefer you even to the most obscure nations.”

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p7"></span>He afterwards adds*, Have I not made to
ascend,* or *brought, Israel from the land of Egypt?* Here the Prophet
reminds them of their origin. Though they had indeed proceeded from
Abraham, who had been chosen by God four hundred years before their
redemption; yet, if we consider how cruelly they were treated in Egypt,
that tyrannical servitude must certainly appear to have been like the
grave. They then began to be a people, and to attain some name, when the
Lord delivered them from Egypt. The Prophet’s language is the same as
though he had said, “Look whence the Lord has brought you out; for ye
were as a dead carcass, and of no account: for the Egyptians treated
your fathers as the vilest slaves: God brought you thence; then you have
no nobility or excellency of your own, but the beginning of your dignity
has proceeded from the gratuitous kindness of God. Yet ye think now that
ye excel others, because ye have been redeemed: God has also redeemed
the Philistines, when they were the servants of the Cappadocians; and
besides, he redeemed the Syrians when they were servants to other
nations.”

<span id="iv.ix.vii-p8"></span>Some take <span
id="iv.ix.vii-p8.1"></span>קיר, *kir,* to mean Cyrene; but as this is
uncertain, I pass it by as doubtful. Whatever it was, there is no ground
of dispute about the subject itself; for it is certain that the
Israelites are here compared with the Philistines as well as with the
Syrians, inasmuch as all had been alike redeemed by the Lord, and this
favor was common to all of whom he speaks. As God then pitied in former
ages other nations, it was certainly not peculiar to the race of
Abraham, that they had been freed by God, and by means of extraordinary
miracles: “Even the Philistine will say the same, and the Syrians will
say the same; but yet ye say that they are profane nations. Since it is
so, ye are now divested of all excellency, that is, there is nothing of
your own in you, that ye should exalt yourselves above other nations.”
This is the meaning. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p2"></span>**8.** Behold, the eyes of the Lord GOD
*are* upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face
of the earth; saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob,
saith the Lord

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Ecce oculi Domini Jehovae ad
reguum sceleratum, et delebo illud a superficie terrae, praeterquam quod
non delendo delebo domum Jacob, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p4"></span>**9.** For, lo, I will command, and I
will sift the house of Israel among all nations, like as *corn* is
sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p5"></span>**9.** Quia ecce ego praecipiam, et
agitabo inter cunctas gentes domum Israel, quemadmodum agitatur
(subaudiendum est nomen tritici, agitatur triticum) in cribo, et non
cadet lapis (id est, granum) in terram.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p7"></span><span id="iv.ix.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p8"></span>Here the Prophet concludes that God
would take vengeance on the Israelites as on other nations, without any
difference; for they could not set up anything to prevent his judgment.
It was indeed an extraordinary blindness in the Israelites, who were
doubly guilty of ingratitude, to set up as their shield the benefits
with which they had been favored. Though then the name of God had been
wickedly and shamefully profaned by them, they yet thought that they
were safe, because they had been once adopted. This presumption Amos now
beats down. *Behold,* he says, *the eyes of the Lord Jehovah are upon
all the wicked* Some restrict this to the kingdom of Israel, but, in my
opinion, such a view militates against the design of the Prophet. He
speaks indefinitely of all kingdoms as though he had said, that God
would be the judge of the whole world, that he would spare no kingdoms
or countries. God then will show himself everywhere to be the punisher
of vices, and will summon all kingdoms before his tribunal, *By
destroying I will destroy from the face of the earth all the ungodly and
the wicked.*

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p9"></span>Now the second clause I understand
otherwise than most do: for they think it contains a mitigation of
punishment, as the Prophets are wont to blend promises of favor with
threatening, and as our Prophet does in this chapter. But it seems not
to me that anything is promised to the Israelites: nay, if I am not much
mistaken, it is an ironical mode of speaking; for Amos obliquely glances
here at that infatuated presumption, of which we have spoken, that the
Israelites thought that they were safe through some peculiar privilege,
and that they were to be exempt from all punishment: “I will not spare
unbelievers,” he says, “who excuse themselves by comparing themselves
with you. Shall I tolerate your sins and not dare to touch you, seeing
that you know yourselves to be doubly wicked?” We must indeed notice in
what other nations differed from the Israelites; for the more the
children of Abraham had been raised, the more they increased their guilt
when they despised God, the author of so many blessings, and became
basely wanton by shaking off, as it were, the yoke. Since then they so
ungratefully abused God’s blessings, God might then have spared other
nations: it was therefore necessary to bring them to punishment, for
they were wholly inexcusable. As then they exceeded all other nations in
impiety, the Prophet very properly reasons here from the greater to the
less: “I take an account,” he says, “of all the sins which are in the
world, and no nations shall escape my hand: how then can the Israelites
escape? For other nations can plead some ignorance, as they have never
been taught; and that they go astray in darkness is no matter of wonder.
But ye, to whom I have given light, and whom I have daily exhorted to
repent, — shall ye be unpunished? How could this be? I should not then
be the judge of the world.” We now then perceive the real meaning of the
Prophet: “Lo,” he says “the eyes of Jehovah are upon every sinful
kingdom; I will destroy all the nations who have sinned from the face of
the earth, though they have the pretense of ignorance for their sins;
shall I not now, forsooth, destroy the house of Israel?” Here then the
Prophet speaks ironically, *Except that I shall not destroy by
destroying the house of Israel;* that is, “Do you wish me to be
subservient to you, as though my hands were tied, that I could not take
vengeance on you? what right have you to do this? and what can hinder me
from punishing ingratitude so great and so shameful?”

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p10"></span><span id="iv.ix.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *For, lo, I will
command,* *etc*. The Prophet here confirms the former sentence; and
hence I conclude that the second part of the preceding verse is
ironically expressed; for if he had promised pardon to the Israelites,
he would have gone on with the same subject; but, on the contrary, he
proceeds in another direction, and says, that God would justly punish
the Israelites; for the event would at length make it known, that among
them not even a grain would be found, but that all would be like chaff
or refuse: *Lo,* he says, *I will shake among the nations the Israelites
as corn is shaken in a sieve: a grain*, he says, *shall not fall on the
earth;* as though he said, “Though I shall scatter the Israelites
through various places that they may be dispersed here and there, yet
this exile shall ever be like a sieve: they now contend with me, when
any grain has fallen. The event then shall show, that there is in them
nothing but chaff and filth; for I will by sieving cleanse my whole
floor, and nothing shall be found to remain on it.” If one objects and
says, that there were some godly persons in that nation, though very
small in number. This I admit to be true: but the Prophet speaks here,
as in many other places, of the whole nation; he refers not to
individuals. It was then true, with regard to the body of the people of
Israel, that there was not one among them who could be compared to
grain, for all had become empty through their iniquities; and hence they
necessarily disappeared in the sieve, and were like chaff or refuse.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p12"></span>But it must be observed, that God here
cuts off the handle for evasion, for hypocrites ever contend with him;
and although they cannot wholly clear themselves, they yet extenuate
their sins, and accuse God of too much severity. The Prophet then
anticipates such objections, “I will command,” he says, “and will shake
the house of Israel as corn is shaken.” It was a very hard lot, when the
people were thus driven into different parts of the world; it was indeed
a dreadful tearing. The Israelites might have complained that they were
too severely treated; but God by this similitude obviates this calumny,
“They are indeed scattered in their exile, yet they remain in a sieve;
*I will shake them*, he says, *among the nations: but not otherwise than
corn when shaken in a sieve:* and it is allowed by the consent of all
that corn ought to be cleansed. Though the greater part disappears when
the corn, threshed on the floor, is afterwards subjected to the fan; yet
there is no one but sees that this is necessary and reasonable: no one
complains that the chaff thus perishes. Why so? Because it is useless.
God then shows that he is not cruel, nor exceeds moderation, though he
may scatter his people through the remote regions of the earth, for he
ever keeps them in a sieve.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *And fall shall not
a grain on the earth* They translate <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p13.1"></span>צרור, *tsarur,* a stone, but <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p13.2"></span>צרר, *tsarer* is to tie, and hence this
word means what is collected or, binding, as when the children of Jacob
had their money tied in their sacks, they said, ‘Behold my binding;’ so
also now it is taken for the solid grain. God then intimates that he
would not be so rigid as not to moderate his punishment, so as to spare
the innocent. I have already said that though there would be still a
remnant among the people, yet what the Prophet says is true as to the
whole body; for it had nothing either sound or pure. But this objection
might be made: It is certain that many faithful worshipers of God were
taken away into exile with the wicked; they then fell on the earth as
useless chaff or refuse; but God denies that this would be the case. To
this I answer, that though the Lord involves his servants with the
ungodly when he executes temporal punishment, he is yet ever propitious
to them; and it is certain, that however hardly they may be dealt with,
they yet do not expostulate; they groan, indeed, but at the same time
they acknowledge that they are mercifully treated by the Lord.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p14"></span>But another thing must also be
remembered, — that though the Lord would not have dealt so severely with
his people, had they been like the few who were good, yet not one of
them was without some fault. Jeremiah, Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego, were indeed like angels among men; and it was
indeed a miracle, that they stood upright in the midst of so much
impiety; they were yet led into captivity. When they approached God,
they could not object, that they were punished beyond what they
deserved. Worthy, indeed, was Jeremiah of heavier punishment; and so was
Daniel, though an example of the highest and even of angelic integrity.
God then could have cast them away as refuse: it is nevertheless certain
that they were wheat; and the Lord shook them in the sieve like the
chaff, yet so as ever to keep them gathered under his protection; but at
the same time in a hidden manner: as, for instance, the wheat on the
floor is beaten together with the chaff, this is common to both; no
difference can be observed in the threshing. True is this, and the case
is the same when the wheat is being winnowed. When therefore the wheat
is gathered, it is, together with the chaff, to be sifted by the fan,
without any difference; but the wheat remains. So also it happened to
the pious worshipers of God; the Lord kept them collected in the sieve.
But here he speaks of the people in general; and he says that the whole
people were like refuse and filth, and that they vanished, because there
was no solidity in them, no use to be made of them, so that no one
remained in the sieve. That God then preserved his servants, was an
instance of his wonderful working. But the denunciation of punishment,
here spoken of, belonged to the outward dealings of God. As then the
people were like refuse or chaff shaken and driven to various places,
this happened to them justly, because nothing solid was found in them.
It now follows —

<span id="iv.ix.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.ix-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p2"></span>**10.** All the sinners of my people shall
die by the sword, which say, The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us.

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Gladio morientur omnes scelerati
populi mei, qui dicunt, Non accedet et non antevertet proper nos malum.

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p6"></span>Amos goes on with the same subject, — that
God without any measure of cruelty would execute extreme vengeance on a
reprobate people: *Die,* he says, *by the sword all the wicked of my
people.* In naming the wicked of the people, he meant no doubt to
include the whole people; though if any one thinks that the elect are by
implication excepted, who were mixed with the ungodly, I do not object:
this is probable; but yet the Prophet speaks here of the people
generally. He says that the wicked of the people would perish by the
sword: for it was not the sin of a few that Amos here refers to, but the
sin which prevailed among the whole nation. Then all the wicked of my
people shall die by the sword. He points out what sort of people they
were, or at least he mentions the chief mark by which their impiety
might be discovered, — they obstinately despised all the judgments of
God, *They say, It will not draw near; nor lay hold on our account, the
evil.*

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p7"></span>Security then, which of itself ever
generates a contempt of God, is here mentioned as the principal mark of
impiety. And doubtless the vices of men reach a point that is past hope,
when they are touched neither by fear nor shame, but expect God’s
judgments without any concern or anxiety. Since then they thus drove far
away from themselves all threatening, while at the same time they were
ill at ease with themselves, and as it were burying themselves in deep
caverns, and seeking false peace to their consciences, they were in a
torpor, or rather stupor, incapable of any remedy. It is, therefore, no
wonder that the Prophet lays down here this mark of security, when he is
showing that there was no remnant of a sound mind in this people. Die
then shall all the wicked by the sword, even those who say, It will not
draw near; nor anticipate us, on our account, the evil: for we can not
explain the word <span id="iv.ix.ix-p7.1"></span>הקדים, *ekodim,* in any
other way than by referring it to the threatening. For the Prophets, we
know, commonly declared that the day of the Lord was at hand, that his
hand was already armed, that it had already seized the sword. As then
the Prophets, in order to smite despisers with fear, were wont to
threaten a near punishment; so the Prophet does here; wishing to expose
the impious stupor of the people, he says, “You think that there will
not be such haste as is foretold to you by the Prophets; but this sheer
perverseness will be the cause of your ruin.”

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p8"></span>As to the expression, It will not come *on
our account,* *from a regard to us*, it deserves to be noticed. Though
hypocrites confess in general, that they cannot escape the hand of God,
yet they still separate themselves from the common class, as if they are
secured by some peculiar privilege. They therefore set up something in
opposition to God, that they may not be blended with others. This folly
the Prophet indirectly condemns by saying, that hypocrites are in a
quiet and tranquil state, because they think that there will be to them
no evil in common with the rest, as also they say in <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p8.1"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p8.1"></span>,
‘The scourge, if it passes, will not yet reach us.’ We now then see what
the Prophet has hitherto taught, and the meaning of these four verses
which we have just explained. Now follows the promise —

<span id="iv.ix.x"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p2"></span>**11.** In that day will I raise up the
tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof;
and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of
old:

<span id="iv.ix.x-p3"></span>**11.** In die illa erigam tabernaculum
David, quod cecidit, et sepiam rupturas ejus, et subversiones ejus
erigam, et aedificabo illud, sicuti diebus antiquis (seculi, ad verbum.)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p6"></span>Here now the Prophet begins to set forth
the consolation, which alone could support the minds of the godly under
afflictions so severe. Threatening alone might have cast the strongest
into despair; but the event itself must have overwhelmed whatever hope
there might have been. Hence the Prophet now applies comfort by saying,
that God would punish the sins of the people of Israel in such a way as
to remember still his own promise. We know, that whenever the Prophets
designed to give some hope to a distressed people, they set forth the
Messiah, for in him all the promises of God, as Paul says, are Yea and
Amen, (<span id="iv.ix.x-p6.1"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix.x-p6.1"></span>)
and there was no other remedy for the dispersion than for God to gather
all the scattered members under one head. Hence, when the head is taken
away, the Church has no head; especially when it is scattered and torn,
as was the case after the time of Amos. It is no wonder then that the
Prophets, after having prophesied of the destruction of the people, such
as happened after the two kingdoms were abolished, should recall the
minds of the faithful to the Messiah; for except God had gathered the
Church under one head, there would have been no hope. This is,
therefore, the order which Amos now observes.

<span id="iv.ix.x-p7"></span>*In that day,* he says, *will I raise up
the tabernacle of David:* as though he had said, that the only hope
would be, when the redeemers who had been promised would appear. This is
the import of the whole. After having shown then that the people had no
hope from themselves, for God had tried all means, but in vain and after
having denounced their final ruin, he now subjoins, “The Lord will yet
have mercy on his people, for he will remember his covenant.” How will
this be? “The Redeemer shall come.” We now then understand the design of
the Prophet and the meaning of the verse.

<span id="iv.ix.x-p8"></span>But when he speaks of the tabernacle of
David, he refers, I doubt not, to the decayed state of things; for a
tabernacle does notcomport with royal dignity. It is the same as though
Amos had said, “Though the house of David is destitute of all
excellency, and is like a mean cottage, yet the Lord will perform what
he has promised; he will raise up again his kingdom, and restore to him
all the power which has been lost.” The Prophet then had regard to that
intervening time, when the house of David was deprived of all splendor
and entirely thrown down. I will then raise up the tabernacle of David:
he might have said the tabernacle of Jesse; but he seems to have
designedly mentioned the name of David, that he might the more fully
strengthen the minds of the godly in their dreadful desolation, so that
they might with more alacrity flee to the promise: for the name of Jesse
was more remote. As then the name of David was in repute, and as this
oracle,

<span id="iv.ix.x-p9"></span>‘Of the fruit of thy loins I will set on
thy throne,’  
(<span id="iv.ix.x-p9.2"></span>[Ps
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.x-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p10"></span>was commonly known, the Prophet brings
forward here the house of David, in order that the faithful might
remember that God had not in vain made a covenant with David: *The
tabernacle* then *of David will I then raise up, and will fence in its
breaches, and its ruins will I raise up; and I will build it as in the
days of old* Thus the Prophet intimates that not only the throne of
David would be overthrown but also that nothing would remain entire in
his mean booth, for it would decay into ruins and all things would be
subverted. In short, he intimates that mournful devastation would happen
to the whole family of David. He speaks, as it is well understood,
metaphorically of the tabernacle: but the sense is clear, and that is,
that God would restore the royal dignity, as in former times, to the
throne of David.

<span id="iv.ix.x-p11"></span>This is a remarkable prediction, and
deserves to be carefully weighed by us. It is certain that the Prophet
here refers to the advent of Christ; and of this there is no dispute,
for even the Jews are of this opinion, at least the more moderate of
them. There are indeed those of a shameless front, who pervert all
Scripture without any distinction: these and their barking we may pass
by. It is however agreed that this passage of the Prophet cannot be
otherwise explained than of the Messiah: for the restitution of David’s
family was not to be expected before his time; and this may easily be
learnt from the testimonies of other Prophets. As then the Prophet here
declares, that a Redeemer would come, who would renew the whole state of
the kingdom, we see that the faith of the Fathers was ever fixed on
Christ; for in the whole world it is he alone who has reconciled us to
God: so also, the fallen Church could not have been restored otherwise
than under one head, as we have already often stated. If then at this
day we desire to raise up our minds to God, Christ must immediately
become a Mediator between us; for when he is taken away, despair will
ever overwhelm us, nor can we attain any sure hope. We may indeed be
raised up by some wind or another; but our empty confidence will shortly
come to nothing, except we have a confidence founded on Christ alone.
This is one thing. We must secondly observe, that the interruption, when
God overthrew the kingdom, I mean, the kingdom of Judah, is not
inconsistent with the prediction of Jacob and other similar predictions.
Jacob indeed had said,

<span id="iv.ix.x-p12"></span>‘Taken away shall not be the scepter from
Judah,  
nor a lawgiver from his bosom, or from his feet,  
until he shall come, the Shiloh,’  
(<span id="iv.ix.x-p12.4"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.x-p12.4"></span>)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p13"></span>Afterwards followed this memorable
promise,

<span id="iv.ix.x-p14"></span>‘Sit of thy progeny on thy throne shall
he,  
who shall call me his Father,  
and in return I will call him my Son,  
and his throne shall perpetually remain,’  
(<span id="iv.ix.x-p14.5"></span>[Ps.
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.x-p14.5"></span>)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p15"></span>Here is promised the eternity of the
kingdom; and yet we see that this kingdom was diminished under Rehoboam,
we see that it was distressed with many evils through its whole
progress, and at length it was miserably destroyed, and almost
extinguished; nay, it had hardly the name of a kingdom, it had no
splendor, no throne, no dignity, no scepter, no crown. It then follows,
that there seems to be an inconsistency between these events and the
promises of God. But the Prophets easily reconcile these apparent
contrarieties; for they say, that for a time there would be no kingdom,
or at least that it would be disturbed by many calamities, so that there
would appear no outward form of a kingdom, and no visible glory. As then
they say this, and at the same time add, that there would come a
restoration, that God would establish this kingdom by the power of his
Christ, — as then the Prophets say this, they show that its perpetuity
would really appear and be exhibited in Christ. Though then the kingdom
had for some time fallen, this does not militate against the other
predictions. This then is the right view of the subject: for Christ at
length appeared, on whose head rests the true diadem or crown, and who
has been elected by Gods and is the legitimate king, and who, having
risen from the dead, reigns and now sits at the Father’s right hand, and
his throne shall not fail to the end of the world; nay, the world shall
be renovated, and Christ’s kingdom shall continue, though in another
form, after the resurrection, as Paul shows to us; and yet Christ shall
be really a king for ever.

<span id="iv.ix.x-p16"></span>And the Prophet, by saying, *as in ancient
days,* confirms this truth, that the dignity of the kingdom would not
continue uniform, but that the restoration would yet be such as to make
it clearly evident that God had not in vain promised an eternal kingdom
to David. Flourish then shall the kingdom of David for ever. But this
has not been the case; for when the people returned from exile,
Zerobabel, it is true, and also many others, obtained kingly power; yet
what was it but precarious? They became even tributaries to the kings of
the Persian and of the Medes. It then follows, that the kingdom of
Israel never flourished, nor had there existed among the people anything
but a limited power; we must, therefore, necessarily come to Christ and
his kingdom. We hence see that the words of the Prophet cannot be
otherwise understood than of Christ. It follows —

<span id="iv.ix.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p2"></span>**12.** That they may possess the remnant
of Edom, and of all the heathen, which are called by my name, saith the
Lord that doeth this.  <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p6"></span>**12.** Ut possideant reliquias Edom et
omnes gentes, super quas (*alii vertunt*, super quos) invocatum est
nomen meum, dicit Jehova hoc faciens.

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p8"></span><span id="iv.ix.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p9"></span>By these words the Prophet shows that the
kingdom under Christ would be more renowned and larger than it had ever
been under David. Since then the kingdom had been greatest in dignity,
and wealth, and power, in the age of David, the Prophet here says, that
its borders would be enlarged; for then he says, *Possess shall the
Israelites the remnant of Edom* He speaks here in common of the
Israelites and of the Jews, as before, at the beginning of the last
chapter, he threatened both. But we now apprehend what he means, — that
Edom shall come under the yoke.

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p10"></span>And it is sufficiently evident why he
mentions here especially the Idumeans, and that is because they had been
most inveterate enemies; and vicinity gave them greater opportunity for
doing harm. As then the Idumeans harassed the miserable Jews, and gave
them no respite, this is the reason why the Prophet says that they would
come under the power of his elect people. He afterwards adds, that all
nations would come also to the Jews. He speaks first of the Idumeans,
but he also adds all other nations. I cannot finish today.

<span id="iv.ix.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.ix.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we see
everywhere so many evident tokens of thy displeasure, and more grievous
ones are impeding, if we indeed duly consider how grievously we have
provoked thy wrath, and how wickedly also the whole world at this day
rages against thee and at the same time abuses thy many and excellent
benefits, — O grant, that we may ever remember thy covenant and
entertain a perpetual confidence in thy only-begotten Son, that whenever
it may please thee to sift us, thou mayest keep us in safety, until we
come, not into any earthly storehouse but into thy celestial kingdom,
where we may become partakers of that glory which thy Son has obtained
for us, who has once for all redeemed us that we may ever remain under
his guardianship and protection. Amen.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixty-ninth

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p2"></span>In yesterday’s Lecture, we could not
finish the verse in which Amos says, that the Idumeans and other nations
would come under the power of the people of God. As to the first clause
there is no ambiguity, but the latter admits of two meanings. Some take
its sense to be this, “Other nations on whom my name is called:” and
others refer this to the children of Abraham in this way, “That possess
the remnants of Edom and all nations they may, upon whom,” etc.; that
is, that they on whom my name is called, even the descendants of
Abraham, may possess the Idumeans and all other nations. If we choose
the reference to be made to the chosen people, the order of the words
seems to be somewhat broken; and yet this sense is very suitable, — that
possess their enemies the faithful may, on whom my name is called; for
the reason appears to be here expressed by the Prophet, why he promised
a large kingdom to the Israelites, and that is, because they were
enrolled in God’s name, the Lord owned them as his people, inasmuch as
he had chosen and adopted them in the person of their father Abraham.
But if the other view be more approved, then the particle <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p2.1"></span>אשר, *asher,* is not, as I think, a pronoun
relative, but an adverb expressing a cause, “That they may possess the
remnants of Edom and all nations, for my name shall have been, or shall
be, called on them:”  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) for who can
have possession of this right or title but those who, having been
aliens, shall pass over into the family of Abraham? Israel is indeed
said to possess whatever comes from another quarter, and is incorporated
into the body of the Church.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p8"></span>But on this point I will not contend;
for this main thing is evident to us, — that the extension of the
kingdom under Christ is here promised as though he had said that the
Jews were included within narrow bounds, even when the kingdom of David
especially flourished, but that God would under Christ extend their
borders, and cause them to rule far and wide. What it is to call God’s
name on a people, we have elsewhere stated. Let us now go on with the
context.

<span id="iv.ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013)<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** Behold, the days come, saith the
LORD, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of
grapes him that soweth seed; and the mountains shall drop sweet wine,
and all the hills shall melt.

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** Ecce dies veniunt, dicit Jehova,
et occurret arator messori, et calcator uvarum efferenti semen; et
stillabunt montes dulcem liquorem, et omnes colles liquefient (nempe ut
lacte diffluant.)

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet describes the felicity
which shall be under the reign of Christ: and we know that whenever the
Prophets set forth promises of a happy and prosperous state to God’s
people, they adopt metaphorical expressions, and say, that abundance of
all good things shall flow, that there shall be the most fruitful
produce, that provisions shall be bountifully supplied; for they
accommodated their mode of speaking to the notions of that ancient
people; it is therefore no wonders if they sometimes speak to them as to
children. At the same time, the Spirit under these figurative
expressions declares, that the kingdom of Christ shall in every way be
happy and blessed, or that the Church of God, which means the same
thing, shall be blessed, when Christ shall begin to reign.

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p7"></span>Hence he says, *Coming are the days,
saith Jehovah, and the plowman shall draw nigh,* or *meet*, *the reaper*
The Prophet no doubt refers to the blessing mentioned by Moses in <span
id="iv.ix.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Le
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p7.1"></span>
for the Prophets borrowed thence their mode of speaking, to add more
credit and authority to what they taught. And Moses uses nearly the same
words, — that the vintage shall meet the harvest, and also that sowing
shall meet the plowing: and this is the case, when God supplies
abundance of corn and wine, and when the season is pleasant and
favorable. We then see what the Prophet means, that is, that God would
so bless his people, that he would suffer no lack of good things.

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p8"></span>*The plowman then shall come nigh the
reaper; and the treader of grapes, the bearer of seed.* When they shall
finish the harvest, they shall begin to plow, for the season will be
most favorable; and then when they shall complete their vintage, they
shall sow. Thus the fruitfulness, as I have said, of all produce is
mentioned.

<span id="iv.ix.xiv-p9"></span>The Prophet now speaks in a hyperbolical
language, and says*, Mountains shall drop sweetness, and all the hills
shall melt,* that is, *milk shall flow down*. We indeed know that this
has never happened; but this manner of speaking is common and often
occurs in Scripture. The sum of the whole is, that there will be no
common or ordinary abundance of blessings, but what will exceed belief,
and even the course of nature, as the very mountains shall as it were
flow down. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ix.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xv-p2"></span>**14.** And I will bring again the
captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities,
and inhabit *them*; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine
thereof; they shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

<span id="iv.ix.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Et reducam captivitatem populi mei
Israel; et aedificabunt urbes dirutas, et habitabunt illic; plantabunt
vites, et bibunt vinum earum; facient hortos, et comedent fructus
ipsorum.

<span id="iv.ix.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.xv-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xv-p6"></span>As the prophecy we have noticed was one
difficult to be believed, especially when the people were led away into
exile, the Prophet comes to the help of this lack of faith, and shows
that this would be no hindrance to God to lead his people to the
felicity of which he speaks. These things seem indeed to be quite
contrary, the one to the other, — that the people, spoiled of all
dignity, should be driven to a far country to live in miserable exile,
and that they should also be scattered into various parts and oppressed
by base tyranny; — and that at the same time a most flourishing
condition should be promised them, and that such an extension of their
kingdom should be promised them, as had never been previously witnessed.
Lest then their present calamities should fill their minds with fear and
bind them fast in despair; he says that the Israelites shall return from
exile, not indeed all; but as we have already seen, this promise is
addressed to the elect alone: at the same time he speaks here simply of
the people. But, this prophecy is connected with other prophecies: it
ought not therefore to be extended except to that remnant seed, of whom
we have before taken notice.

<span id="iv.ix.xv-p7"></span>*Restore* then *will I the captivity of my
people Israel;* and then, *They shall build nested cities and dwell
there; they shall plant vineyards, and their wine shall they drink; they
shall make gardens, and shall eat their fruit.* He reminds the people
here of the blessings mentioned in the Law. They must indeed have known
that the hand of the Lord was opposed to them in their exile. Hence the
Prophet now shows, that as soon as the Lord would again begin to be
propitious to them, there would be a new state of things; for when God
shows his smiling countenance, prosperity follows and a blessed success
in all things. This then is what the Prophet now intends to show, that
the miserable exiles might not faint in despair, when the Lord chastised
them. It follows at last —

<span id="iv.ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iv.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Amos
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p2"></span>**15.** And I will plant them upon their
land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have
given them, saith the Lord thy God.

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p3"></span>**15.** Et plantabo eos super terram
suam, (in terra sua,) et non evellentur amplius a terra sua, quam dedi
illis, inquit Jehova Deus tuus.

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet further mentions here a quiet
dwellings in the land, for it was not enough for the people to be
restored to their country, except they lived there in safety and
quietness; for they might soon afterwards have been removed again. It
would have been better for them to pine away in exile, than to be
restored for the sake, as it were, of sporting with them, and in a short
time to be again conquered by their enemies, and to be led away into
another country. Therefore the Prophet says, that the people, when
restored, would be in a state of tranquillity.

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p7"></span>And he uses a most suitable comparison,
when he says, *I will plant them in their own land, nor shall they be
pulled up any more:* for how can we have a settled place to dwell in,
except the Lord locates us somewhere? We are indeed as it were flitting
beings on the earth, and we may at any moment be tossed here and there
as the chaff. We have therefore no settled dwelling, except as far as we
are planted by the hand of God, or as far as God assigns to us a certain
habitation, and is pleased to make us rest in quietness. This is what
the Prophet means by saying, *I will plant them in their own land, nor
shall they any more be pulled up* How so? “Because, he says, I have
given to them the land”. He had indeed given it to them before, but he
suffered them to be pulled up when they had polluted the land. But now
God declares that his grace would outweigh the sins of the people; as
though he said, “However unworthy the people are, who dwell in this
land, my gift will yet be effectual: for I will not regard what they
deserve at my hands, but as I have given them this land, they shall
obtain it.” We now apprehend the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p8"></span>Now, if we look on what afterwards
happened, it may appear that this prophecy has never been fulfilled. The
Jews indeed returned to their own country, but it was only a small
number: and besides, it was so far from being the case, that they ruled
over neighboring nations, that they became on the contrary tributaries
to them: and further still, the limits of their rule were ever narrow,
even when they were able to shake off the yoke. In what sense then has
God promised what we have just explained? We see this when we come to
Christ; for it will then be evident that nothing has been in vain
foretold: though the Jews have not ruled as to the outward appearance,
yet the kingdom of God was then propagated among all nations, from the
rising to the setting of the sun; and then, as we have said in other
places, the Jews reigned.

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p9"></span>Further, what is here said of the
abundance of corn and wine, must be explained with reference to the
nature of Christ’s kingdom. As then the kingdom of Christ is spiritual,
it is enough for us, that it abounds in spiritual blessings: and the
Jews, whom God reserved for himself as a remnant, were satisfied with
this spiritual abundance.

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p10"></span>If any one objects and says, that the
Prophet does not speak here allegorically; the answer is ready at hand,
even this, — that it is a manner of speaking everywhere found in
Scripture, that a happy state is painted as it were before our eyes, by
setting before us the conveniences of the present life and earthly
blessings: this may especially be observed in the Prophets, for they
accommodated their style, as we have already stated, to the capacities
of a rude and weak people. But as this subject has been discussed
elsewhere more at large, I only touch on it now as in passing and
lightly. Now follows the Prophecy of Obadiah, who is commonly called
Abdiah.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p12"></span>End of the Commentaries on Amos.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc27016.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.ix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.i-p7"></span> Calvin is not without many expounders, who
agree with him in this view; yet the reasons assigned do not apply.
“Though the true God,” as *Dr. Henderson* justly observes, “was seen
beside the idolatrous altar, it was not for the purpose of receiving
homage, but of commanding that the whole of the erection and worship at
Bethel should be destroyed.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc27016.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.ix.i-p10.8"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.i-p11"></span> These two lines are variously explained.
The words can hardly admit the meaning here given to them. The scene was
in the temple, and worshippers were present. The command was to strike
the lintel; the fall of the pillars or posts was the consequence: many
were destroyed, and those who remained were to be killed by the sword,
and not one was to escape. There seems to be here an allusion to two
previous events — the shaking and pulling down of the pillars of the
house of Dagon by Sampson, — and the slaughter of the priests of Baal by
Jehu. I render the verse thus: —  
I saw the Lord standing on the altar, and he said, —

<span id="iv.ix.i-p12"></span>“Strike the lintel, that the pillars may
shake,  
And break them down on the head of them all;  
And the remainder of them with the sword will I slay;  
Flee away from them shall not he who fleeth,  
And escape from them shall not he who escapeth.”

<span id="iv.ix.i-p13"></span>*Junius* and *Tremelius,* as well as
*Dathius*, render the third and fourth lines, where the difficulty alone
exists, according to the version given above; and *Henderson* renders
the third line materially the same, —

<span id="iv.ix.i-p14"></span>And break them in pieces on the heads of
them all.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p15"></span>But he retains “posterity” in the fourth
line, which seems not consistent with the tenor of the passage.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p16"></span>The version of *Junius* and *Tremelius* is
this, —

<span id="iv.ix.i-p17"></span><span id="iv.ix.i-p17.1"></span>Et divide
ipsos in capite ipsorum omnium,  
Quod autem post ipsos est gladio interrficam.

<span id="iv.ix.i-p18"></span>*Dathius* is more paraphrastic, and gives
the same sense, —

<span id="iv.ix.i-p19"></span><span id="iv.ix.i-p19.1"></span>*Eosque
diffinde* ut ruant *in caput omnium* qui adsunt, *  
Reliquos vero gladio interficam*

<span id="iv.ix.i-p20"></span>*Newcome,* who is too fond of emendations,
folllows *Houbigant,* who, for no reason that appears, turns the verb
into the first person; and he gives this rendering of the third line, —

<span id="iv.ix.i-p21"></span>*For I will wound them in the head,* even
*all of them:*

<span id="iv.ix.i-p22"></span>But this evidently does not comport with
the context. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc27016.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p4"></span> This verse and the preceding are
connected together, and form but one period, as it evidently appears
from the construction of the words in Hebrew. The following may be
considered a literal version: —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p5"></span>*5. And the Lord, Jehovah of hosts,* —*  
Who touches the earth and it melts,  
And mourn do all who dwell on it,  
And it heaves up as a river, the whole of it,  
And sinks down as the river of Egypt,* —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p6"></span>*6. Who builds in the heavens his
ascents,  
And fixes on the earth his station,  
Who calls the waters of the sea,  
And pours them forth on the face of the earth,* —*  
Jehovah is his name.*

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p7"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc27016.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p11"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p11.1"></span>*Caenacula,* in other places, <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p11.2"></span>*ascensiones,* and more correctly; for <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p11.3"></span>מעלות is properly ascents, steps to ascend,
stairs; and hence, the places ascended to, chambers.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc27016.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p12"></span> <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p12.1"></span>*Coagmentationes suas* — his joinings,
cementings; but <span id="iv.ix.iv-p12.2"></span>אנדתו is in the
singular number. It is difficult to ascertain its meaning. It occurs not
as a verb, but from its application, its ideal meaning seems to be, to
join or bind together, so as to form a compact body. It is applied in
<span id="iv.ix.iv-p12.3"></span>[2Sa
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#025)<span id="iv.ix.iv-p12.3"></span>,
to designate a *troop*, a compact body of men. It signifies in <span
id="iv.ix.iv-p12.4"></span>[Ex
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ix.iv-p12.4"></span>, a *bundle* of hyssop. *Newcome* renders it
a *storehouse,* deriving its meaning from the Chaldee; and *Henderson*
renders it *vault,* tracing it from the Arabic, and says that it
signifies the vault or arch of heaven, the hemispheric expanse, which
apparently to the eye is founded on the earth; but a *band* or *troop*
has been its most common acceptation.

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p13"></span>It must be borne in mind, that it must be
something on earth that corresponds or forms a contrast with *ascents*
in the heavens. God has his ascendings, or as it were, his steps or
stairs in the heavens, along which, speaking after the manner of men, he
ascends: then what has he on earth? It seems to me that something firm,
solid, compacted, is intended; and the earth is said to be his
footstool. Hence a firm footing, standing, or station, appears to be the
meaning of the word.  
The French translation is —

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p14"></span><span id="iv.ix.iv-p14.1"></span>*Qui
fonde son batiment sur la terre* —*  
“Who founds his* building *on the earth.”*

<span id="iv.ix.iv-p15"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc27016.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv.ix.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p3"></span> <span id="iv.ix.xi-p3.1"></span>עשה זאת,
“who *will* do these things.” It appears that <span
id="iv.ix.xi-p3.2"></span>זאת is a pronoun which is plural as well as
singular: and the Welsh <span id="iv.ix.xi-p3.3"></span>*hyn* is exactly
the same; it will admit thing or things to be added to it — <span
id="iv.ix.xi-p3.4"></span>*y peth hyn*—*y pethan hyn* When it is put by
itself, <span id="iv.ix.xi-p3.5"></span>*hyn* it conveys the idea of one
particular thing, or of several things, according to the context.

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p4"></span>The relative pronoun, <span
id="iv.ix.xi-p4.1"></span>אשר, who, whom, is of the same character; it
is both singular and plural, as *whom* also is in the English language,
and <span id="iv.ix.xi-p4.2"></span>*sawl* in Welsh.

<span id="iv.ix.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.ix.xi-p5.1"></span>עשה is
considered a participle, and the participle in Hebrew may often be
rendered as a personal noun, and in this instance *the doer.* It is the
<span id="iv.ix.xi-p5.2"></span>ὁ ποιων of the Greek. But if the verbal
form be retained, the auxiliary verb must be in the same tense with the
leading verb in the context, “who *will* do these things.”—*Ed.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc27016.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p3"></span> This sentence is an instance, common in
Hebrew, of the use of two pronouns, —a relative and a personal pronoun;
to the latter of which is prefixed the preposition. It has already been
noticed, that in Welsh the same idiom exists; in that language this line
is rendered word for word like the Hebrew: and the true rendering is no
doubt that which is mentioned last by Calvin. The Hebrew literally is
this, —

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p4"></span>Whom shall be called my name upon them.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p5"></span>The same line in Welsh, without any
change even in the order of the words, —

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p6"></span><span id="iv.ix.xiii-p6.1"></span>Y rhai
y gelwir vy enw arnyt.

<span id="iv.ix.xiii-p7"></span>Another peculiarity is, that the
preposition is prefixed and *joined to* the personal pronoun in Welsh as
well as in Hebrew; and a third is, that the relative *y* <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p7.1"></span>*rhai* (the whom) in Welsh, like <span
id="iv.ix.xiii-p7.2"></span>אשר in Hebrew, admits of no case. It is the
same when a nominative to a verb, or when an accusative governed by it.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc27016.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.ix.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.xvi-p11"></span> There is no Prayer here, for the
Lecture is not completed: it includes a portion of the Book of Obadiah.
— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Obadiah](cc27017)
