[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc27000)  [Next](cc27002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 27: Joel, Amos, Obadiah*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>Translator’s Preface

<span id="ii-p2"></span>This volume contains the Writings of three
Prophets. Joel exercised his office among the Jews; Amos, though a
native of Judea, was yet appointed a Prophet of The Ten Tribes; and
Obadiah’s prophecy refers only to Edom.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The great master of Hebrew criticism, Bishop
Lowth, speaking, in his twenty-first Prelection, of Joel, says, that
though he differs much in style from Hosea, he is yet “*equally
poetical.*” He represents him as “*elegant, clear, diffuse, and flowing,
and also very sublime, severe, and fervid.*” Admitting the perspicuity
of his diction, and the clearness of his arrangements, he yet confesses
that the matter which he handles is sometimes obscure, especially
towards the end of his Prophecy.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>With regard to the style of Amos, the Bishop
differs widely from Jerome, who has characterized the Prophet as
“*unskillful in speech, but not in knowledge,*” (imperitum sermone, set
non in scientia.) Lowth, on the contrary, regarded him as “*not a whit
behind the very chiefest Prophets, being in elevation of sentiment and
nobleness of mind almost equal to the very firsts and hardly inferior to
any of them in splendor of diction and elegance of composition.*”  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="ii-p6"></span>Of Obadiah, nothing more is said by the Bishop
than that he left but a small monument of his genius, and that a
considerable portion of that is contained in the prophecy of Jeremiah.
Of his composition Dr. Henderson says, “*Its principal features are
animation, regularity, and perspicuity.*”

<span id="ii-p7"></span>There is especially one subject in connection
with the present Volume, which seems to require particular notice — The
interpretation of those prophecies which speak of the future restoration
of the Jews to their own land. Calvin viewed some passages, as having
been already accomplished in their return from Babylon, which in the
estimation of others are yet to be fulfilled; while he interpreted those
which evidently refer to what is future, in such a way as clearly shows
that he did not consider that the Jews are to be restored again to their
own country. That justice may be done to him, we must know and bear in
mind the principles by which he was guided: for it is not to be
supposed, that one so versed in Scripture, who had studied it with so
much labor, and manifested, as it is commonly admitted, so much
penetration and discernment as an expounder, would have taken such a
view of this subject on slight grounds, without adopting a rule of
interpretation, which, according to what he thought, was countenanced by
Scriptural examples.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>It must first be observed, that Calvin, in
common with others, regarded the history as well erg the institutions of
the people of Israel, as in great measure typical of things under the
Gospel. Their temporal evils and blessings, their temporal oppressions
and deliverances, were intended to set forth the spiritual state and
condition of the Christian Church. The free choice of the people by God,
their Egyptian bondage, their passage through the wilderness and their
possession of the land of Canaan, were events symbolical of things
connected with that spiritual community afterwards formed by the
preaching of the Gospel; and of the same character was the subsequent
captivity of that people in Babylon, and their restoration afterwards to
their own land.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>The next thing to be noticed is, that Promises
of Blessings made to the people of Israel had in some instances a
twofold meaning, and had reference to two things — the one temporal and
the other spiritual. The restoration, for instance, from Babylon, was a
prelude of the restoration or redemption by Christ. It was not only
typical, but a kind of an initiative process, which was to be completed,
though in a sublimer sense, by the Savior of man. The first was a
restoration from temporal evils; the second was still a restoration, but
from evils of a spiritual kind. The performance of the promise, in one
case, was the commencement of a restorative work, which was to be
completed in the other: the temporal restoration was eventually
succeeded by that which is spiritual.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>But the most material point in interpreting the
Prophecies is The Language which is Used: rightly to understand this
language forms the main difficulty. There are Promises which, as
admitted by Calvin, look beyond the restoration from Babylon; and they
are couched in terms, which, if taken literally, most evidently show
that there is to be a second restoration. What is there, it may be
asked, which can justify a departure from the letter of the promises?
This is the chief question, on which the whole matter depends. Calvin
evidently thought that the literal sense cannot be taken, as that would
be inconsistent with the general character of the ancient prophecies;
for he considered that many of the prophecies, which relate to the
Church of the New Testament, were conveyed in a language suitable to the
institutions then existing, and in consistency with the notions which
then prevailed, as to religion and divine worship. Hence the Temple,
Mount Sion, sacrifices, offerings, the priests, as well as the
restoration of the people to their own land, and their perpetual
establishment in it, are often spoken of in those very promises which
incontestably refer to the Gospel dispensation. Now, if in some cases,
as confessed by most, if not by all, the language is not to be taken
literally, but as representing the success, the extension and the
blessings of the Gospel, why should it be taken literally in other
similar cases? The possession of the land of Canaan was to the people of
Israel one of their chief blessings, and was a signal token of the
divine favor. Banishment from it was not only a temporal loss, but
involved also the loss of all their religious privileges. Nothing,
therefore, could have conveyed to their minds a higher idea of
redemption than the promise of restoration to their own land, and a
perpetual possession of it.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>The foregoing seem to have been the views by
which Calvin was guided in his interpretation: and the Editor must be
allowed to express his concurrence, though he is fully aware, that there
have been, and that there are still, many celebrated men of a contrary
opinion.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>There is another idea which Calvin suggests, in
connection with this subject. He regarded The Promises made in some
instances by the Prophets as to the future prosperity of the people of
Israel, and the perpetuity of their institutions and privileges, as
Conditional, even when no condition is expressed. Instances of the same
kind are to be found in the writings of Moses and of the earlier
Prophets. Promises of perpetuity are made, (as for instance, respecting
the priesthood,) and often unaccompanied by any conditions; and yet they
were conditional, as the event proved, and in accordance with the tenor
of the covenant under which the Israelites lived. The same view may also
be taken of such promises as are found in the later Prophets, that is,
such as bear on them a national stamp: they were announced
unconditionally; but as they included blessings which belonged to the
people as subjects of the Mosaic covenant, they were necessarily
conditional, dependent as to their accomplishment on their obedience.
Hence Jeremiah, who had himself announced promises of this kind, says,
that the time would come when God would establish another covenant; and
for this reason, because the people of Israel had broken the former
covenant.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>The Editor feels it to be his duty to say
generally of Calvin’s Expositions that the more maturely he considers
them, after having compared them with those of others, both modern and
ancient, the more satisfied he is with them, and the more he admires the
acuteness and solid judgment they display. Perhaps no individual,
possessing his high qualifications, natural, acquired, and spiritual,
has ever, either in ancient or modern times, exercised himself so much
in the study of the Holy Scriptures, and produced Comments so original
and so valuable.

<span id="ii-p14"></span>What is remarkable in Calvin as an Expositor is
his unvarying attention to the context. This was his polar star, which
enabled him to steer clear and safe through many intricacies and
ambiguities no to the meaning of particular words, and even of
sentences. His first object seems to have been to ascertain the general
drift of a passage or of a chapter; and his next, to harmonize its
several parts. There are many words which have various meanings, and the
surest way of ascertaining their meaning in any given sentence, is to
inquire what comports with the context. There is indeed no other way by
which we can make a choice, when a word admits of different senses.
Probably no Commentator has ever paid so much attention to this canon of
interpretation as Calvin did. The ground on which he almost at all times
rejects a sense given by others to words or to sentences is, that it
does not suit the place, or, to adopt an expression he frequently uses,
that it does not square (<span id="ii-p14.1"></span>non quadrat) with
the passage.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>It has been often thought that more difficulty
attends the Hebrew language than other languages, owing to the variety
of meaning which belongs to some of its words. But this variety exists
quite as much, and indeed much more, in many other languages, and even
in our own. What enables us in numberless instances to ascertain the
meaning of a word, and even often of a sentence, is what stands
connected with it, that is, the context. It is what goes before and
comes after, not only in a sentence, but often in a long passage, that
explains the precise meaning of many words. To transfer the meaning of a
word from one passage to another, and to say that because it has a
certain meaning in one place, it must have the same in another, (except
the word has but one meaning,) is certainly not the way to explain
Scripture or any other writing. The best expositor in this respect is no
doubt the context.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>It is well known that these Lectures were
delivered extempore, and were taken down by some of those who heard
them; and we have them now as thus taken down, and afterwards corrected
by Calvin. This circumstance accounts for the occasional defect of order
and for occasional repetitions. But these drawbacks seem to have been
more than compensated by the freshness and vigor, the life and animation
which these spontaneous effusion of his mind exhibit. In none of his
other writings, as it appears to the Editor, has Calvin shone forth with
so much lustre as an able, clear, plain, and animated an Expounder, as
in these Lectures. There is a flow and energy to be found in them not
equaled in those productions which he composed in private, and finished
with more careful attention to order and style. When the mind is well
stored and the memory retentive, as was the case in no ordinary degree
with Calvin, a public auditory has usually the effect of calling into
action all the powers of the mind; and, as frequently in the present
instance, the consequence is, that the finest and the most striking
thoughts are elicited, and are expressed in a language the most
energetic, calculated to produce the deepest impressions.

<span id="ii-p17"></span>J.O.  
Thrussington November, 1846.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc27001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p5"></span> — <span id="ii-p5.1"></span>Pastoreum nostrum
<span id="ii-p5.2"></span>μηδεν ὑστερηκεναι των ὑπερ λιαν προφητων;
<span id="ii-p5.3"></span>ut sensuum elatione et magnificentia spiritus
prope summis parem, ita etiam dictionis splendore et composititonis
elegantia vix quoquam inferioreum. — *Lowth, Prael.* xxi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Joel](cc27002)
