[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m05105) 
[Next](m05107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION CVI

"Janamejaya said, 'Interminably wedded to evil, blinded by avarice,
addicted to wicked courses, resolved upon bringing destruction on his
head, inspiring grief in the hearts of kinsmen, enhancing the woes of
friends, afflicting all his well-wishers, augmenting the joys of foes,
and treading the wrong path, why did not his friends seek to restrain
him, and why also did not that great friend (of Kuru's race), the holy
One; with tranquil soul, or the Grandsire tell him anything from
affection?'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Yes, the holy one did speak. Bhishma also spoke
what was beneficial. And Narada too said much. Listen to all that these
said.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Narada said, 'Persons that listen to the
counsels of friends are rare. Friends again are rare that offer
beneficial counsels, for a friend (in need of counsel) is never there
where a friend (offering counsel) is. O son of Kuru's race, I think, the
word of friends ought to be listened to. Obstinacy ought to be avoided;
for it is fraught with great evil. In this connection is cited an old
story regarding Galava's having met with disgrace through obstinacy. In
ancient times, in order to test Viswamitra, who was then engaged in
ascetic austerities Dharma personally came to him, having assumed the
form of the Rishi, Vasishtha. Thus assuming, O Bharata, the form of the
one of the seven *Rishis*, and feigning himself hungry and desirous of
eating, he came, O king, to the hermitage of Kausika. Thereupon,
Viswamitra struck with

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

awe, began to cook *Charu* (which was a preparation of rice and milk).
And in consequence of the care he took in preparing that excellent food,
he could not properly wait upon his guest. And it was not till after the
guest had dined on the food offered by the other hermits that Viswamitra
succeeded in approaching him with the *Charu* he had cooked and which
was still steaming. 'I have already dined; wait here,'--were the words
that the holy one said. And having said that the holy one went away. And
thereupon, the illustrious Viswamitra, O king, waited there. And bearing
that food on his head and holding it with his arms, that ascetic of
rigid vow stood in his hermitage, still as a post, subsisting on air.
And as he stood there, an ascetic of the name of Galava, from motives of
respect and reverence and from affection and desire of doing what was
agreeable, began to wait upon him. And after a hundred years had passed
away, Dharma, again assuming the form of Vasishtha, came to Kausika from
desire of eating. And beholding the great *Rishi* Viswamitra, who was
endued with high wisdom, standing there with that food on his head,
himself subsisting all the while on air, Dharma accepted that food which
was still warm and fresh. And having eaten that food, the god
said,--*Gratified am I, O regenerate Rishi*. And saying this, he went
away. And at those words of Dharma, Viswamitra divested of
*Kshatriyahood* because endued with the status of a *Brahmana* and was
filled with delight <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11). And pleased as
he was with the services and devotion of his discipline, the ascetic
Galava, Viswamitra, addressed him and said, 'With my leave, O Galava, go
whithersoever thou mayest wish.' Thus commanded by his preceptor,
Galava, highly pleased, said in a sweet voice unto Viswamitra of great
effulgence, What final gift shall I make thee in consequence of thy
services as preceptor? O giver of honours, it is in consequence of the
(final) present that a sacrifice becometh successful. The giver of such
gifts obtains emancipation. Indeed, these gifts

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

constitute the fruit (that one enjoys in heaven). They are regarded as
peace and tranquillity personified. What, therefore, shall I procure for
my preceptor? Oh, let that be said. 'The illustrious Viswamitra knew
that he had really been conquered by Galava by means of the latter's
services, and the *Rishi*, therefore, sought to dismiss him by
repeatedly saying, 'Go, Go.' But thou repeatedly commanded by Viswamitra
to go away, Galava still addressed him saying, 'What shall I give?' And
seeing this obstinacy on the part of ascetic Galava, Viswamitra felt a
slight rise of anger and at last said, 'Give me eight hundred steeds,
every one of which should be as white as the rays of the moon, and every
one of which should have one ear black. Go now, O Galava, and tarry
not.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[215:1](m05106.htm#fr_11) The story of
Viswamitra's promotion to the status of a Brahmana is highly
characteristic. Engaged in a dispute with the Brahmana Rishi Vasishtha,
Viswamitra who was a Kshatriya king (the son of Kusika) found, by bitter
experience, that Kshatriya energy and might backed by the whole science
of arms, availed nothing against a Brahmana's might, for Vasishtha by
his ascetic powers created myriads and myriads of fierce troops who
inflicted a signal defeat on the great Kshatriya king. Baffled thus,
Viswamitra retired to the breast of Himavat and paid court to Siva. The
great God appeared and Viswamitra begged him for the mastery of the
whole science of weapons. The god granted his prayer. Viswamitra then
came back and sought an encounter with Vasishtha, but the latter by the
aid only of his Brahmanical (bamboo) stick baffled the fiercest weapons
of Viswamitra, of even celestial efficacy. Humiliated and disgraced,
Viswamitra set his heart on becoming a Brahmana. He gave up his kingdom
and retiring into the woods with his queen began to practise to severest
austerities. After the expiration of ten thousand years, the Creator
Brahma appeared before him and addressed him as a royal Rishi.
Dispirited at this, he devoted himself to still severer austerities. At
last, at Dharma's command (as here referred to) the great Kshatriya king
became a Brahmana. This, in the Hindu scriptures, is the sole instance
of a person belonging to a lower order becoming a Brahmana by ascetic
austerities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section CVII](m05107)
