[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Native California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](scc31)  [Next](scc33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 30.--YAUDANCHI YOKUTS. THE PRAIRIE FALCON'S WIFE.\[2\]

The prairie falcon lived there. His wife, the duck, lived there. Coyote
lived there with them. The three were there. Then the prairie falcon
went off. He told Coyote: "Do not sleep." Then the prairie falcon's wife
went off from there. She gathered seeds. Then they \[the woman and
Coyote\] returned. The prairie falcon also returned. They all returned
safely. Then in the morning

\[2. From a Yaudanchi text. Present series, II, 259.\]

{p. 222}

the prairie falcon again went. He told Coyote: "Do not sleep." Then the
prairie falcon's wife again went. Now Coyote slept while she gathered
seeds. Then the condor saw her from above. Then he came from there. He
lit near the prairie falcon's wife. He said to her: "We will go up." The
woman said to him: "I will not go." He said to her: "We will go." Then
she agreed. She said to him: "How shall I go?" He said to her: "Lie down
right here on my back." Then they two went off. They went up. Then they
arrived there, far off, at the hole of our world. An old man was there.
Now the two lived there. The woman was with him. The old man there
guarded the woman. Then the prairie falcon came home. He said: "Where is
my wife?" Then he \[Coyote\] said: "I do not know." He said to him:
"What did you do? Did you sleep?" He said: "Yes, I slept." Now they two
looked for her. They did not find her. Then they sent the dove to look.
The dove did not find her. Then they sent the buzzard also. The buzzard
did not find her. They sent also the large fly, and he did not find her.
Then they sent the large lizard, k'ondjedja (species?). Then the lizard
came out from the rock. He looked about. He saw the hole of our world
above. Then the lizard said: "Far up." Then they sent the large fly
again. He went up. He came there above to the hole of our world. Then
the fly saw that woman. From there he went back. He came to the prairie
falcon. He told the prairie falcon: "Your wife is above there." Now the
condor went. He said to the old man: "Do not say this to my wife; do not
tell her: 'Bring water!' Well, now I am going." Then the condor went.
Now the prairie falcon arrived there where the water was. Then the
prairie falcon saw his wife there. He told his wife: "Do not say
anything." Then he went from there. He arrived there. Then the old man
said to him: "Where are you going?" Then he said: "I am traveling for
nothing." Then he said: "I am going now." He told his wife: "Come to me
there where the water is." Then his wife said: "Yes." Then the prairie
falcon had gone. That old man slept. Then the prairie falcon's wife
went. Then the prairie falcon's wife came to him at the water. Then they
went. Now they two arrived at their house.

{p. 223}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31.--Yaudanchi Yokuts. The Prairie Falcon Loses.](scc33)
