[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc02)  [Next](ipc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

THE first edition of this work, issued in 1893, had an unexpected
success, especially abroad. In France, the eminent Sanskrit scholar, M.
Léon de Rosny, reviewed it very favourably in the "XXme Siêcle" in a
long article that gave a digest of the subject.

He said: "The astonishing points of contact (ressemblances étonnantes)
between the popular legend of Buddha and that of Christ, the almost
absolute similarity of the moral lessons given to the world, at five
centuries’ interval, between these two peerless teachers of the human
race, the striking affinities between the customs of the Buddhists and
of the Essenes, of whom Christ must have been a disciple, suggest at
once an Indian origin to Primitive Christianity."

And in Germany the eminent scientist, Ludwig Büchner, also reviewed it
in one of the periodicals summing up thus: "There is no longer any
question of the close relationship, in form and contents, of the two
greatest and most successful religions of the world." This article has
been reproduced in the volume entitled "Last Words on Materialism."

But the subject had already been ventilated on the continent.

In the "Revue des Deux Mondes," 15th July, 1888, M. Émile Burnouf has an
article entitled "Le

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bouddhisme en
Occident." M. Burnouf holds that the Christianity of the Council of Nice
was due to a conflict between the Aryan and the Semite, between Buddhism
and Mosaism:

"History and comparative mythology are teaching every day more plainly
that creeds grow slowly up. None come into the world ready-made, and as
if by magic. The origin of events is lost in the infinite. A great
Indian poet has said, 'The beginning of things evades us; their end
evades us also. We see only the middle.'"

M. Burnouf asserts that the Indian origin of Christianity is no longer
contested: "It has been placed in full light by the researches of
scholars, and notably English scholars, and by the publication of the
original texts. . . . In point of fact for a long time folks had been
struck with the resemblances, or rather the identical elements,
contained in Christianity and Buddhism. Writers of the firmest faith and
most sincere piety have admitted them.

"In the last century these analogies were set down to the Nestorians,
but since then the science of Oriental chronology has come into being,
and proved that Buddha is many years anterior to Nestorius and Jesus.
Thus the Nestorian theory had to be given up. But a thing may be
posterior to another without proving derivation. So the problem remained
unsolved until recently, when the pathway that Buddhism followed was
traced step by step from India to Jerusalem."

A small work that had such a reception would by-and-by require a second
edition, but intermediately an obstacle had come in the way, a very
serious obstacle. Looking over the "Buddhist Records of the Western
World," by the Reverend Samuel Beal, I came across a passage in which he
declares that there was a complete union between Buddhism and

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

the followers of S’iva, brought about by Nâgarjuna about A.D. 100. I had
been partially on this track myself. Mr Beal asserts that Quan Yin in
Chinese means Avalokitisvara (S’iva looking down), and Mr. Beal asserts
that in China Quan Yin is an Hermaphrodite God.

At first I did not attach much weight to the theory. But when I thought
of bringing out a second edition to my work, the "Influence of Buddhism
in Primitive Christianity," I found that it complicated my task. The
main postulate of my work was that the monks and mystics in Egypt and
Palestine were in close touch with the Buddhist monks in India. How did
S’iva-Buddhism affect them? Immensely. The task at first appeared too
much for me. But I found a great difficulty in throwing over the matter
altogether, and I subsequently got leisure to take it up in earnest. One
flash of light quickly came to corroborate Mr. Beal.

I found that the Left-handed Tântrika rites, the devil-dancing, and the
worship of S’iva as Bhairava, were in every Buddhist kingdom. This did
not seem so very important at first. The worship was accounted for
everywhere locally. In Tibet it was due to the Bons, in China to
Dragon-Worshippers, in Ceylon to the aboriginal Nâgas. These were mere
remains of local superstitions, mere barnacles outside the ship. I
accepted the interpretation.

But soon many points suggested themselves to completely overthrow it. In
each Buddhist kingdom was a hierarchy as strongly organised and as
persistent as the hierarchy at Rome. That is the testimony of the Roman
Catholic bishop, Bigandet. Now a hierarchy is an institution specially
framed to resist all change instead of effecting changes. Why should all
these hierarchies accept radical changes suddenly and simultaneously.
One writer suggests that

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddhism desired
to gain over the poorer classes of India by bringing Durgâ into their
Pantheon. But Buddhism was already the religion of the poorer classes.
It was the religion of the Yellow races and the low caste Sûdras. It
gave to these peace, honesty, prosperity instead of Eastern slavery and
interminable Indian warfare. It changed wastes into waving rice fields.
It established the first hospital for healing the sick instead of
handing them over to the interested sorceries of greedy devil dancers.
It revealed to the Sûdra the spiritual life which the haughty Aryan had
steadily kept from him. Plainly the great change called Mahâyâna could
not have come from the outside.

But it might have come from a Supreme Curia like the Court of Rome. The
Dalai Lâma claims to be the head of the Buddhist hierarchies. In ancient
days he bore sway in the splendid monastery of Nalanda near Buddha Gaya.
He was called the Âcharya (Teacher). He is alluded to in the Mahâwanso
as the "High Priest of all the World." When the Buddhists were turned
out of India at the revival of Brahminism, it is alleged that the great
Buddhist establishment from Nalanda took refuge first in Kashmir and
then in Tibet. Avalokitishvara (S’iva) guided them on their journey. And
Avalokitishvara, becoming incarnate in the Dalai Lâma, still inspires
Buddhism: China, Nepal, and I believe Burma, still treat him as their
Pope. Such a supreme Authority coerced by a monarch so powerful as
Kanis’ka, might have forced a change as revolutionary as the Mahâyâna
upon the minor churches. The task was quite beyond a few ignorant
devil-dancers working separately and at far distances one from the
other.

Many other points tend to the same conclusion. Avalokitishvara and his
wife Durgâ have the chief place in the litanies and prayers of the
Viharas.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

The great seven days’ festival of India the Durgâ Pûjah, under various
names "Perahar," the "Festival of the She-devil Devî," etc., is the
chief festival of most Buddhist countries.

The healing of the sick by the casting out of devils which was the chief
outside function of the Buddhist monks, has now in Buddhist countries
been taken from them and handed over to the unadulterated followers of
Bhairava. The vow to worship the Chaitya is the chief solemn promise
exacted from the Buddhist postulant at his baptism, or Abhisheka.

This Chaitya is a sham relic-dome made purposely like S’iva's Lingam. A
model of it is given to the postulant with his beads and alms bowl.

Now it must be remembered that the main subject of this book is the
question of the influence of Buddhism on primitive Christianity. The
first edition was directed chiefly to an attempt to show the many points
of resemblance between the water-drinking vegetarian celibates of
Galilee who had for their main point of attack the superstition of the
bloody altar, and the water-drinking vegetarian celibates of India, who
had for their main point of attack the same superstition. It was
suggested that the analogy was so close between them that they must have
been in close communication. This at once suggests enormous
difficulties. If there was this close communication, evidences of the
great change which brought back to India the reeking altar and
Bacchantic intoxicants would soon find their way to Alexandria and the
West. This was the difficulty that faced me when I thought of preparing
a new edition of this work. I saw that I would have to make an elaborate
study of the religion of Serapis and of the gnostic and early Christian
sects. I saw that I must get clearer ideas of the channel by which India
was in

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

communication with the West. The result is now before the reader.

I soon found strong evidence that Ceylon was the high road along which
Buddhism had come. The early Christian controversies might be said to be
a battle between Persian Dualism, the philosophy of the authors of the
later Jewish scriptures, and the pantheism of S’iva. In the following
pages the reader may gain some knowledge of how it affected the doctrine
of eternal rewards and punishments, the rite of Transubstantiation, the
destruction of the Kosmos by the advent of the great Judge, the Trinity
and Logos ideas. As in Ceylon the Western World in those days believed
themselves to be a prey to millions and billions of evil spirits, who
everywhere and at all times sought their destruction. Cures could only
be effected by charms and spells and the "casting out" of these devils.

And the gods of S’iva-Buddhism seemed really to have invaded Alexandria.
Serapis was a servile copy of Sakkraia, a god, half man, half stone; and
Kattragam had analogies with the Logos of Philo and Abrasax, the
Time-god, sacrificed at the end of the year.

But a more startling discovery was behind, which, if authenticated,
would place my theory of a S’iva-Buddha union on a basis that cannot be
easily shaken.

I came across a passage in the writings of the Orientalist, Horace
Hayman Wilson, showing that he was much struck with the close analogy
between certain gross rites amongst the Vâmâcharîs, or left-handed
Tântrika rites of the followers of S’iva as detailed in the Devi Rashya
and the alleged improprieties of the Agapæ, as described by Gibbon. I
give these rites as described in the Indian work, and also in the Kâlî
Ka Purâna.

But this discovery led to others. In Nepal, according to Mr. Brian
Hodgson, and in Ceylon, according

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

to Spence Hardy, the Buddhists are very reticent about their esoteric
mysteries, as Mr. Hodgson calls them, and initiatory rites; but a
Miracle Play from Tibet, entitled the "Sacrificial Body of the Dead
Year," when read side by side with the Kâlî Ka Purâna, quite opened my
eyes. In a word, it was quite plain that the slaughter of a victim to
represent the dying year, had been part of the mysteries which the
followers of S’iva had forced upon the blameless water-drinking
ascetics, who hailed Buddha for a teacher. The records of Ceylon told
much the same story. The initiatory rite there is called the
"Inebriating Festival of the Buddha," and to bring in the Bacchantic
element, a version of Buddha's descent into hell has been invented,
detailing how he took part in this festival as a man named Mâga; and how
he made the Nâgas drunk, and cleared hell both of its victims and its
fiends. This might of course only be a Sinhalese fable, but I have
discovered five bas reliefs amongst the Amarâvatî marbles on the
staircase of the British Museum which tell the same story in stone. This
shows that at an early date it was current in the Buddhism on the
mainland of India. Brian Hodgson shows that the worship of Bhairava or
S’iva in his aspect as the God of Evil was part of the baptismal
initiation as detailed in the esoteric Sûtras, which were sent for
safety from Magadha to Nepal. These Tântras, setting forth the worship
of the Left-handed gods, the Târâ Tântra or Worship of Durgâ, the
Mahâkâla Tântra or worship of S’iva as Time, the terrible Kâla Chakra
Tântra, the Nâga Pûjah (Worship of Serpents), etc., amount to
seventy-four in the Buddhist library of Nepal alone. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

S’iva-Buddhism reached Alexandria, and it may be asked how it affected
the religion of Christ. I answer, In no way, if by Religion of Christ
something

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

distinct is understood from what is now called Christianity. The
Nazarine water-drinkers of the Church founded at Jerusalem by Christ's
genuine apostles to the last refused to adopt the Bacchantic Change
which Tatian summed up in the terse indictment: "Ye gave the Nazarite
wine to drink, and commanded the prophet, saying, 'Prophecy not.'"

The Church of Rome boasts that their sacramental rites picture in brief
the life of Christ. I examine this theory and show that it certainly
does not apply to the Jesus of the first three Gospels whatever it may
do to the "Mystery" of the Gnostic Year God. Tertullian tells us that
the followers of Valentinus called some of their rites "left-handed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[7:\*](ipc03.htm#fr_0) Hodgson, "Religion in
Nepal," p. 38.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. S’iva](ipc04)
