[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc03)  [Next](ipc05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### CHAPTER I

#### S’IVA.

<span class="small">His legends being older, and not in Sanskrit, he has
been neglected.—Found in India by the Aryans when they crossed the
mountains—S’iva as the Cobra, and Durgâ as the Tree (pestilential Indian
jungle) probably the oldest gods in the world.—S’iva as the Phenician
Baal.—Esoterically a noble Pantheism fighting with the Polytheisms
around.—The S’iva-Durgâ Cultus rises everywhere far above other
religions, and also sinks lower. Invents the Yogi—and the Yoga
philosophy.—Invents the Hypostases.—Great importance of
[Gaṇes’a](errata.htm#1) in the history of civilisation.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> the Indian god S’iva has much to do
with our present inquiry, first of all we must try to get a better
knowledge of him. Professor Horace Hayman Wilson tells us that Saiva
literature has been very little presented to the Hindus. The legends are
not in Sanskrit.

From the earliest times the thunderstorm has been used to image God's
voice and God's anger. We see Thor with his "hammer" knock down the
enormous cloud-giant, Hrungner. In the First Book of Samuel, Yahve
"thunders with a great thunder" and defeats the Philistine enemies of
the chosen race. In Hesiod the "vaulted sky, the Mount Olympus, flashed
with the terrible bolts" of Zeus in the Titan warfare. This symbolism
naturally suggests itself when we look up to the "vaulted sky"; but in
the Rig Veda it takes a different turn. Indra the

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thunderer
vanquishes his enemy Vritra, but often he seeks him in a "Cavern," a
bottomless pit.

"He (Indra) has burst in the doors of that cavern where Vritra detained
the waters shut up in his power. Indra has torn to pieces Suchna
(Drought viewed as God) with his horns of menace."

"By him has been opened the bosom of that vault, yea, that vault without
boundaries. Armed with the thunderbolt, Indra, the greatest of the
Angiras, has forced the stable of the Celestial Cows." <span
id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1)

That the chief god inimical to the Aryans was S’iva there can be no
doubt. His special symbol is the Mahâdeo, and Dr. Muir has unearthed two
passages of the Rig Veda that blurt out this truth brutally.

"May the glorious Indra triumph over hostile beings. Let not those whose
god is the S’is’na approach our sacred ceremony."

"Desiring to bestow strength on the struggle that warrior (Indra) has
besieged inaccessible places at the time when irresistibly slaying those
whose god is the S’is’na he by his force conquered the riches of the
City with a hundred gates." <span id="fr_2"></span>[†](#fn_2)

The S’is’na is the Mahâdeo, sex worship in *puris naturalibus*.

Another symbol under which S’iva is attacked is that of a serpent. He is
"Ahi," of the Rig Veda. Serpents even in modern times kill about 24,000
people every year in India. It is most probable that S’iva and Durgâ as
two snakes were the earliest of Indian gods. Every year Durgâ figures as
a snake at the Nâgapanchami Festival, and is prayed to to preserve her
votaries against snake bites.

"He (Indra) has struck Ahi, who was hiding in the body of a mountain. He
has struck him with that resounding weapon forged by Twashtri (the
Vulcan of

<span id="img_pl01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 1. DURGÂ AS
THE SERPENT MANASÂ.](tn/pl01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl01.jpg)  
PLATE 1. DURGÂ AS THE SERPENT MANASÂ.  
</span>

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the Vedas), and the waters like cows ran towards their stable He has
struck the first born of the Ahis." <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3)

But Ahi or Vritra has a wicked wife, "Nirriti the insurmountable." This
is plainly S’iva's wife, Durgâ (the Tower of Strength).

"May Nirriti whose force is so formidable never come near to smite us,
Nirriti the insurmountable. May she perish with the thirst that she
herself instils."

A French Orientalist thinks that she was a personification of the
terrible Indian fever. This is, of course, the basis of the tree worship
in an Indian jungle.

But another name, a very important one, was rendered prominent by that
active Orientalist, Colonel Tod, namely Bal. When he was staying in
Saurashtra he noticed this name in many temples. There was Balpur (the
City of Bala), Balnath (the Lord Bal), and the plateau of the Sahyadri
mountains was called Mahâbaleshwar (the Great Ishwara, Bala or S’iva).

Colonel Tod believed that this God, Bala, was the Baal of the
Phenicians, and through them the Bal, Sit, or Typhon, the earliest god
of Memphis and lower Egypt. In Babylon he was Bel with his wife
Ashtoreth. The names Bala and Bali are philologically the same, being
based on the word Balishwara. In the Râmâyana Sîva is termed Bali, and
in the Rig Veda he is named Bala.

"God who wieldest the Thunderbolt, thou hast burst in the cavern where
Bala kept the celestial cows."

"The Maruts support Indra when that God armed with the lightning and
strengthened by our offerings, smites the soldiers of Bala, as Trita
dispersed the guards."

Inscriptions dating as early as 4,000 B.C. have induced Professor Sayce
and others to claim for Assyria the lead in early religious ideas. But
Colonel

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tod believes that
the religion of S’iva was spread abroad at a very early age, before the
Phenicians came in with their Baal worship. Recent discoveries have
confirmed Colonel Tod.

It has been discovered that Indian teak was used for building purposes
in Babylon, and Indian muslin was known there, and called "Sindhu," the
early name for India.

Another singularly able Orientalist, Mr. Paterson, wrote thus in the
"Asiatic Researches" <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4)

"The doctrines of the Saivas seem to have extended themselves over the
greatest portion of mankind. They spread amongst remote nations, who
were ignorant of the origin and meaning of the rites they adopted, and
this ignorance may be considered as the cause of the mixture and
confusion of images and ideas which characterised the mythology of the
ancient Greeks and Romans.

"In fact, foreign nations could only copy the outward signs and
ceremonies. They could not be admitted beyond the threshold of the
temple. The adytum was impenetrable to them.

"Kal and Kâlî assumed various names. Kal became Kronos, Moloch, Saturn,
Dis, Pluto, and Typhon. Kâlî became Hecate, Proserpine, and Diana who
was, worshipped with bloody sacrifice at Tauris. It was to the
barbarians that the Greeks were referred by their own writers to
understand the names and origin of their deities.

"S’iva in his character of the creative power became the Zeus
triopthalmos (the 'three-eyed,' a special characteristic of S’iva)
Jupiter and Osiris. His consort Bhavânî, became Juno, Venus, Cybele,
Rhoea the Syrian goddess, the armed Pallas, Iris, Ceres, and Anna
Perenna. The multiplication of deities arose from the ignorance of
foreign nations as to the source

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

of the superstition which they adopted, and the original meaning of the
symbols.

"They supplied their want of information by fables congenial to their
own national character and manners: hence arose those contradictions
which made their theology a labyrinth of confusion." <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

And now what is S’iva?

The first answer would be that he is the God of Destruction, who moves
about amongst the tombs in the guise of an old and emaciated Yogi, a
mere scaffolding of the human building. Around his neck is twisted a
Naja Tripudians, the most deadly of snakes, but he wears also a larger
necklace composed of human skulls. His waist-cloth is a tiger's skin.
Vipers are his ear-rings. In one of his hands he holds the Pâs’a, the
terrible noose of the Thugs, his ardent worshippers. In another hand
hangs a bleeding head; a third holds the Gada, his terrible mace of war.
But more awful than all, in his fourth hand is the Trisul, the three
pronged pitchfork, with which he pushes about human enterprises and mars
them chiefly. Ashes made of very disagreeable ingredients cover him.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">         Is that the King of Dread  
         With ashy musing face  
From whose moon-silvered locks famed Gunga springs?</span>

</div>

The religions invented by man have reached the most abject depths of
baseness. The religions invented by man have reached superb heights of
human exaltation. It is a strange paradox that at this early date the
religion of S’iva-Durgâ capped both ends of this long line of human
speculation. It gave to the world the foul left-handed Tântrika rites;
and was also the forerunner of Patanjali, Buddha, Isaiah, Jesus,
Fenelon, and Mirza the Sufi. For there sat the Indian Yogi, calmly
contemplating this great problem:

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What is man, and
what are his relations to the universe around him?

That the Indian Yogi was in existence when the Aryans reached India is
proved from the Zend Avesta for in the fourth Fargard, the Persian
Âryans denounce his solitary dreamings in an Indian forest:—

"Verily I say unto thee, O Spitâma Zarathustra, the man who has a wife
is far above him who begets no sons; he who keeps a house is far above
him who has none; he who has children is far above the childless man; he
who has riches is far above him who is poor.

"And of two men he who fills himself with meat is filled with the good
spirit much more than he who does not do so.

"It is this man who can strive against the onsets of the death fiend;
that can strive against the winter fiend with the thinnest garments on;
that can strive against the wicked tyrant and smite him on the head; can
strive against the ungodly Ashemaogha (heretic) who does not eat."

S’iva is Darkness—the Lord of Hell, a region that seems to have sprung
from him and his cave. But from him has also came the idea of Kailas and
its jewelled buildings. That was still the Hindu Paradise at the date of
the Râmâyana. And S’iva's rude stone denotes life as well as
death,—earthly life, heavenly life.

Also he is sometimes represented with three heads. Trailinga Ishwara, as
Creator, Protector, Destroyer. This fancy has been stolen by the
Brahmins who call Brahma the Creator, and Vishnu the Protector. But the
central head of his statue, say the one at Elora is not that of Brahma,
for it has Ganga (a head of the Ganges) in its top knot. Trailinga
Ishwara dates very far back, for a considerable portion of Madras is
called Telinga after him. And Mr. Crawford tells

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

us that in Java and the Islands it appeared to be the name of the
islanders for India. And Siva has one more attribute, the most
formidable of all. S’iva is Mahâkâla (Remphan, Kronos, "Great Time.") In
the Râmâyana, Valmiki informs us that S’iva has "emasculated all the
gods." And when winter tourists in India sneer at a white-dusted yogi in
the bazaar, they little guess what he represents. He bears the white ash
of the innumerable gods, stars, systems, races of men that the Great
Yogi, Mahâ Kâla, has burnt up. <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6)

Man's religion may be called the "Non-ego as viewed by the Ego." It is
the relation that the thinking individual believes himself to hold with
the infinite universe around him. What mind-picture did the facts of
life present to the early races of India, driven by the hardier Aryans
into jungles and wastes where serpents and fevers were very plentiful,
and food very scarce? They were pronounced to be Pariahs. They were
forbidden to look into any sacred book, death being the penalty. Indra,
Agni, Varuna and other gods had poured down on the Indian soil colleges
of holy men to perform certain rites that pleased these gods; and folks
gained in return happiness and comfort. But such joys were not for the
yellow-faced Turanian. Even the Nirvâna promised after many dreary
rebirths was refused to him.

But whilst matters were running along in this manner S’iva's Yogi was
sitting in his jungle seeking the Bodhi, or transcendental knowledge. It
came to him in a form which we might call the critical faculty. He
examined the divine claims of the priests, and found them contradicted
by experience. Agni ate up greedily the flesh of the bullocks, the rice
and the ghee, placed on his altar, but did not give in return

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

wealth, health, or immunity from the accidents and sorrows of life.
Indra, when requisitioned, refused, as often as not, to strike with his
vajra the bellying cloud and deluge the baking earth with fruitful
showers. Soon an early philosophy arose. It was called the Sankhya, and
had two schools, two Bibles. One, that of Patanjali, is called Seshwara
Sankhya, the Sûtras or maxims of S’iva, the Great Serpent Sesh. The
other that of Kapila, is called the Nirîswara Sankhya, and it denies the
existence of God altogether. These tractates are immensely old.
Professor Manilal Mabhubhai <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) Dvivedi
says that in the Yoga Patanjali talks as if he were only an editor, and
Colebrooke believes Kapila to be a mythological personage.

We will copy down from Colebrooke a digest of the two prominent
philosophies of the followers of S’iva, the first derived from the Yoga
S’âstra of Patanjali, and the second from the Karica of Kapila. Says
Colebrooke:—

"God, Îs’wara, the supreme ruler according to Patanjali, is a soul, a
spirit distinct from other souls; unaffected by the ills by which they
are beset; unconcerned with good or bad deeds and their consequences, or
with fancies and passing thoughts. In him is the utmost omniscience. He
is the instructor of the earliest beings that have a beginning (the
deities of mythology), himself infinite, unlimited by time."

Kapila on the other hand, according to Colebrooke, denies an Îs’wara
(ruler of the world by volition), alleging that there is no proof of
God's existence unperceived by the senses, not inferred from reasoning,
nor yet revealed. He acknowledges, indeed, a. being issuing from nature
who is intelligence absolute, source of all individual intelligences,
and origin of other existences successively evolved and developed. He
expressly affirms that the truth of such an Îs’wara

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

is demonstrated, the creator of worlds in such sense of creation: for
"the existence of effects," he says, "is dependent on consciousness, not
upon Iswara." <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8)

As I shall have to show that the second or Atheistic Sankhya had so much
to do with the great change of Buddhism, I will add another detail,
taking advantage of an able essay by Ludwig Büchner.

"A consistent pessimism is the main feature of the system." "Happiness
is a mere illusion, and all conscious life, pain and suffering." <span
id="fr_9"></span>[†](#fn_9)

Suffering man is involved in a vortex of rebirths. It is only after
tasting old age and death and other infirmities time after time for
thousands of years, that the saint can gain repose in complete
annihilation. <span id="fr_10"></span>[‡](#fn_10)

S’iva is the God of Destruction as well as life. Periodically he
destroys the entire Kosmos—gods, men, and whirling stars. The white
ashes of his followers represent the charred remains of these portentous
destructions, as I have shown. The idea was plainly invented as an
answer to the high-blown pretensions of the Brahmin polytheism—"Yes,
there are gods, Brahma, Indra, Vishnu, etc., but S’iva sweeps them all
away"; and oddly enough, the Brahmins seem to have accepted the theory.

It is also plain that the callousness of the god is another gird against
the Brahmin priesthoods, who urged that sacrifices and other savage
rites alone could move him. The Yogis held that the Great All was
unknowable, unthinkable, omnipresent, inert, eternal.

The theory of this Pralaya, or destruction of worlds, suggests the
origin of the Nirvâna of Buddha, in the sense of annihilation. According
to his biography, he came to earth to give immortality to mankind,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

but the Pralaya sweeps away gods, men, and stars. This made immortality
out of the question. And the Mahayana movement plainly also got from the
Sankhya philosophy its atheism, cosmism, pessimism, and the idea of the
grievous, prolonged tortures of its metempsychosis. Early Buddhism had
pronounced that by joining Buddha's fold these torments could be made at
once to cease.

But the Yogi of S’iva in his jungle gave to the world another gift. He
said practically this—A god mysterious and callous, who dwells in the
great Temple of Darkness, may be said to be incomprehensible to all
except minds of his own fathom. The Absolute must be treated as the
Absolute. It could not create anything for everything is already
perfection. It could not supervise and direct mortal affairs, for those
affairs were by absolute wisdom already arranged. A mind inscrutable and
boundless can have no will to produce anything but what is like himself
boundless and perfect.

But in the world some men are more wise, some more strong, some more
virtuous than others. Could we not, as a workable postulate, deify what
seem to be the attributes of this mighty mystery? Could not we imagine a
God of Wisdom, a son of God, and call him Gaṇes’a? Could we not imagine
a God of Strength and call him Karttikeya? The result was the Avesthâ
idea, which, according to Professor Horace Hayman Wilson, was translated
"Hypostasis" in Alexandria. Gaṇes’a was the son of Sîva, the "Word" of
God, the Creator of the World; and two great feats are plainly his. As
Gaṇes’a he gave to India much of its civilisation. As Janus, which
Orientalists all affirm is the word Gaṇes’a a little altered, he gave
civilisation to ancient Rome.

I insert a quotation from the works of Sir William J ones.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

"The titles and attributes of this old Italian deity are fully comprised
in two choriambick verses of Sulpitius; a further account of him from
Ovid would here be superfluous:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Jane pater, Jane tuens, dive biceps, biformis,  
O cate rerum fator, O principium deorum!</span>

</div>

<span class="small">Father Janus, all beholding Janus, thou divinity
with two heads and with two forms. O sagacious planter of all things and
leader of deities.</span>

"He was the God we see of Wisdom whence he is represented on coins with
two, and on the Etruscan image found at Falisci, with four faces,
emblems of prudence and circumspection. Thus is Gaṇes’a, the God of
Wisdom in Hindustan, painted with an elephant's head, the symbol of
sagacious discernment.

His next great character (the plentiful source of many superstitious
usages) was that from which he is emphatically styled the Father, and
which the second verse before cited more fully expresses; the origin and
founder of all things. Whence this notion arose, unless from a tradition
that he first built shrines, raised altars, and instituted sacrifices,
it is not easy to conjecture. Hence it came, however, that his name was
invoked before any other god; that in the old sacred rites corn and
wine, and in later times incense also, were first offered to Janus; that
the doors or entrances of private houses were called Januæ, and any
previous passage or thoroughfare in the plural number Jani, or "with two
beginnings;" that he was represented as holding a rod as guardian of
ways, and a key as opening not gates only, but all-important works and
affairs of mankind; that he was thought to preside over the morning or
the beginning of day; that, although the Roman year began regularly in
March, yet the eleventh month named Januarius, was considered as first
of the twelve, whence the whole year was supposed to be under his

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

guidance, and opened with great solemnity by the Consuls inaugurated in
his fane, where his statue was decorated on that occasion with fresh
laurel; and for the same reason a solemn denunciation of war, than which
there can hardly be a more momentous national act, was made by the
military consul opening the gates of the temple, with all the pomp of
his magistracy. The twelve altars and twelve chapels of Janus might
either denote according to the general opinion that he leads and governs
twelve months, or that, as he says of himself in Ovid, all entrance and
access to the principal gods must be made through him. They were, to a
proverb of the same number. We may add that Janus was imagined to
preside over infants at their birth or the beginning of life.

"The Indian divinity has precisely the same character. All sacrifices
and religious ceremonies, all addresses even to superior gods, all
serious compositions in writing and all worldly affairs of moment are
begun by pious Hindus with an invocation to Gaṇes’a, a word composed of
"Isa," the Governor or leader, and "gana" a company of deities, nine of
which companies are enumerated in the Amaracosha. Instances of opening
business auspiciously by an ejaculation to the Janus of India (if the
lines of resemblance here traced will justify me in so calling him)
might be multiplied with ease. Few books are begun without the words
"Salutation to Gaṇes’a," and he is first invoked by the Brahmins who
conduct the trial by ordeal, or perform the ceremony of the Homa, or
sacrifice by fire. M. Sonnerat represents him as highly revered on the
Coast of Coromandel, where, the Indians, he says, "would not on any
account build a house without having placed on the ground an image of
this deity which they sprinkle with oil and adorn every day with
flowers. They set up his figure in all the temples, in the streets, in
the high roads,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

and in the open plains at the foot of some tree, so that persons of all
ranks may invoke him before they undertake any business, and travellers
worship him before they proceed on their journey." To this I may add
from my own observation that in the commodious and useful town that now
rises at Gaya, under the auspices of the active and benevolent Thomas
Law, Esquire, Collector of Rotas, every new built house agreeably to an
immemorial usage of the Hindus has the name of Gaṇes’a superscribed on
its door; and in the old town his image is placed over the gates of the
temples." <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11)

I pause here to notice an important point. Colebrooke, Sir William
Jones, Horace Hayman Wilson, and the old giants, all held that the
mythologies of Greece and Rome were derived from India, but since
Oriental studies have become professorial, some authorities subscribe to
the wild theory of Max Müller, that when the Âryans passed from Bactria
across the Hindu Kush, "the great mountains closed for centuries their
Cyclopeian gates," <span id="fr_12"></span>[†](#fn_12) and India became
a sort of undiscovered America until the arrival in India of Alexander
the Great.

Now it seems to me that it would be quite impossible for any writer to
compose a paragraph which would more completely pulverise Max Müller's
fancy about the "Cyclopean Gates" than that of Sir William Jones. The
Professor holds that the Greek and Latin languages were sisters to the
Sanskrit before the separation at the Hindu Kush. He holds, too, that
the Greek and Latin mythologies were sisters to the Indian mythology;
but when the Âryans crossed the mountains, all connection ceased. And
yet we find in Italy a wide knowledge of the best Indian religious ideas

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and customs. This knowledge could not have been obtained before the
Âryan separation, for Gaṇes’a is a non-Aryan and non-Vedic god. It was
not obtained subsequent to Alexander's expedition, for
[Gaṇes’a](errata.htm#2) stretches away to the earliest and haziest
traditions of Italy, to the time when Kronos his father battled with
Zeus.

Learned professors who have never been to India study the Indian books,
but not the Indians themselves. We must try and throw ourselves into
very early times, when there were no letters of the alphabet, and folks
had to rely on their rhapsodists and "bhats" for history; and the said
rhapsodists had to make the dull framework of facts into a pleasant
romance to obtain a hearing.

Let us suppose that the votaries of one religion think they have
triumphed over another, and a pleasant allegory suggests itself. The god
of the triumphing religion may be represented as a dwarf who comes to
the god of the second religion, and humbly asks to be allowed as much
land as he could pace with three of his poor, inconsiderable, dwarfish
steps. Then comes the *denouement*. The dwarf becomes a giant and his
three steps cover hell, earth and the vast region lit up by the stars.
Every Indian would know what this was intended to mean quite as well as
if it were written down in the unpoetical, systematically dull, language
of Hallam.

How was such an attack to be met in days when there were no letters of
the alphabet and no books.

An answer to this question comes from the S’iva Purâna. It is a legend
of great importance to our inquiry.

At a place called Merlya Loka a number of very holy Brahmins had
collected together with their wives. They lived in a collection of rude
huts called an Â'sram, and they performed daily the most severe and
painful

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

exercises of ascetic Brahmanism, to gain magical powers. The people
around flocked to them, with their ailments and troubles. All admitted
that such holy men had never been seen in those parts. They were stern
men, no doubt, especially towards the followers of S’iva, wicked men who
neglected and derided the holy Vedas.

But one morning a strange circumstance occurred. One of them looking up
whilst seated cross-legged under a tree, saw at the edge of the jungle a
woman of exquisite beauty. She seemed to wish him to come towards her,
although why he thought this he would not have been able to explain. She
held in her hand an Indian lute. Suddenly on this she played a few bars.
Such melody had never been heard before. He got up almost unconsciously
and moved towards her. He was seeking to bridge earth and heaven.
Perhaps Indra had sent one of his beautiful Apsaras to help him.

But the odd thing was that all the other ascetics had much the same
experience. They wandered away into the leafy glades after the same
Apsara. What occurred there is not narrated in the S’âstras. The next
day they were in an angry mood, and specially angry with a magician whom
in a body they visited and accosted with these stern words:—

"Ugly fiend, what trick is this that thou hast played?"

The person thus designated was a dwarf, certainly ugly, and as certainly
endowed with very rare and magical faculties. He was named Tripurasura.
He lived in a hut alone, and was quite independent of the other
ascetics. Indeed, he intercepted many of the offerings of the poor
people around, folks who thought that he was a greater magician than
they were.

"Ugly fiend," said Tripurasura, with a laugh,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "go to, the story
of an ugly fiend has to be narrated to me and explained to me, worthy
masters!"

"What dost mean, O deformed one?"

"I am told that an 'ugly fiend' persuaded certain grave ascetics to
follow her into the paths of wantonness."

"Vile slanderer!" cried the ascetics.

"Did ye not recognise the woman with the gaping mouth, Durgâ, who feeds
on little babies?"

"These words are silliness, O man of falsities!" said the Brahmins, now
thoroughly alarmed.

"And all this time," pursued the malicious dwarf, with a chuckle, "where
were the Brahmins’ wives? and where was the Apsara's husband, S’iva, the
progenitor of many?"

With shrill voices the Brahmins’ wives treated this as a most pernicious
insinuation. But women sometimes quarrel, and by-and-by it came out that
a young man as handsome as Kama had visited them when the Brahmins were
away in the forest.

The Brahmins were now furious, and desired a summary vengeance. They
held that a Brahmajnâni (as initiate in the mysteries of Brahma), was
superior to any tricky fiend whatever. They performed new incantations
and sacrifices, and produced a tiger whose mouth was like a cavern, and
his voice like thunder amongst the mountains. This they sent against the
god S’iva. He seized the tiger and squeezed it to death, and he still
wears its skin as a kummerbund.

Nothing daunted, the Brahmins tried new incantations. This time they
determined to send something that he could not kill. They selected the
Ânanta Naga, the Serpent of Eternity. S’iva played to it a tune on his
flute to charm it, and wound it harmlessly round his neck, where it
still remains. The Brahmins now thought of a new plot. It was to send
the dwarf, Tripurasura, against the god. He was vain-glorious,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and a little flattery might easily turn his head. He had, moreover, a
terrible club charged with horrid spells by Vishnu himself. But S’iva
seized the club, dashed out the dwarf's brains with it, and then danced
in triumph over the dwarf's body. The club, as the Gada, figures in his
hand in all his images.

A fourth plot of the Brahmins had a success that they did not
anticipate. They united all their magical potencies to dismember the
god, as Ouranos was dismembered by Saturn. In this they succeeded. But
an astounding development took place. The severed Mahâdeo, flaming and
burning, began to traverse the world and burn up the cities; and Durgâ
followed it, uttering the piercing lamentations that re-echo still in
the temples. The amazed Brahmins fled for help to Brahma, who advised
them to sacrifice to Mahâdevî, and to pray to her to calm the fury of
S’iva, before the Traipura (earth, hell, and the sky) was burnt up.

There are two terminations to the story.

One is that it was settled that the S’iva-Durgâ symbol should be set up
as chief object of worship in every temple in India. The second
termination was that a search was made for the remains of the charred
Mahâdeo. It was at last found, and then by miraculous multiplication
thirty-nine portions of it were detached. Of these twenty-one were
distributed amongst that number of temples on earth, nine were delegated
to the temples of heaven, and even dark Pâtâla got its portion, a
solitary one, of the precious flesh. But this version of the story has a
corollary which would be unintelligible unless we bear in mind S’iva's
bull vitality, his marriage, his mutilation, his asceticism, his
necklace of skulls, items which represent the sum of human life as seen
through the yearly journey of the sun. In the Mahâkâla Sanhita S’iva
dies at the end of the year, but at once springs

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

up again as a baby, who becomes a giant almost immediately, under the
title of Bâles’war.

And the moral of the story is clear enough. The Brahmin satire described
Vishnu as a dwarf compassing the Traipura (earth, heaven and hell) with
his portentous strides. "Just so," said the followers of S’iva, "but it
was as the Evil Spirit (Asura)," and S’iva vanquished this Dwarf,
Traipura Asura. "See the club which he holds as a trophy." And the dwarf
has certainly got the worst of the fight. A missionary in Madras, Miss
Wilson Carmichael, tells us that thirty millions of S’iva stones (the
Mahâdeo, as it is called) are now being adored in India, and that the
followers of Sîva number a hundred million. And the gods of the Brahman
polytheism, Agni, Brahma, Indra, Vishnu, have been placed on a shelf to
give way to a monism, with S’iva nicknamed "Brahma" (neuter).

<span class="small">THE TEMPLE SONG.</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

   Giver of joys untold  
Thou trampledst on the wondrous dwarf of old,  
His club made weird by Vishnu's might  
Became thine honoured trophy in the fight,  
O dancer in the wondrous halls of gold!

   In Perunturrai's shrine  
The saints assemble round the Lord divine,  
Nilkanta, <span id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) when the mountain whirled
around  
To mark the land and fix the ocean's bound  
He drank, to save us, all the poisoned brine.

   Past days and present days  
Thou art, great Mahâkâla, and thy gaze  
Measures the future that thou hidst from all,  
New joys, new pangs, surprises that appal,  
For Time is Fate with Fate's remorseless ways.

   Charred cities fame of old  
Mark out thy fateful path; and we behold  
At night thy diamonds streak across the sky,  
Thy coils great Sesh enfold infinity,  
O dancer in the wondrous halls of gold!

</div>

<span id="img_pl03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 3. SIVA
DANCING.](tn/pl03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl03.jpg)  
PLATE 3. S’IVA DANCING.  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[10:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_1) Rig Veda (Sect. II. Hymn
IX. v. 3.)

<span id="fn_2"></span>[10:†](ipc04.htm#fr_2) Muir's "Sanskrit Texts,"
IV., pp. 345, 346.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[11:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_3) Lect. II. Hymn XIII., v.
2.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[12:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_4) Vol. VIII.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[13:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_5) "Asiatic Researches,"
Vol. VIII.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[15:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_6) "Catechism of the Shaiva
Religion," by Sabhapati Mudalyar, p. 73.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[16:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_7) "Translation of Yoga
Sutras," p. 1.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[17:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_8) Colebrooke's "Essays,"
Vol. I., p. 251.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[17:†](ipc04.htm#fr_9) Büchner, "Last Words on
Materialism," p. 119.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[17:‡](ipc04.htm#fr_10) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[21:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_11) Sir William Jones
"Works," Vol. III., p. 329.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[21:†](ipc04.htm#fr_12) Max Müller "Chips from a
German Workshop," Vol. I., pp. 8-12.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[26:\*](ipc04.htm#fr_13) Blue Throat!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Baal](ipc05)
