[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc04)  [Next](ipc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### BAAL

<span class="small">Tree and Serpent worship carried by the Phenicians
everywhere—The religion of the Indian jungle—Baal in Palestine—The "Star
of Chiun" (S’iva)—The Mahâdeos and Masseboth—Special blood-thirstiness
of the Phenician Divinity—"Holy of Holies" of Jewish Temple, and
"Sanctuary of the S’iva-Linga" in India.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Colonel Tod</span> tells us that somewhere near
Baroda he came across some followers of Durgâ living in caves in abject
poverty. They were called Aghoras, or Murdi Chors (man-eaters), and fed
on human flesh of the most putrid description, sometimes coming down and
begging the body at a funeral. Their goddess they called Aghora Îswarî
Mata (Lean Famine), and they pictured her as hungry and as insatiate as
themselves.

This spectacle is immensely interesting.

We see the religion of Durgâ in its earliest form.

Early man had three stages of progress:—

\(1\) The cave man, whose sole food came to him by hunting and battle.

\(2\) The shepherd, who by the invention of tents could move about from
place to place seeking new pastures for his flocks and herds.

\(3\) In the third stage man had learnt to till the ground and build
houses.

The Egyptians and Babylonians, when they emerge in real history, had
selected vast plains watered by

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

great rivers as sites for their cities. In a word, they had reached the
third stage of progress, the agricultural. Between them and the starving
Indian Aghora in his dripping cave there might be hundreds, possibly
thousands, of years. And yet their religion was the religion of the
Indian Aghora.

Let us try and picture to ourselves the condition of the earliest cave
man in an Indian jungle. When we remember that man's first idea of a god
is that of a malignant and hurtful being, we cannot be surprised that
two special divinities soon suggested themselves.

\(1\) At the period when the rainy season is over and the burning sun
strikes upon the rotten vegetation, Indian jungles are ravaged by a
terrible fever called the jungle fever. It is almost certain death to
expose oneself to it.

\(2\) The second danger comes from the cobra (*Naja Tripudians*), a
snake whose poison mingling with the blood kills the victim in a few
hours. In civilised modern India something like 24,000 Hindus perish
every year from this snake. India is a vast triangular plain. In these
days it was choked with jungles. The poor Aghora had to hunt for his
food, bare-footed, in unhealthy seasons as well as healthy seasons. Soon
came to him his first idea of a god, a cannibal witch, symbolised in the
form of a tree. She was Nirriti, of the Rig Veda, the fever-breath of
the Indian forest.

But the deadly snake likewise did not escape observation. He became at
once a male god, the Seshanâg, S’iva the husband of Durgâ; the two
seemed to work together. Both were propitiated with the gift that the
starved and hungry Aghora most valued—raw meat, the warm blood of beasts
and babies.

A third divinity very soon suggested itself: a stone; and at this point
all that we shall say of it is that

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

it was utilitarian. It was not carved or fashioned in any way; man did
not know how to carve or fashion anything. In his cave dwelling it was a
lump of the bed rock, and on this he poured the warm blood of the
victim. The stone represented Durgâ as well as S’iva. These three
objects of worship were started many thousand years ago.

What was the date of the early Indian cave men? How can we fix that?
Cave dwellers before they could become shepherds had to invent the tent.

One fact suggests an enormous gap between the Aghora and the builder of
cities. When the great Âryan shell burst in Bactria the fragments, the
separate Âryan clans, must have been in a pastoral state of development
at most. One fragment, Greece, as we see, learnt agriculture from the
wife of S’iva or Kronos; one fragment, the Italian, learnt it from
S’iva's son Janus, or Ganeśa; one, the Babylonian, learnt it from Rhea,
or S’iva's wife Durgâ.

But Professor Max [Müller](errata.htm#3) tells us that thousands of
years must have elapsed before the ancient Bactrian language could have
changed to pure Greek or pure Latin; and Janus, let us say, and Ceres,
must have given their instructions in some more modern tongue than the
Bactrian, or they would not have been understood.

Of only one thing we can he quite certain, and that is that the epoch of
the cave-dweller must be judged by the figures, almost of geological
computation.

Kronos, or S’iva, taught Thebes, Babylon, Tyre, Jerusalem, agriculture.
Another lesson he taught them: the religion of the Aghora.

That consisted, as we have seen, of three special points:—

\(1\) The worship of a cannibal witch in the form of a tree.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

\(2\) The worship of a snake, the Naja Tripudians.

\(3\) The worship of a rough unhewn stone.

Now this in a word was the exact religion of Thebes, Babylon, Athens,
Tyre; and the cannibalism of the witch survived everywhere in vast human
sacrifices.

#### THE TREE.

The following legend comes from the Skanda Purâna:—

Durgâ was once very angry with S’iva, accusing him of dalliance with the
Apsaras. Refusing to be pacified she fled to the jungles, and seating
herself in the hollow trunk of a Sami tree, she performed Tâpasya, or
ascetic practices, for nine years. Immense magical powers came to her in
her wrath, and flames burst forth which scattered all the animals and
shepherds living near the place, and threatened ruin far and near.
Sacrifices were made to her and, pacified by these, she determined to
restrict this combustion to the Sami tree. She lives in it as Samirama,
the goddess of the Sami tree. It was settled that the Araṇî, the wooden
drill that lights the sacred fire, should always be from this tree, and
that her festival as the Tree goddess should take place once a year, on
which occasion she would bestow abundant wealth and corn to all her
worshippers. <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14)

This legend is plainly written to account for Indian tree worship to
appease the goddess of Indian fire and Indian fever.

This festival of Durgâ is still the leading festival of India.

Let us now consider Tree-worship in Palestine.

"In early times," says Robertson Smith, "tree worship had such a vogue
in Canaan that the sacred tree, or the pole its surrogate, had come to
be viewed as a general symbol of [Deity](errata.htm#4)."

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

Mrs. Philpot, in her work on Tree-worship, says the same thing. "There
is no country in the world where the tree was more ardently worshipped
than it was in ancient Palestine. Amongst the Canaanites every altar to
the god had its sacred tree beside it, and when the Israelites
established local sanctuaries under their influence, they set up their
altar under a green tree, and planted beside it, as its indispensable
accompaniment, an Ashêra, which was either a living tree or a tree-like
post, and not a 'grove,' as rendered in the Authorised Version."

But in some texts the Ashêra is confused with the goddess Ashtoreth in
person, as the Sami Tree in India and Durgâ are deemed one.

Another point of contact between Israel and India is remarkable, namely,
the reaping festival. The Jews are commanded to go out for nine days
into the woods "when they have gathered the fruit of the land," and to
"cut down the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and boughs
of thick trees, and willows of the brook," and to live in booths of
trees seven days.

In India, in the Deccan, during the festival of the tree, the Peishwa
and all his followers move out into camp. The whole population marches
in solemn procession towards the Holy Tree. Elephants and camels, Sepoys
and noblemen, are all dressed out in gorgeous array. The Peishwa in
person plucks a few leaves from the tree after the prescribed sacrifices
are completed. Cannon and muskets are discharged and all decorate
themselves with stalks of the jowri or rice plant.

Mrs. Philpot holds that the Israelites got this Tree worship from the
followers of the Assyrian Astarte, but why go so far afield? Ezekiel
(xx. 8, 13.) tells us that the Israelites were thoroughly imbued with
the religion of Egypt, and that they "rebelled" against Jehovah in the
wilderness, which phrase means, no

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

doubt, that they still preserved Egyptian rites and Egyptian ideas.
Lower Egypt, where they had been confined, worshipped Bal, or Typhon,
with its serpent worship and tree worship. "Trees," says Maspero, "were
the homes of the various divinities."

Says Jeremiah:—

"They have built also their high places to Baal to burn their sons with
fire for burnt offerings to Baal, which I commanded not, nor spake it,
nor came it into my mind."

Many critics hold that the earliest god of the Israelites was really
this Baal, the chief point of discussion now being, When did Jehovah
worship come in.

"Amos," says Professor Dozy, "tells us that the so-called Tabernacle,
the Mosaic Sanctuary, was dedicated to Saturn (Chiun or Chievan, *i.e.*,
Baal), so that a sanctuary of Baal stood at Shiloh just as a feast of
Baal took place at the Gilgal.

"The same is shown by the fact that the place where the ark stood in
Samuel's days, known afterwards as Kirjath Jearim was formerly called
Kirjath Baal or simply Baal (1 Chron. xiii. 6).

"The strongest proof, however, that the worship of Baal went hand in
hand with that of J.H.V.H. and existed as lawful worship till David's
time is the fact that the name Baal occurs in several proper names.
Among others in those of the sons of Saul and David, *viz*., Eshbaal,
Meribaal, Baalyahad. The Compiler o f the Books of Samuel, who disliked
this, changed these names into Ishbosheth, Mephiboseth, Elyadah, but in
parallel passages of the Chronicles the original names are
preserved." <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15)

Dr. Oort attacks this as "extravagant." He points out that the passage
in Amos mentions not one but three objects of worship, a tent, a Chiun,
and a star. He concludes that there is no proof at all that Chiun

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

had anything to do with the planet Saturn. In writing thus confidently
he little expected a bolt from the blue.

For Orientalists marking the controversy saw at once its immense
importance. Chiun, in its more correct reading "Chievan," is almost the
French "Chivin," their name for S’iva. He is called in different parts
of India "Shiva," "Shivin," "Chivin." The French call him "Chivin." And
the three objects that are supposed to confound Dr. Dozy confirm him
instead. The Tabernacle is the Vahan or pavilion carriage of S’iva, and
the six-rayed star is also most important. S’iva's symbol is an
equilateral triangle; Durgâ's is the same turned upside down. The two
joined form the six-rayed star of Amos. That is the S’iva-Durgâ
combination.

And when Dr. Oort tells us that Chiun had nothing whatever to do with
Saturn we are a little amazed.

In Acts vii. 443, we read, "Yea, ye took up the Tabernacle of Moloch and
the star of your god Remphan." The author of "the Acts" knew what was
meant, and in point of fact he is quoting the Septuagint, which altered
"Chiun" into "Remphan."

And Jehovah's great anger against "Ashtoreth, the goddess of Sidon," and
the "pillars" and "groves," does not harmonise with the early books. We
are told (2 Kings xviii. 24) that "Hezekiah removed the high places and
brake the images and cut down the groves and brake in pieces the brazen
serpent that Moses had made."

Does it seem likely that Moses would have made a brazen serpent almost
immediately after he had received a stupendous command from the Almighty
never to make the likeness of anything in the heaven above or the earth
beneath?

Professor Maspero shows a curious point of contact between the
worshippers of Ba’al, in Syria and the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

worshippers of S’iva, in India. Each tribe, each city, each people had
its special Baal, Baal Sur, Baal Sidon, as in India Andhikîśwara is the
S’iva in Andheke's cave, another is in Perumterrai, and so on.

"Each of these Baalim, as they were called, had his Astarte, Ashera,
Sanit." "Astartis," says the Professor, "presided over love, generation,
war, and in consequence over the different seasons of the year, that
when nature is restored to youth and that when she seems to die. Gods
and goddesses they dwell on the tops of mountains, the Lebanon, Hermon,
Sinai, Kasios. They love forests and springs. They reveal themselves to
mortals in high places (bamoth). They dwell in trees, in unhewn stones
(betyles) and even in fashioned columns (masseboth)." <span
id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16)

But when we have shown the Indian Durgâ in Palestine and Egypt as the
provider of plenty at the tree festival, we have only got halfway to the
real difficulty. Why, at that festival did she also figure as a cannibal
witch?

Says the "Encyclopædia Britannica":—"Among the nations of Canaan the
victims were peculiarly chosen. Their own children and whatever was
nearest and dearest to them were deemed the most worthy offerings to
their god. The Carthaginians who were a colony of Tyre, carried with
them the religion of their mother country and instituted the same
worship in the parts where they settled. It consisted in the adoration
of several deities, but particularly of Kronus; to whom they offered
human sacrifices, and especially the blood of children. If the parents
were not at hand to make an immediate offer the magistrates did not fail
to make choice of what was most fair and promising, that the god might
not be defrauded of his dues. Upon a check being received in Sicily, and
other alarming circumstances happening, Hamilcar without any hesitation

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

laid hold of a boy and offered him on the spot to Kronus. The
Carthaginians another time upon a great defeat of their army by
Agathocles imputed their miscarriages to the anger of the god whose
services had been neglected. Touched with this and seeing the enemy at
their gates, they seized at once three hundred children of the prime
nobility and offered them in public for a sacrifice. Three hundred men,
being persons who were somehow obnoxious, yielded themselves voluntarily
and were put to death with the others . . . There were particular
children brought up for the altar as sheep are fattened for the
shambles; and they were bought and butchered in the same manner. It is
remarkable that the Egyptians looked out for the most specious and
handsome person to be sacrificed. The Albanians pitched upon the best
man of the community."

When we read of this awful butchery, we see at once a wild paradox, a
monstrous inconsequence. A tree charged with ripe fruit suggests a
festival of thanksgiving, but why should it be smeared and fouled with
all this human blood. Durgâ is a cannibal witch, and I say that we must
go back to the Indian Aghora and his jungle, at a time when human flesh
was choice food. In those days the fever tree suggested frantic
propitiations.

Mrs. Philpot and Professor Sayce carry Tree-worship back to Eridu on the
Persian Gulf, B.C. 4,000.

But Assyria was badly off for trees and had to get her teak from India.
Why should not the Indian Tree goddess have come with the Indian tree?
In the Rig Veda, Bala has a wife, "Nirriti the Insurmountable."

"May Nirriti so formidable by her power, Nirriti the Insurmountable,
never draw near to smite us. May she perish with the thirst that she
causes." <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

#### THE SERPENT.

Monsieur Buffon thus describes an ancient forest:—

"All along the swampy banks of the river Niger or Oroonoko, where the
sun is hot, the forests thick, and men but few, the serpents cling among
the branches of the trees in infinite numbers. They carry on an
unceasing war against all other animals in their vicinity. Travellers
have assured us that they have often seen large snakes twining round the
trunk of a tall tree, encompassing it like a wreath and thus climbing up
and down at pleasure."

The French naturalist goes on to say that the fabulous stories of
gigantic serpents may have had some solid truth. Pliny talks of a
serpent one hundred and twenty feet long. In India is a serpent that
attacks large tigers and buffaloes. These animals it swallows whole; and
it takes, we learn, almost as many months to digest a big buffalo as
Ravan's brother Kumbhakarna took to digest his gigantic meal.

This description of a forest by the French naturalist gives probably a
good picture of an Indian jungle when the earliest Aghora was living in
a cave near it. What wonder that he sacrificed to the Serpent Manasâ
(one of the earliest forms of Durgâ), and prayed her to protect him from
her too numerous brood.

Turning from India to the Delta of the Nile, we find that a city sprang
up there which had for its god Typhon, or Bal; then Typhon had for wife
Echidna, a serpent, and was himself furnished with one hundred serpent
heads. The pair are certainly Seshanâg and Manasâ.

The Creator of the universe was the serpent god and "Kneph, and Egypt,"
says the anonymous author of "Ophiolatreia," "was the home of this
peculiar worship." Gau gives a drawing of one of

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the columns of a cave temple at Derri. It was four-sided, with for
capital four heads of Isis, and with Typhon's serpent body repeated four
times along the shaft. This would make Typhon her first husband. In
"Ophiolatreia," Horus is called a serpent god. Thermuthis was the name
of the snake chiefly worshipped. It is a cobra, the Naja Hage. We learn
from Diodorus Seculus that the kings of Egypt wore high bonnets that
terminated at top in a round ball, and the whole was surrounded with
figures of asps. The priests likewise had upon their bonnets these
serpents.

Says the author of "Ophiolatreia," "The worship of the Serpent, next to
the adoration of the Phallus, is one of the most remarkable, and at
first sight, unaccountable forms of religion the world has ever known.
Until the true source from whence it sprang can be reached and
understood, its nature will remain as mysterious as its universality,
for what man could see in an object so repulsive and forbidding in its
habits as this reptile to render worship to, is one of the most
difficult problems to find a solution to. There is hardly a country of
the ancient world, however, where it cannot be traced pervading every
known system of mythology.

\*       \*       \*       \*

"Whether the worship was the result of fear or respect is a question
that naturally enough presents itself, and in seeking to answer it we
shall be confronted with the fact that in some places, as Egypt, the
symbol was that of a good demon while in India, Scandinavia, and Mexico
it was that of an evil one."

All this is very important: indeed, far more important than the
anonymous author of "Ophiolatreia" seems to suspect. In point of fact
India viewed the serpent from two opposing points. First it was an
object of wild terror when rude tribes like the Aghoras

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

died in thousands from its bites. Ahi was a terrible god at the date of
the Rig Veda. But by whatever name and under whatever symbol you
describe the Supreme God, the god of the savage will in process of time
gain in wisdom and gain in loving-kindness. Ahi became Sesh. At first
"in distributing the regions to the different gods," says Colonel Moor,
"Seshanâga had the regions under the earth allotted to him." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) That is, he was S’iva living in his
bottomless pit. Then Sesh with his thousand heads grew so popular in
India that the followers of Vishnu were obliged to try and steal him.
One thing is certain, serpents are more petted in India than elsewhere.
Purchas, in his "Pilgrims," tells us that a king in Calicut (the city of
Kâlî) built cottages for live serpents, whom he tended with particular
care. He executed any one who in his dominions destroyed a snake.

Says Mr. Rivett Carnae:—

"I find from my notes that one Kunbi whom I questioned in old days when
I was a Settlement officer in camp in the Nâgpur Division, stated that
he worshipped the Nâg and nothing else; that he worshipped clay images
of the snake, and when he could afford to pay snake catchers for a look
at a live one he worshipped the living snake; that if he saw a Nâg on
the road he would worship it, and that he believed no Hindu would kill a
Nâg or cobra if he knew it was a Nâg. He then gave me the following list
of articles that he would use in worshipping the snake.

\(1\) Water; (2) Cleaned rice; (3) Gandh pigment of sandal wood for the
forehead and body; (4) Flowers; (5) Leaves of the Bail tree; (6) Milk;
(7) Curds; (8) A thread, or piece of cloth; (9) Red powder; (10)
Saffron; (11) Abir, a powder composed of fragrant substances; (12)
Garland of flowers; (13) Buttemah, or grain; (14) Jowarri; (15) Five

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

lights; (16) Sweetmeats; (17) Betel leaves; (18) Cocoa-nut; (19) A sum
of money, according to means; (20) Flowers offered by the suppliant, the
palms of the hand being joined.

We see from this that Indian Serpent, worship had two stages. The
serpent was first of all a grim bogey, and then a benign being. In Egypt
we see only the second stage. We must remember also that Egypt was
inundated yearly by the Nile which would kill most of the snakes.
Plainly the derivation comes from India.

Other coincidences I give for what they are worth. The city of Typhon
was Memphis, where dwelt the [Pharaoh](errata.htm#5) of Exodus, and if
it be true that the Israelites, as Dr. Erasmus Wilson assures us, had
dwelt four hundred years in Lower Egypt, we may credit them with
carrying away some of the local [superstitions](errata.htm#6) across the
Red Sea. At the Nâgapanchami festival in India, Durgâ figures as Manasâ
the Serpent, and it is curious that the first god objectivised after the
Exodus takes the form of the curative brazen serpent erected by Moses to
cure the bites of the "fiery" serpents. Miss Wilson Carmichael gives
another point of contact. The natives of Madras once a year leave a
number of hand-prints and fingerprints on their doors, marking them with
S’iva's white paste made of cow dung and the ashes of the vilva and
asoka. In India this is done that the snake Manasâ may spare the houses
of her votaries. This suggests the marking of the houses in Exodus.

#### SEX-WORSHIP.

We have considered two out of the three special characteristics which I
have put forward as tracing S’iva Worship to the early cave man. We now
come to the third—sex-worship; and it is time to mention a fourth
characteristic, namely, bull-worship. This, of course, cannot be traced
as far back as the cave

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

man, for it implies that the pastoral age had been reached. But when
Saivism went abroad on its strange missionary career, this bull-worship
was very prominent. We must all defer to an Indian authority as shrewd
as Colonel Tod. He held that this bull worship was the strongest
evidence in Palestine, Egypt, etc., of S’ivan derivation.

"What are Bal and the Brazen Calf to which especial honours were paid on
the 15th day of the month but the Baliswar, and the Bull Nandi of
India?" <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19)

Colonel Tod explains that the Hindus divide the month into two pukhs or
fortnights. At the beginning of the second pukh called the Amava, the
bull Nandi is worshipped on the fifteenth day of the month. Now we learn
from 1 Kings xiii. that Jeroboam made a golden calf and sacrificed to it
on the fifteenth day of the month at Beth-el. Colonel Tod connects the
two incidents.

Now although, as I have said, we cannot carry back bull worship to the
date of the Aghora who lived by the chase alone, we may, I think,
inferentially carry it back to the Rig Veda. Bala there figures living
in his cavern with his "wives," "cows," "Devaputras," and if Âryan bards
were like other bards, and used what was before their eyes to express
their ideas, the Asura whose wives were "cows" must have been a bull.
Indra is praised in one hymn for having "killed the wives whom the Black
one had rendered pregnant." S’iva or Bala was the Black One, and his
followers are called in the Rig Veda "Black, noseless Dasyus."

But Devî is certainly a cow when S’iva is a bull.

Of this union Sir William Jones writes thus:—

"Bhavânî (Durgâ) now demands our attention, and in this character I
suppose the wife of Mahâdeva to be as well the Juno Cinxia or Lucina of
the Romans

<span id="img_pl02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 2. TRAILINGA
ISHWARA. DURGÂ AS EUROPA.](tn/pl02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl02.jpg)  
PLATE 2. TRAILINGA ISHWARA. DURGÂ AS EUROPA.  
</span>

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (called also by
them Diana Solvizona, and by the Greeks Ilithyia), as Venus herself, not
the Idalian queen of laughter and jollity . . . but Venus Urania, so
luxuriantly painted by Lucretius, and so properly invoked by him at the
opening of a poem on nature; Venus presiding over generation, and on
this account exhibited sometimes of both sexes (an union very common in
the Indian sculptures), as in her bearded statue at Rome, in the images
perhaps called Mermathena, and of those figures of her which had the
form of a conical marble "for the reason of which figure we are left,"
says Tacitus, "in the dark." The reason appears too clearly in the
temples and paintings of Hindustan, where it never seems to have entered
into the heads of the legislators or people that anything natural could
be offensively obscene, a singularity which pervades all their writings
and conversation, but is no proof of depravity in their morals. Both
Plato and Cicero speak of Eros or the Heavenly Cupid as the son of Venus
and Jupiter, which proves that the monarch of Olympus and the goddess of
Fecundity were connected as Mahâdeva and Bhavânî. (Works Vol. III., p.
367). <span id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20)

This moderation of tone, and this spirit of abstract justice on the part
of a distinguished legist contrasts with certain clerical petulancies.

Bishop Heber calls this worship "uncleanness and abomination." In fact
he considers the 200,000,000 Hindus in India as "vile" as the poor
Buddhists of Ceylon, who to the grosser vision of the laity, seem the
most peaceable and loyal of His Majesty's subjects.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">What though the spicy breezes  
  Blow soft on Ceylon's Isle,  
And every prospect pleases,  
  And only man is vile. . .</span>

</div>

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

But to visit on the heads of the Indians the blemishes of a form of
worship which was universal at one time, and especially conspicuous and
objectionable in Palestine of old, and not very nice at the
head-quarters of Christianity in the Middle Ages, is scarcely just. The
"Jew's harp" symbol, as it is called, is said to be on the portal of the
cathedral of Toulouse, and also on other churches; and Nelson's friend,
Sir William Hamilton, has described practices, not mere carnival
fooleries, but proceedings at the solemn festivals of St. Cosmo and St.
Damiana which bring down the "abomination" to very modern times.

The Aghora, the early savage, lived in a cave. Fever swept away some of
his companions. Snakes killed others. He had an idea of a god, not a
very lofty one, but the best obtainable. Vaguely he imaged to himself a
potency that could oppose death; and he chose a stone to represent him,
a plain stone. The idea was utilitarian, and by-and-bye it developed. In
enlarging his cave he left a lump of the bed-rock to represent the
"Mahâdeo," and the larger this object the less his labour. It is
impossible to know how soon sex worship intervened. Mr. R. F. Burton, in
a paper entitled "Certain Matters connected with the Dahoman," read
before the Anthropological Society, shows that the crave for offspring
is very strong with savages like the Dahomans, and the practices of sex
worship very gross. Certainly, if births do not correct the death rates,
the tribe promptly dwindles, and with savages, for labour and battle,
strong men are required. But it is difficult to prove that this sex
worship is spontaneous and not derived. The Aryans, when they first
reached India, were in a rude state of development, and they fell foul
of the Indian sex-worship at first instead of adopting it.

Mr. Grant Allen has shown the close analogy between S’iva and Yahveh,
each being symbolised

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

by a stone on which the oil, wine and ghee of the linga pûjâ was poured,
and each being famous for opening the wombs of elderly Sarahs, Hannahs,
Rebekahs. <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21) The Holy Places were all
Mahâdeos. A "Rock" accompanied the Israelites in the desert.

"Of the Rock that begot thee thou art unmindful," says Deuteronomy
(viii. 18). Grant Allen thinks that the "ark" carried always a S’iva
stone inside.

In the Temple of S’iva there is one holy chamber which contains the
Shiva Linga, the most exalted form of Mahâdeo. No one but an Ati Shaiva
Brahmin can enter this. <span id="fr_22"></span>[†](#fn_22) Two special
forms of adoration are exacted in the "Sanctuary of the Shiva linga."
The first is the Pari-i-dakshina. "I will compass thine altar, O Lord,"
said David. The second is the "Salutation with eight members." "And
Balaam bowed his head and fell flat on his face" (Numbers xxiii. 31). I
have alluded already to the S’iva Temple Dance. "Let them praise him in
the dance," says Psalm clxix.

In the Sepher-Toldoth-Jeshu it is announced that there was a stone in
the temple on which was inscribed the inexpressible name of God. It was
placed in the Holy of Holies by David.

There is a controversy about this book, but the statement is partly
confirmed by passages in the Old Testament:—"Jacob set up a pillar and
anointed it with oil and poured a drink-offering on it, and called it
Beth-el, the 'House of God.'" Plainly he worshipped it like the Indian
Mahâdeo. (Genesis xviii. 22; xxv. 7, 14.)

Later on David selected a site for Solomon's Temple, and apparently this
stone was chosen, this "House of God" (1 Chron. xxii. 1, 4). It was
believed in the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Talmud to figure
in the Holy of Holies, and to be [inscribed](errata.htm#7) with the
inexpressible name J.H.V.H. It was called the Shemhamphoras. Do we not
here seem to get the "Sanctuary of the Shiva linga?"

And in many other points the worship of Baal and S’iva seems identical.
The Israelites burn incense to the brazen serpent (2 Kings xviii. 4).
There is mention of a "box" with perfumes and oil (1 Sam. x. 1); also of
the "flowers," the "lamps" and the "tongs" (2 Chron. iv. 21). "A people
that sacrificeth in gardens" (Isaiah lxv. 3) suggests the sacredness of
the "Temple Gardens" of a S’ivan pile.

Noteworthy also is the "Prophet disguised with ashes" (1 Kings xx. 38).

The Yogis of S’iva are distinguished thus all over India, the god being
imaged as a white-dusted Yogi. The Book of Numbers gives a receipt for
this white ash:—

"Burn the heifer with her dung" (Numbers xix. 5).

The Indian white ash has also cow-dung for the chief ingredient. One
more point is remarkable. The ashes of S’iva "can blot out all the
greater sins." <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23) In Israel the ashes
were collected outside the camp to purify "the congregation and the
children" (Numbers xix. 2, 17). In Hebrews (ix. 13) it is announced that
these "ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean sanctify to the
purifying of the flesh."

And the earliest Indian account of the Creation of the Fourteen Worlds
is very remarkable. At first on the top of Kailâsa, S’iva's mount,
appeared a bare tree trunk in a triangle, the lingam and the Yoni. This
equilateral triangle is still S’iva's special symbol; and that of Yahveh
is a similar triangle, with the upright letter Yodh in it.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

It is plain too that the earlier Jewish divinity represented a god that
supervised what men call evil as well as what they call good:—

Says Yahveh: "I make peace and create evil."

And S’iva's Hermaphrodite element appears as well as his Pantheism: "The
Lord created Adam male and female."

Then, too, the priests who danced to the sound of the tabret and cut
themselves with knives remind one of modern Sadhus in India. All this is
of considerable importance as it points to a well-worn pathway between
India and Palestine.

And why was the serpent viewed as a beneficent Divinity by Moses, and
the Author of Evil in the fragment called the "Jehovistic"
interpolation, in chapters ii., iii., and iv. of Genesis? It seems an
attack on the Serpent and Tree Worship of the earlier times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[30:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_14) "Asiatic Researches,"
Vol. IV.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[32:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_15) Cited in Dr. Oort's
"Worship of Baalim," p. 7.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[34:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_16) Maspero, "Hist.
Ancienne des Peuples d’Orient," p. 340.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[35:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_17) Lect. III., Hymn VI.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[38:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_18) Moor, "Pantheon," p.
180.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[40:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_19) "Travels in Western
India," p. 54.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[41:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_20) Each Indian god had an
emblematical animal. Brahmâ had Brahmî, a swan, hence Sita. S’iva's
animal was a bull, hence Durgâ the Indian Europa. See Plate [p.
14](#img_pl02).

<span id="fn_21"></span>[43:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_21) Grant Allen, "Evolution
of the Idea of God." p. 73.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[43:†](ipc05.htm#fr_22) "Catechism of the Shaiva
Religion," by Sabhapati Mudahya, p. 53.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[44:\*](ipc05.htm#fr_23) "Catechism of the
Shaiva Religion," by Sabhapati Mudahya, p. 74.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Buddha](ipc06)
