[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc05)  [Next](ipc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### BUDDHA

<span class="small">Born of a Virgin—Genealogies—The "Flower Star" in
the East—Asita and Simeon—The four presaging tokens—The Prince leaves
the Palace—The Bo Tree—Buddha preaches—Early biography altered—Mâyâ Devi
is Durgâ—Dasasatanayana (S’iva the "thousand eyed") blesses him when he
leaves the palace—Other changes.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Buddha</span> was born at Kapilavastu, in the
Lumbini Garden, B.C. 550.

Kapilavastu—the City of Kapila. This is the translation of the word.
Much has been made by some Orientalists of this. The City of Kapila, the
author of the *Nirîśwara*, or Atheistic Sankhya philosophy, is
evidently, it has been urged, a non-existent place, and Buddha a
non-existent person. He is a myth invented to shadow forth the
dissemination of Kapila's atheism. But nothing is certain except the
unexpected. The non-existing city has suddenly turned up, covering miles
of jungle.

Sir Alexander Cunningham, the great Indian archæologist, was of opinion
that the site of Kapilavastu was Bhuila, in the Basti district. But the
real site is now no matter of doubt. It is between Gorukhpore and the
Himalayas.

In 1893, a pillar was discovered in the Nepal Terai, the mighty forest
that surrounds the great Himalayan

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

range. Deciphered, it proved to be one of the columns of King Asoka, who
covered India with his stone inscriptions, B.C. 257. It announced that
on this particular spot was the *stûpa* of Kanaka Muni, one of the seven
great mortal Buddhas. In the year 1896 Major Waddell pointed out, in the
"Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal" that according to the
testimony of Hwen Thsang, the celebrated Chinese traveller, this *stûpa*
was only seven miles off from Buddha's birthplace, the traveller having
paid it a visit. This brought Dr. Führer into the field, and he was soon
rewarded with the discovery of an inscription identifying the celebrated
Lumbini Garden where Queen Mâyâ gave birth to her distinguished son.
Then came a second triumph. Choked up in the luxurious jungle by
colossal ferns and creepers, emerged a dead city of *stûpas*, and
monasteries, and villages and buildings. More important still was
another column set up by King [Asoka](errata.htm#8). This is the
translation of it:

"King Piyadasi (Asoka) the beloved of the gods, having been anointed
twenty years, himself came and worshipped, saying, 'Here, Buddha, Sakya
Muni, was born!' And he caused a stone pillar to be erected, which
declares, 'Here the Venerable was born.'"

I propose now to give a short life of Buddha. It has points of contact
with that of Jesus, whose great importance will be dwelt on by and by.

#### PRE-EXISTENCE IN HEAVEN.

The early Buddhists, following the example of the Vedic Brahmins,
divided space into Nirvritti, the dark portion of the heavens, and
Pravritti, the starry systems. Over this last, the luminous portion,
Buddha figures as ruler when the legendary life opens. The Christian
Gnostics took over this idea and gave to Christ a similar function. He
ruled the Pleroma.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

#### "BEHOLD A VIRGIN SHALL CONCEIVE."

Exactly 550 years before Christ there dwelt in Kapilavastu a king called
Śuddhodana. This monarch was informed by angels that a mighty teacher of
men would be born miraculously in the womb of his wife. "By the consent
of the king," says the "Lalita Vistara," "the queen was permitted to
lead the life of a virgin for thirty-two months." Joseph is made, a
little awkwardly, to give a similar privilege to his wife (Matt. i. 25).

Some writers have called in question the statement that Buddha was born
of a virgin, but in the southern scriptures, as given by Mr. Turnour, it
is announced that a womb in which a Buddha elect has reposed is like the
sanctuary of a temple. On that account, that her womb may be sacred, the
mother of a Buddha always dies in seven days. The name of the queen was
borrowed from S’ivism. She was Mâyâ Devi, the Queen of Heaven.

Queen Mâyâ was chosen for her mighty privilege because the Buddhist
scriptures announce that the mother of a Buddha must be of royal line.

Long genealogies, very like those of the New Testament, are given also
to prove the blue blood of King Śuddhodana, who, like Joseph, had
nothing to do with the paternity of the child. "King Mahasammata had a
son named Roja, whose son was Varaoja, whose son was Kalyana, whose son
was Varakalyana," and so on, and so on. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*](#fn_24)

How does a Buddha come down to earth? The sign of Capricorn in the old
Indian Zodiac is an elephant issuing from a Makara (leviathan), and
S’iva's son had an elephant's head. It symbolises the active god issuing
from the quiescent god in his home on the face of the waters. In
consequence, Buddha comes

<span id="img_pl04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 4.&lt;br&gt;
THE BUDDHIST VIRGIN AND CHILD.](tn/pl04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl04.jpg)  
PLATE 4.  
THE BUDDHIST VIRGIN AND CHILD.  
</span>

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

down as a white elephant, and enters the right side of the queen without
piercing it or in any way injuring it. Childers sees a great analogy in
all this to the Catholic theory of the perpetual virginity of Mary.
Catholic doctors quote this passage from Ezekiel (xliv. 2):

"Then said the Lord unto me: This gate shall be shut, it shall not be
opened, and no man shall enter by it; because the Lord, the God of
Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore shall it be shut."

#### A DOUBLE ANNUNCIATION.

It is recorded that when Queen Mâyâ received the supernal Buddha in her
womb, in the form of a beautiful white elephant, she said to her
husband: "Like snow and silver outshining the sun and the moon, a white
elephant of six tusks, with unrivalled trunk and feet, has entered my
womb. Listen, I saw the three regions (earth, heaven, hell), with a
great light shining in the darkness, and myriads of spirits sang my
praises in the sky."

A similar miraculous communication was made to King Śuddhodana:

"The spirits of the Pure Abode flying in the air, showed half of their
forms, and hymned King Śuddhodana thus:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Guerdoned with righteousness and gentle pity,  
Adored on earth and in the shining sky,  
The coming Buddha quits the glorious spheres  
And hies to earth to gentle Maya's womb."</span>

</div>

In the Christian Scriptures there is also a double annunciation. In Luke
(i. 28) the Angel Gabriel is said to have appeared to the Virgin Mary
before her conception, and to have foretold to her the miraculous birth
of Christ. But in spite of this astounding miracle, Joseph seems to have
required a second

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

personal one before he ceased to question the chastity of his wife
(Matt. i. 19). Plainly, two evangelists have been working the same mine
independently, and a want of consistency is the result.

When Buddha was in his mother's womb, that womb was transparent. The
Virgin Mary was thus represented in mediaeval frescoes. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25)

#### "WE HAVE SEEN HIS STAR IN THE EAST."

In the Buddhist legend the *devas* in heaven announce that Buddha will
be born when the Flower star in seen *in the East*." <span
id="fr_26"></span>[†](#fn_26)

In the "Lalita Vistara" two serpents, Nanda and Uponanda, show their
forms in the sky, and rain down baptismal water on the young infant.
"Nanda," says Colonel Tod, "is a favourite title of S’iva in
Saurasthra."

Amongst the thirty-two signs that indicate the mother of a Buddha, the
fifth is that, like Mary, the mother of Jesus, she should be "on a
journey" <span id="fr_27"></span>[‡](#fn_27) at the moment of
parturition: this happened. A tree (palasa, the scarlet butea) bent down
its branches and overshadowed her, and Buddha came forth. Voltaire says
that in the library of Berne there is a copy of the first gospel of the
Infancy, which records that a palm-tree bent down in a similar manner to
Mary. <span id="fr_28"></span>[§](#fn_28) The Koran calls it a "withered
date-tree."

In the First "Gospel of the Infancy" it is stated that, when Christ was
in His cradle, He said to His mother: "I am Jesus, the Son of God, the
Word whom thou didst bring forth according to the declaration of the
angel Gabriel to thee, and my Father hath sent Me for the salvation of
the world."

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

In the Buddhist scriptures it is announced that Buddha, on seeing the
light, said: "I am in my last birth. None is my equal. I have come to
conquer death, sickness, old age. I have come to subdue the spirit of
evil, and give peace and joy to the souls tormented in hell."

In the same scriptures <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29) it is
announced that at the birth of the Divine child, the devas (angels) sang
thus:—"O Purusha, the equal to thee exists not here; where will a
superior be found?"

#### CHILD-NAMING.

"Five days after the birth of Buddha," says Bishop Bigandet, in the
"Burmese Life," "was performed the ceremony of head ablution and naming
the child" (p. 49)

We see from this where the ceremony of head ablution and naming the
child may have come from. In the "Lalita Vistara," Buddha is carried to
the temple. Plainly, we have the same ceremony. There the idols bow down
to him as in the First Gospel of the Infancy the idol in Egypt bows down
to Jesus.

#### HEROD AND THE WISE MEN.

It is recorded in the Chinese life <span id="fr_30"></span>[†](#fn_30)
that King Bimbisâra, the monarch of Râjâgriha was told by his ministers
that a boy was alive for whom the stars predicted a mighty destiny. They
advised him to raise an army and go and destroy this child, lest he
should one day subvert the king's throne. Bimbisâra refused.

At the birth of Buddha the four Maharajas, the great kings, who in
Hindoo astronomy guard each a cardinal point, received him. These may
throw light on the traditional Persian kings that greeted Christ.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

In some quarters these analogies are admitted, but it is said that the
Buddhists copied from the Christian scriptures. But this question is a
little complicated by the fact that many of the most noticeable
similarities are in apocryphal gospels, those that were abandoned by the
Church at an early date. In the Protevangelion, at Christ's birth,
certain marvels are visible. The clouds are "astonished," and the birds
of the air stop in their flight. The dispersed sheep of some shepherds
near cease to gambol, and the shepherds to beat them. The kids near a
river are arrested with their mouths close to the water. All nature
seems to pause for a mighty effort. In the "Lalita Vistara" the birds
also pause in their flight when Buddha comes to the womb of Queen Mâyâ.
Fires go out, and rivers are suddenly arrested in their flow.

#### ASITA.

More noticeable is the story of Asita, the Indian Simeon.

Asita dwells on Himavat, the holy mount of the Hindoos, as Simeon dwells
on Mount Zion. The "Holy Ghost is upon" Simeon. That means that he has
obtained the faculties of the prophet by mystical training. He "comes by
the Spirit" into the temple. Asita is an ascetic, who has acquired the
eight magical faculties, one of which is the faculty of visiting the
Tawatinsa heavens. Happening to soar up into those pure regions one day,
he is told by a host of devatas or heavenly spirits, that a mighty
Buddha was born in the world, "who will establish the supremacy of the
Buddhist Dharma." The "Lalita Vistara" announces that, "looking abroad
with his divine eye, and considering the kingdoms of India, he saw in
the great city of Kapilavastu, in the palace of King Śuddhodana, the
child shining with the glitter

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

of pure deeds, and adored by all the worlds." Afar through the skies the
spirits of heaven in crowds recited the "hymn of Buddha."

This is the description of Simeon in the First Gospel of the Infancy,
ii, 6: "At that time old Simeon saw him (Christ) shining as a pillar of
light when St. Mary the Virgin, His mother, carried Him in her arms, and
was filled with the greatest pleasure at the sight. And the angels stood
around Him, adoring Him as a king; guards stood around Him."

Asita pays a visit to the king. Asita takes the little child in his
arms. Asita weeps.

"Wherefore those tears, O holy man?"

"I weep because this child will be the great Buddha, and I shall not be
alive to witness the fact."

The points of contact between Simeon and Asita are very close. Both are
men of God, "full of the Holy Ghost." Both are brought "by the Spirit"
into the presence of the Holy Child, for the express purpose of
foretelling His destiny as the Anointed One.

#### DISPUTATION WITH THE DOCTORS.

More remarkable still is the incident of the disputation with the
doctors.

A little Brahmin was "initiated," girt with the holy thread, etc., at
eight, and put under the tuition of a holy man. When Viśvâmitra,
Buddha's teacher, proposed to teach him the alphabet, the young prince
went off:

"In sounding 'A,' pronounce it as in the sound of the word 'anitya.'"

"In sounding 'I,' pronounce it as in the word 'indriya.'"

"In sounding 'U,' pronounce it as in the word, 'upagupta.'"

And so on through the whole Sanskrit alphabet.

In the first Gospel of the Infancy, chap. xx., it is recorded that when
taken to the schoolmaster Zaccheus

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

"The Lord Jesus explained to him the meaning of the letters Aleph and
Beth.

"(8) Also, which were the straight figures of the letters, which were
the oblique, and what letters had double figures; which had points and
which had none; why one letter went before another; and many other
things He began to tell him and explain, of which the master himself had
never heard, nor read in any book.

"(9) The Lord Jesus further said to the master, 'Take notice how I say
to thee.' Then He began clearly and distinctly to say Aleph, Beth,
Gimel, Daleth, and so on to the end of the alphabet.

"(10) At this the master was so surprised that he said, I believe this
boy was born before Noah."

In the "Lalita Vistara" there are two separate accounts of Buddha
showing his marvellous knowledge. His great display is when he competes
for his wife. He then exhibits his familiarity with all lore, sacred and
profane, "astronomy," the "syllogism," medicine, mystic rites.

The disputation with the doctors is considerably amplified in the
twenty-first chapter of the First Gospel of the Infancy:

"(5) Then a certain principal rabbi asked Him, hast thou read books?

"(6) Jesus answered that He had read both books and the things which
were contained in books.

"(7) And he explained to them the books of the law and precepts and
statutes, and the mysteries which are contained in the books of the
prophets—things which the mind of no creature could reach.

"(8) Then said that rabbi, I have never yet seen or heard of such
knowledge! What do you think that boy will be?

"(9) Then a certain astronomer who was present asked the Lord Jesus
whether He had studied [astronomy](errata.htm#9).

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

"(10) The Lord Jesus replied, and told him the number of the spheres and
heavenly bodies, as also their triangular, square, and sextile aspects,
their progressive and retrograde motions, their size and several
prognostications, and other things which the reason of man had never
discovered.

"(11) There was also among them a philosopher, well skilled in physics
and natural philosophy, who asked the Lord Jesus whether He had studied
physics.

"(12) He replied, and explained to him physics and metaphysics.

"(13) Also those things which were above and below the power of nature.

"(14) The powers also of the body, its humours and their effects.

"(15) Also the number of its bones, veins, arteries, and nerves.

"(16) The several constitutions of body, hot and dry, cold and moist,
and the tendencies of them.

"(17) How the soul operated on the body.

"(18) What its various sensations and faculties were.

"(19) The faculty of speaking, anger, desire.

"(20) And lastly, the manner of its composition and dissolution, and
other things which the understanding of no creature had ever reached.

"(21) Then that philosopher worshipped the Lord Jesus, and said, 'O Lord
Jesus, from henceforth I will be Thy disciple and servant.'"

Viśvâmitra in like manner worshipped Buddha by falling at his feet.

#### THE FOUR PRESAGING TOKENS.

Soothsayers were consulted by King Śuddhodana. They pronounced the
following:—

"The young boy, will, without doubt, be either a king of kings or a
great Buddha. If he is destined to

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

be a great Buddha, four presaging tokens will make his mission plain. He
will see—

"(1) An old man.

"(2) A sick man.

"(3) A corpse.

"(4) A holy recluse.

"If he fails to see these four presaging tokens of an avatara, he will
simply be a Chakravartin" (king of earthly kings).

King Śuddhodana, who was a trifle worldly, was very much comforted by
the last prediction of the soothsayers. He thought in his heart, "It
will be an easy thing to keep these four presaging tokens from the young
prince." So he gave orders that three magnificent palaces should at once
be built—the Palace of Spring, the Palace of Summer, the Palace of
Winter. These palaces, as we learn from the "Lalita Vistara," were the
most beautiful palaces ever conceived on earth. Indeed, they were quite
able to cope in splendour with Vaijayanta, the immortal palace of Indra
himself. Costly pavilions were built out in all directions, with
ornamental porticoes and burnished doors. Turrets and pinnacles soared
into the sky. Dainty little windows gave light to the rich apartments.
Galleries, balustrades, and delicate trellis-work were abundant
everywhere. A thousand bells tinkled on each roof. We seem to have the
lacquered Chinese edifices of the pattern which architects believe to
have flourished in early India. The gardens of these fine palaces
rivalled the chess-board in the rectangular exactitude of their
parterres and trellis-work bowers. Cool lakes nursed on their calm
bosoms storks and cranes, wild geese and tame swans; ducks, also, as
parti-coloured as the white red and blue lotuses, amongst which they
swam. Bending to these lakes were bowery trees—the champak, the acacia
serisha, and the beautiful asoka tree, with its orange-scarlet flowers.
Above rustled the mimosa,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

the fanpalm, and the feathery pippala, Buddha's tree. The air was heavy
with the strong scent of the tuberose and the Arabian jasmine.

It must be mentioned that strong ramparts were prepared round the
palaces of Kapilavastu, to keep out all old men, sick men, and recluses,
and, I must add, to keep in the prince.

And a more potent safeguard still was designed. When the prince was old
enough to marry, his palace was deluged with beautiful women. He
revelled in the "five dusts," as the Chinese version puts it. But a
shock was preparing for King Śuddhodana.

This is how the matter came about. The king had prepared a garden even
more beautiful than the garden of the Palace of Summer. A soothsayer had
told him that if he could succeed in showing the prince this garden, the
prince would be content to remain in it with his wives for ever. No task
seemed easier than this, so it was arranged that on a certain day the
prince should be driven thither in his chariot. But, of course, immense
precautions had to be taken to keep all old men and sick men and corpses
from his sight. Quite an army of soldiers were told off for this duty,
and the city was decked with flags. The path of the prince was strewn
with flowers and scents, and adorned with vases of the rich kadali
plant. Above were costly hangings and garlands, and pagodas of bells.

But, lo and behold! as the prince was driving along, plump under the
wheels of his chariot, and before the very noses of the silken nobles
and the warriors with javelins and shields, he saw an unusual sight.
This was an old man, very decrepit and very broken. The veins and nerves
of his body were swollen and prominent; his teeth chattered; he was
wrinkled, bald, and his few remaining hairs were of dazzling whiteness;
he was bent very nearly double, and tottered feebly along, supported by
a stick.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

"What is this, O coachman?" said the prince. "A man with his blood all
dried up, and his muscles glued to his body! His head is white; his
teeth knock together; he is scarcely able to move along, even with the
aid of that stick!"

"Prince," said the coachman, "this is Old Age. This man's senses are
dulled; suffering has destroyed his spirit; he is contemned by his
neighbours. Unable to help himself, he has been abandoned in this
forest."

"Is this a peculiarity of his family?" demanded the prince, "or is it
the law of the world? Tell me quickly."

"Prince," said the coachman, "it is neither a law of his family, nor a
law of the kingdom. In every being youth is conquered by age. Your own
father and mother and all your relations will end in old age. There is
no other issue to humanity."

"Then youth is blind and ignorant," said the prince, "and sees not the
future. If this body is to be the abode of old age, what have I to do
with pleasure and its intoxications? Turn round the chariot, and drive
me back to the palace!"

Consternation was in the minds of all the courtiers at this untoward
occurrence; but the odd circumstance of all was that no one was ever
able to bring to condign punishment the miserable author of the
mischief. The old man could never be found.

King Śuddhodana was at first quite beside himself with tribulation.
Soldiers were summoned from the distant provinces, and a cordon of
detachments thrown out to a distance of four miles in each direction, to
keep the other presaging tokens from the prince. By-and-bye the king
became a little more quieted. A ridiculous accident had interfered with
his plans: "If my son could see the Garden of Happiness he never would
become a hermit." The king determined

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

that another attempt should be made. But this time the precautions were
doubled.

On the first occasion the prince left the Palace of Summer by the
eastern gate. The second [expedition](errata.htm#10) went through the
southern gate.

But another untoward event occurred. As the prince was driving along in
his chariot, suddenly he saw close to him a man emaciated, ill,
loathsome, burning with fever. Companionless, uncared for, he tottered
along, breathing with extreme difficulty.

"Coachman," said the prince, "what is this man, livid and loathsome in
body, whose senses are dulled, and whose limbs are withered? His stomach
is oppressing him; he is covered with filth. Scarcely can he draw the
breath of life!"

"Prince," said the coachman, "this is Sickness. This poor man is
attacked with a grievous malady. Strength and Comfort have shunned him.
He is friendless, hopeless, without a country, without an asylum. The
fear of death is before his eyes."

"If the health of man," said Buddha, "is but the sport of a dream, and
the fear of coming evils can put on so loathsome a shape, how can the
wise man, who has seen what life really means, indulge in its vain
delights? Turn back, coachman, and drive me to the palace!"

The angry king, when he heard what had occurred, gave orders that the
sick man should be seized and punished, but although a price was placed
on his head, and he was searched for far and wide, he could never be
caught. A clue to this is furnished by a passage in the "Lalita
Vistara." The sick man was in reality one of the Spirits of the Pure
Abode, masquerading in sores and spasms. These Spirits of the Pure Abode
are also called the Buddhas of the Past in many passages, as I shall
shortly show.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

In the Southern scriptures it is explained that the Spirits of the Pure
Abode dwell in the heaven of Brahma. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_31) I may mention, too, that in a valuable
inscription, copied from an old column in the island of Ceylon by Dr.
Rhys Davids, it is announced that in the reign of the king who erected
it, the Buddha devatas "talked with men" <span
id="fr_32"></span>[†](#fn_32) in the great temple. Here we have plainly
the Buddhas of the past, of the "Lalita Vistara." The disciples of the
"Carriage which drives to the Great Nowhere" have senselessly,
interlarded this book with certain "Bodhisatwas of the Ten Regions,"
which, figuring side by side with the "Buddhas of the Ten Regions,"
confess the cheat. When the "Great Vehicle" movement dethroned the
Buddhas of the past, it substituted Bodhisatwas (mortals who have
reached the last stage of the metempsychosis) and transferred the old
saint-worship, the sacrifices, processions, relic expositions, etc., to
them.

For another valuable fact we are indebted to the Southern scriptures.
They announce that the answers of the charioteer were given under
inspiration from the unseen world. <span id="fr_33"></span>[‡](#fn_33)
On the surface this is plausible, for we shall see that the speeches of
the charioteer were not always pitched in so high a key.

And it would almost seem as if some influence, malefic or otherwise, was
stirring the good King Śuddhodana. Unmoved by failure, he urged the
prince to a third effort. The chariot this time was to set out by the
western gate. Greater precautions than ever were adopted. The chain of
guards was posted at least twelve miles off from the Palace of Summer.
But the Buddhas of the Ten Horizons again arrested the prince. His
chariot was suddenly

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

crossed by a phantom funeral procession. A phantom corpse, smeared with
the orthodox mud, and spread with a sheet, was carried on a bier.
Phantom women wailed, and phantom musicians played on the drum and the
Indian flute. No doubt, also, phantom Brahmins chanted hymns to
Jâtavedas, to bear away the immortal part of the dead man to the home of
the Pitris.

"What is this?" said the prince. "Why do these women beat their breasts
and tear their hair? Why do these good folk cover their heads with the
dust of the ground. And that strange form upon its litter, wherefore is
it so rigid?"

"Prince," said the charioteer, "this is Death! Yon form, pale and
stiffened, can never again walk and move. Its owner has gone to the
unknown caverns of Yama. His father, his mother, his child, his wife cry
out to him, but he cannot hear."

Buddha was sad.

"Woe be to youth, which is the sport of age! Woe be to health, which is
the sport of many maladies! Woe be to life, which is as a breath! Woe be
to the idle pleasures which debauch humanity! But for the five
'aggregations’ there would be no age, sickness, nor death. Go back to
the city, I must compass the deliverance."

A fourth time the prince was urged by his father to visit the Garden of
Happiness. The chain of guards this time was sixteen miles away. The
exit was by the northern gate. But suddenly a calm man of gentle mien,
wearing an ochre-red cowl, was seen in the roadway.

"Who is this," said the prince, "rapt, gentle, peaceful in mien? He
looks as if his mind were far away elsewhere. He carries a bowl in his
hand."

"Prince, this is the New Life," said the charioteer. "That man is of
those whose thoughts are fixed on

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the eternal Brahma (Brahmacharin). He seeks the divine voice. He seeks
the divine vision. He carries the alms-bowl of the holy beggar
(bhikshu). His mind is calm because the gross lures of the lower life
can vex it no more."

"Such a life I covet," said the prince. "The lusts of man are like the
sea-water—they mock man's thirst instead of quenching it. I will seek
the divine vision, and give immortality (the Amrita) to man."

In the "Lalita Vistara" the remedy for age, sickness, and death is
immortality. <span id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34) In Dr. Rhys Davids’
"Buddhism," the remedy for death is death. If the apologue was composed
outside of Bedlam, it is plain that the "Lalita Vistara" gives us the
correct version. If a prick with a dagger is the amrita, why go through
all the tortures of yoga to gain it?

King Śuddhodana was beside himself. He placed five hundred corseleted
Sakyas at every gate of the Palace of Summer. Chains of sentries were
round the walls, which were raised and strengthened. A phalanx of loving
wives, armed with javelins, was posted round the prince's bed to
"narrowly watch" him. The king ordered also all the allurements of sense
to be constantly presented to the prince.

"Let the women of the zenana cease not for an instant their concerts and
mirth and sports. Let them shine in silks and sparkle in diamonds and
emeralds."

Mahâ Prajâpatî, the aunt who, since Queen Mâyâ's death has acted as
foster-mother, has charge of these pretty young women, and she incites
them to encircle the prince in a "cage of gold."

But the heavenly legions have not forgotten their son. One day, when the
prince reclined on a silken couch listening to the sweet crooning of
four or five

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

brown-skinned, large-eyed Indian girls, his eyes suddenly assumed a
dazed and absorbed look, and the rich hangings and garlands and
intricate trelliswork of the golden apartment were still present, but
dim to his mind. And music and voices, more sweet than he had ever
listened to, seemed faintly to reach him. I will write down some of the
verses he heard.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Mighty prop of humanity  
March in the pathway of the Rishis of old,  
Go forth from this city!  
Upon this desolate earth,  
When thou hast acquired the priceless knowledge of the Jinas,  
When thou hast become a perfect Buddha,  
Give to all flesh the baptism (river) of the Kingdom of Rightness.  
Thou who once didst sacrifice thy feet, thy hands, thy precious body,
and all thy riches for the world,  
Thou whose life is pure, save flesh from its miseries!  
In the presence of reviling be patient, O conqueror of self!  
Lord of those who possess two feet, go forth on thy mission?  
Conquer the evil one and his army."  
Thus run some more of these gâthâs:—  
Light of the world! <span id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_35)  
In former kalpas this vow was made by thee;  
"For the worlds that are a prey to death and sickness I will be a
refuge!"  
Lion of men, master of those that walk on two feet, the time for thy
mission has come!  
Under the sacred Bo-tree acquire immortal dignity, and give Amrita
(immortality) to all!  
When thou wert a king (in a former existence), and a subject insolently
said to thee: "These lands and cities, give them to me!"  
Thou wert rejoiced and not troubled.  
Once when thou wert a virtuous Rishi, and a cruel king in anger hacked
off thy limbs, in thy death agony milk flowed from thy feet and thy
hands.  
When thou didst dwell on a mountain as the Rishi Syama, a king having
transfixed thee with poisoned arrows, didst thou not forgive this
king?</span>

</div>

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">When thou wert the king of antelopes, didst thou not
save thine enemy the hunter from a torrent?  
When thou wert an elephant and a hunter pierced thee, thou forgavest
him, and didst reward him with thy beautiful tusks!  
Once when thou wert a she-bear thou didst save a man from a torrent
swollen with snow. Thou didst feed him on roots and fruit until he grew
strong;  
And when he went away and brought back men to kill thee, thou forgavest
him!  
Once when thou wert the white horse, <span
id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36)  
In pity for the suffering of man,  
Thou didst fly across heaven to the region of the evil demons,  
To secure the happiness of mankind,  
Persecutions without end,  
Revilings and many prisons  
Death and murder,  
These hast thou suffered with love and patience,  
Forgiving thine executioners.  
Kingless, men seek thee for a king!  
Stablish them in the way of Brahma and of the ten virtues,  
That when they pass away from amongst their fellow-men, they may all go
to the abode of Brahma.</span>

</div>

"By these gâthâs the prince is exhorted," says the narrative. And whilst
the Jinas sing, beautiful women, with flowers and perfumes, and jewels
and rich dresses, try to incite him to mortal love.

But to bring about their plans more quickly, the Spirits of the Pure
Abode have conceived a new project. The beautiful women of the zenana
are the main seductions of Mara, the tempter, whom philologists prove to
be closely connected with Kama, the god of love. The Spirits of the Pure
Abode determine that the prince shall see these women in a new light. By
a subtle influence they induce him to visit the apartments of the women
at the moment that they, the Jinas, have put all these women into a
sound sleep.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

Everything is in disorder—the clothes of the women, their hair, their
trinkets. Some are lolling ungracefully on couches, some have hideous
faces, some cough, some laugh sillily in their dreams, some rave. Also
deformities and blemishes that female art had been careful to conceal
are now made prominent by the superior magic of the spirits. This one
has a discoloured neck, this one an ill-formed leg, this one a clumsy
fat arm. Smiles have become grins, and fascinations a naked hideousness.
Sprawling on couches in ungainly attitudes, all lie amidst their tawdry
finery, their silent tambourines and lutes.

"Of a verity I am in a graveyard!" said the prince, in great disgust.

And now comes an incident which is odd in the life of a professed
atheist. Buddha has determined to leave the palace altogether. "Then he
(Buddha) uncrossed his legs, and turning his eyes towards the eastern
horizon, he put aside the precious trellis-work and repaired to the roof
of the palace. Then joining the ten fingers of his hands, he thought of
all the Buddhas and rendered homage to all the Buddhas, and, looking
across the skies, he saw the god of the ten hundred eyes (Dasasata
Nayana)."

This is S’iva as the thousand-headed serpent, Sesh. Of this more
hereafter.

At the moment that Buddha joined his hands in homage towards the eastern
horizon, the star Pushya, which had presided at his birth, was rising.
The prince on seeing it said to Chandaka:—

"The benedication that is on me has attained its perfection this very
night. Give me at once the king of horses covered with jewels!"

The highest spiritual philosophers in Buddhism, in Brahmanism, in
Christendom, in Islam, announce two kingdoms distinct from one another.
They are called in India the Domain of Appetite (Kâmaloca)

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

and the Domain of Spirit (Brahmaloca). The "Lalita Vistara" throughout
describes a conflict between these two great camps. Buddha is offered a
crown by his father. He has wives, palaces, jewels, but he leaves all
for the thorny jungle where the Brahmacharin dreamt his dreams of God.
This is called pessimism by some writers, who urge that we should enjoy
life as we find it, but modern Europe having tried, denies that life is
so enjoyable. Its motto is *Tout lasse, tout casse, tout passe*. Yes,
say the optimists, but we need not all live a life like Jay Gould. A
good son, a good father, a good husband, a good citizen, is happy
enough. True, reply the pessimists, in so far as a mortal enters the
domain of spirit he may be happy, for that is not a region but a state
of the mind. But mundane accidents seem, almost by rule, to mar even
that happiness. The husband loses his loved one, the artist his
eyesight. Philosophers and statesmen find their great dreams and schemes
baffled by the infirmities of age.

Age, disease, death! These are the evils for which the great Indian
allegory proposes to find a remedy.

The Buddhas of the Past win the victory in spite of the fact that King
Śuddhodana offers to resign the crown to his son if he will abandon the
idea of a religious life. Buddha steals away one night on his horse
Kantaka, and enlists as a disciple of a Brahmin named Arâta Kâlâma.

But, by-and-bye, becoming dissatisfied with his teacher, he retires to
the silences of Buddha Gayâ and the famous Bo-tree. There occurs his
celebrated conflict with Mâra, the Buddhist Satan, who comes in person
to tempt him. Two of the temptations are precisely similar to those of
Jesus. Buddha is said to have gone through a forty-nine days’ fast, and
the first temptation appeals to his hunger. For the second he is
transported to the neighbourhood of the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

splendid city of Kapilavastu, which is made to revolve, like the "wheel
of a potter," and display its magnificence. The third temptation
introduces a prominent feature in a fasting ascetic's visions. Beautiful
females, the daughters of Mârâ, come round him. But Buddha triumphs over
them, and triumphs over their father, and by-and-bye baptises both.

It is announced that after the great battle with Mâra the *devatas* came
from the sky and ministered to Buddha. But besides the "Fasting" and
"Temptation" there is a third close resemblance to the story of Jesus,
Buddha's Abhisheka or "Baptism." He plunges into the Nairanjana, the
Jordan of India, and tries to get to the "other bank" (the Indian simile
for Heaven). Mâra, the Spirit of Evil, prevents him for a time, and then
the mystic Sophia, under the similitude of a tree, bends down her
branches and helps him up.

This lady, the Divine Mother, figures constantly. She appears about the
same time as a young peasant, and relieves the fasting Buddha by giving
him in a gold pot the concentrated essence of the milk of one thousand
cows, rice milk being at once by an obvious simile the food of the
Buddhist monk and the immortal food. The Buddhists prettily call
Buddha's advent the "Epoch when the Rice Milk came into the world."

And the work of Sophia or Dharma (whose symbol is the Tree as well as
the Lotus) is not over. Buddha has reached the Tree of Knowledge, the
great Bo-Tree, and a coruscation like that on the Jordan, as recorded in
the "Gospel according to the Hebrews" when the heavenly dove reached
Christ, took place, and the dazzling Heavens of the Buddhas were seen
afar with their rim of matchless lapis lazuli. And from the sky came
voices:—

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">He hath overthrown the Banner of Pride.  
He hath won the Triple Knowledge.  
The aggregations of the seen world give place to the aggregations of the
unseen world.  
The King of Physicians with his heavenly amrita will dull all human pain
and lead all flesh to Nirvana.  
Having entered the City of Omniscience and become one with all the
Buddhas.  
He is now indivisible.</span>

</div>

Then Brahma in person appeared to the ascetic and commissioned him to
preach the "glad tidings" (suba shita), <span
id="fr_37"></span>[\*](#fn_37) and to turn the wheel of the law.

<span id="img_pl05"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 5.&lt;br&gt;
BUDDHA PREACHING.](tn/pl05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl05.jpg)  
PLATE 5.  
BUDDHA PREACHING.  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[48:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_24) Dipawanso, see "Jour.
As. Soc.," Bengal, Vol. VIII., p. 925.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[50:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_25) See illustration.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[50:†](ipc06.htm#fr_26) Lefman, XXI., 124;
Wassiljew, p. 95.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[50:‡](ipc06.htm#fr_27) Beal, "Roman History,"
p. 32.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[50:§](ipc06.htm#fr_28) "Oeuvres," Vol. XL.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[51:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_29) See Turnour's "Pali
Legendary Life."

<span id="fn_30"></span>[51:†](ipc06.htm#fr_30) Beal, "Romantic
History," p. 103.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[60:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_31) Turnour, "Journ. Beng.
As. Soc.," Vol. VII., p. 798.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[60:†](ipc06.htm#fr_32) "Journ. As. Soc.," Vol.
VII., p. 364.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[60:‡](ipc06.htm#fr_33) Spence Hardy, "Manual,"
p. 157.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[62:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_34) "Un fruit de vie, de
bien être, et d’immortalité," Foucaux, p. 185.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[63:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_35) "Lampe du Monde,"
Foucaux's translation.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[64:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_36) Yearly the sun-god as
the zodiacal horse (Aries) was supposed by the Vedic Aryans to die to
save all flesh. Hence the horse-sacrifice.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[68:\*](ipc06.htm#fr_37) See Rajendra Lala
Mitra, "Northern Buddhist Literature," p. 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. “The Wisdom of the Other Bank”](ipc07)
