[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc18)  [Next](ipc20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

### CHAPTER XVI

#### CEYLON

<span class="small">Hiouen Thsiang, the Chinese traveller, on the
religion of the Island in his day—"Followers of the Great
Vehicle"—Bishop Copleston combats this—Three hundred Great Vehicle monks
at Kânchapura—Wytulian heresy—Kappooism—S’iva as Saman Deva Raja supreme
in the Island—Dewales and Buddhist Viharas in the same enclosures—Cure
of the sick officially handed over to the Kappooists—Sekkraia (S’iva as
Indra) a man, half-man, half stone—S’ivan mystery—the "Inebriating
Festival of the Buddha"—Legend—Temple women—Kattragam or Karttikeya—His
power and popularity.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> have seen that a crowd of monks from
Alexandria were feasted in Ceylon in the year 160 B.C. on the occasion
of the opening up of the Great Tope at Ruanwelli. As these holy men were
treated like orthodox Buddhist monks it would help us if we could know
exactly what was Cingalese Buddhism at this particular time, for Ceylon
had plainly much to do with the passage of Gnosticism from India to the
West.

On this point we have evidence of quite exceptional importance from the
Chinese traveller, Hiouen Thsiang. It is quite plain from him that what
we call S’iva-Buddhism was the religion of the island.

Bishop Copleston, in his work "Buddhism," combats this, and he begins
with as, it seems to me, a slight mistake. He says that Hiouen Thsiang
"describes a school of Mahayana existing as far south as Ceylon." <span
id="fr_249"></span>[\*](#fn_248) This is not at all what the Chinese
traveller says.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "In Ceylon," he
declares, "are about ten thousand monks who follow the doctrines of the
Great Vehicle"; and the context shows that he believed that the change
had affected the whole island.

And why should all the testimony of Hiouen Tsiang be at once "set
aside," as the Bishop phrases it. Hiouen Thsiang was a sort of Lord High
Commissioner, selected by the Head of the Buddhist Church to conduct the
great convocation of King Śîlâditya, which was summoned especially to
consider the dispute between the disciples of the Great Vehicle
(Mahayana), and the disciples of the "Little Vehicle."

The Chinese traveller says, moreover, that the controversy raged
fiercely for a time before the Great Vehicle was successful over the
Little Vehicle. He tells us that one of the Chief Apostles of the Great
Vehicle was Devi Bodhisatwa, a Cingalese. He announces that the early
Buddhists called the Great Vehicle the "Carriage that drives to
Nothingness," and that it came from the followers of S’iva and not
Buddha at all.

At Kânchapura, the Chinese pilgrim came upon three hundred monks who had
just fled across the water from Ceylon to escape the anarchy and famine
consequent on the death of the king there. This stopped his visit. The
Bishop "sets him aside" because he never reached the Island at
all, <span id="fr_250"></span>[\*](#fn_249) but supposing that Dr. Pusey
was visiting the Isle of Man to see if "Church" ideas had reached the
clergy of that island; and supposing that the steamer were wrecked but
the passengers rescued by another steamer, coming from the Isle of Man,
and having on board thirty clergymen hastening to an Anglican
conference, surely these clergymen could tell him quite as much about
the religion of the Island as he could acquire by an actual visit.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

In point of fact, history supports the Chinese traveller. The
Râjaratunacari announces that a great heresy arose with the advent of
one Wytulia. What it was is a little vague, but it "sought to subvert by
craft and intrigue the religion of Buddha." It was put down summarily.
The books of the Wytulians were burned. But by-and-bye a fresh heretic
arose in the person of one Sanghamitta, who was profoundly versed in the
religion of the Bhûtas (demons).

"It is probable," says Sir Emerson Tennant, "that out of the Wytulian
heresy grew the system which prevails to the present day by which the
heterodox Dewales and halls for devil dancing are built in close
contiguity to the temples and Wiharas of the orthodox Buddhists, and the
barbarous rites of demon worship are incorporated with the abstractions
of the national religion." <span id="fr_251"></span>[\*](#fn_250)

What was the devil dancing? A very able work will help us here. In the
year 1829 Mr. Edward Upham published a work on "Kappooism," or the Demon
Worship of the Island. It is enriched with forty-three plates, crude,
untouched, fresh from a Cingalese bazaar, and therefore most valuable.
They are from a collection brought home by Sir Alexander Johnson, a
Ceylon Chief Justice.

Mr. Upham, with his plates, gives us a very good idea of the "Kappooism"
or the "devil worship" of Ceylon. He was astonished when reading the
work of Mr. Hodgson "to find how close was the resemblance in the matter
of the metempsychosis, the heavens, and the divine agencies" between the
Buddhism of Ceylon which is generally pronounced the Hînayâna or Little
Vehicle, and the Buddhism of Nepal, which we call S’iva-Buddhism.

Let us inquire first who is deemed the Supreme God? or to put it in the
language of the country,

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

what Deity possesses the mighty "Stone of Supremacy," the Minne
Phalange? As the accounts are very contradictory, we must see if the
legends and the plates can throw any light upon it.

There was a Serpent King, Samana Deva Râja, Lord of Hell, who lived in a
palace called Nangewenodenneye. This Serpent King sent an invitation to
Buddha, who came to his palace through the air, and by a miracle created
a darkness so thick that all the "nâgas" subject to this sovereign fled
in consternation. This allowed Buddha to occupy the Minne Phalange or
Seat of Supremacy; and fire issued from the four points of the compass
which frightened the "devils," as Mr. Upham calls them, still more. But
Buddha released them from hell, preached to them and comforted them, and
handed over to them the wood called Jak-girre for their abode. <span
id="fr_252"></span>[\*](#fn_251)

Two points are prominent. The legend is intended to give an account of
the religion of Buddha superseding that of Samana Deva Râja, or S’iva
with his Nâgas. Buddha, by his superior miracles, takes from him the
Minne Phalange; and transfers his crew from hell to a pleasant wood,
Jak-girre, miraculously erected. It is called an island in the
Mahâwanso.

A second legend announces that Buddha at his death handed over the Minne
Phalange to Deva Râja. I do not see that this can mean anything except
the advent of S’iva Buddhism, with the date purposely mis-stated (p.
130). Deva Rajah is S’iva, and S’iva now rules once more. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[†](#fn_252)

<span id="img_pl20"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 20.&lt;br&gt;
SEKKRAIA SINKING INTO THE STONE.](tn/pl20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl20.jpg)  
PLATE 20.  
SEKKRAIA SINKING INTO THE STONE.  
</span>

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

But there is a third claimant for the "Stone of Supremacy," Sekkraia
(Sanskrit—Śakra or Indra).

To those who have not studied S’ivism, this claim gives rise to many
contradictions apparently purposeless. But S’ivism being a rigid
Pantheism, its god has two faces, that of the god of what men call
"evil," as well as the god of what men call good.

Though the name Sekkraia and some of the facts concerning him indicate
the god Indra ([Plate 20](#img_pl20)), there is much more of S’iva in
his composition.

Sekkraia has in the Devaloka a most wonderful tree, the Tavateinza Tree.
Its stem is a pillar of silver. It flowers only once in a thousand
years, and produces most delicious fruit. In order to get this fruit the
gods assemble in crowds for a hundred years before it ripens, and for
one whole year they dance and sing, accompanied by drums and other
musical instruments. Having eaten of that fruit they become inebriated
for four entire months. Immediately the tree has flowered, Sekkraia is
informed of the fact, and he mounts the great Elephant Erravum to hurry
to the festival.

"Erravum" is Indra's famous elephant, Airâvana, but the Stone of
Supremacy is the lingam. On it Sekkraia stands when he administers
justice: that is when he is S’iva as Yama. If the accused is guilty, the
god sinks partly into the stone. It does not want [Plate 20](#img_pl20)
to tell exactly what that means. Man, stone, and spire-shaped crown make
up an unmistakeable Lingam.

The gods of Kappoism are worshipped in erections, chiefly rude, called
Dewales (devalayas?), and Dr. Davy is cited by Mr. Upham as announcing
"that it is not uncommon to see a Dewale and a Wihara (Buddhist Temple)
contiguous, or under the same roof." <span
id="fr_254"></span>[\*](#fn_253) The Dewales have for presiding genius
the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Goddess Pattinee.
She is described as "the most mischievous fairy in Ceylon" (p. 50), and
seems to correspond with Major Waddell's "She Devil Devî." Her likeness
shows her to be Durgâ. Above her head as a crown is a head of S’iva
without the upper jaw. A clergyman named Fox, wandering in a jungle at
night with one native attendant, came accidentally across a scene of
devil dancing. The native was wild with fear when he found that his
master was going to try and probe such tremendous mysteries.

"We came at length to a temporary hut (which they call a maduwa) adorned
in front with cocoa-nut leaves and about sixty lamps made of coarse
clay. I saw shadows of men, but they disappeared; and on my approach I
only saw the Kappooa dancing before the place, with hollow bangles on
his arms filled with stones to make a jingle. Inside the maduwa was a
sick man, near his feet was a wicker basket. This I lifted up. It
contained a live cock smeared all over with soot. <span
id="fr_255"></span>[\*](#fn_254)

"The man who acts the part of the devil is dressed in a garment of dried
grass or rushes which reaches to the ground. His arms and his feet are
concealed, a white country cloth covers his shoulders. Round his head
and under his chin are two or three cotton handkerchiefs. The face is
frightful. The mouth and nose are black. Two large teeth project far
beyond the lips. A row of coarse shells is bound over the eyes. On the
head is a red cap which reaches four or five feet in height."

Now here we get the Buddhism of the North, as it is called, face to face
with the Buddhism of the South. In the Tântrika Rites of Nepal, as Mr.
Hodgson calls them, offerings of flesh and spirits and warm blood are
made to the "Balis." A mummer

<span id="img_pl21"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 21.&lt;br&gt;
BALI DEVIL-DANCER.](tn/pl21.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl21.jpg)  
PLATE 21.  
BALI DEVIL-DANCER.  
</span>

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

in a mask of Bhairava impersonates the god. Here also is a mummer
impersonating the "Bali." The word "Bali" means literally a sacrifice,
but in Nepal and also in Ceylon it is used to denote the sorcerers as
well. The "devil" in Nepal is called Bhairava. In Ceylon he has two
enormous teeth, and turning to Mr. Upham's plates I find that the demon
so furnished (See [Plate 21](#img_pl21)) is called Coola Kumara. Kumara
is S’iva's son, and dancing before the altar a S’ivan rite.

All the Cingalese, including the Buddhist [hierarchy](errata.htm#33),
admit that above Buddha there is a superior God, Saman-deva-râja. This
God, says Mr. Upham, is called Saman from Samane Galle (Adam's Peak),
"where he is now living with his deities with power over Ceylon" (p.
51).

There he stands upon the Minne Phalange or Seat of Supremacy given to
him at the death of Buddha. There grows the immortal Tavateinza Tree.
Around him are myriads of "divine nâgas of mighty power," rendered
orthodox formerly by Buddha, and he has moreover the sacred White
Elephant which is Buddha reincarnate.

These "devas" watch to cure the sick and to preserve men from incurring
losses in their goods, and are represented as residing on the peaks of
their high mountains whence they inspect, govern and exercise a tutelary
superintendence over their favourite districts. The Buddhist Church make
a virtue of necessity and officially adopt the devils, in the matter of
the cure of disease. They say that Buddha gave that faculty to Kumara.

"The natives of Ceylon," says Mr. Upham, "show the demons honours and
make offerings, because they fear that demons can visit human beings
with sickness; and therefore they in cases of sickness invoke them and
make offerings of money, also of boiled and unboiled meats, and cause
the throat, arms,

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

legs and body of the sick to be tied by the Bali conjurers with
necklaces or threads (amulets) dyed yellow with saffron water" (p. 66).

It must be remembered, too, that Bhairava judges the dead and consigns
some to the jewelled palaces of his Kailâs, and others to regions which,
as depicted in Mr. Upham's book, show red demons beating sinners with
red-hot clubs and hammers, as they lie in beds of flame. All this
scarcely describes a few belated Nâgas beating tom-toms and selling
gambouge amulets in sly corners. If the Buddhists of Ceylon turn to
S’iva and his Devas in business, in sickness, in affliction—if they use
him to direct their happiness on earth and their hope in the
hereafter—there is little wonder that the altars of the Devalayas are
thronged, and those of the Buddhists are deserted.

And now let us pause and take stock of what we have discovered in the
Island of Ceylon. Simply that there, as in other Buddhist countries, the
religion is the religion of S’iva-Buddha. S’iva is the acknowledged
divine Ruler. The foul rites of the Vâmâcharîs, the left-handed
Tântrikas, are the only rites that any of the Cingalese seem to care
anything about.

Now there are two explanations of all this, the one furnished by Hiouen
Tsiang, the Chinese Buddhist, namely that the Great Vehicle (or S’iva
Buddhism) effected a complete revolution in the religion of S’âkya Muni
in Ceylon about the epoch of the Christian era. The second is that the
religion of Ceylon is the pure and unadulterated religion of S’âkya
Muni, but as popular superstitions are difficult to completely eradicate
some of the old Nâgas, or Serpent Worshippers, who were supreme in the
island before its conversion by Buddha, still perform on the sly some of
their ancient rites.

In fact, once more upsprings the Barnacle theory, the Nâgas are mere
barnacles quite outside the ship.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

<span id="img_pl22"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 22.&lt;br&gt;
SESH DISGUISED AS BUDDHA.](tn/pl22.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl22.jpg)  
PLATE 22.  
SESH DISGUISED AS BUDDHA.  
</span>

But are they outside the ship? Plainly one of the barnacles has taken
command of it. Bishop Copleston notices the "Wytulian heretics," and
their attempt to mix up Buddhism and the religions of the South of
India. And he tries to account for this heresy:—

From early times hordes of Hindus have fled to the island from their
oppressors. Also the native kings have sought their brides in India, and
selected Tamil soldiers for their body-guard. And in point of fact the
civilisation of Ceylon itself was due to India. But with all due respect
to the learned Bishop I think he scarcely appreciates the puzzle. It is
not whether individuals on the Island of Ceylon in the old days had, or
had not, opportunities of studying other religions besides the official
creed. The puzzle is that a powerful hierarchy, for according to the
French Bishop Bigandet, Ceylon had a hierarchy as effectively organised,
and very like that of the Christians; the puzzle is that this hierarchy
should have allowed their beatified Saint to be pushed off his pedestal,
and a novel god to be placed there, and that god to be worshipped with
human sacrifices, cannibalism, and Bacchanalian orgies, the very rites
that S’âkya Muni had spent eighty years in trying to eradicate.

Such a vast change must have come from above, not below. Hierarchies are
accustomed to turn a deaf ear to the reasonings of individuals. At
Nalanda, near Buddha Gaya, was the Achârya, the acknowledged pope of the
Buddhists—the Mahâwanso calls him the "High Priest of all the world."
Now the invaluable Hiouen Tsiang gives us a hint of what might have
occurred. He says that Kanis’ka wanted to adopt high-handed measures
with his convocation or council, and force this high priest to let it
sit at Nalanda, though that prelate and his ten thousand monks were
strongly opposed to the proposed changes. But

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Parsvika, the
prime minister, suggested caution and urged that it was safer to hold
the convocation in his own dominions.

"Many conflicting opinions will be expressed, and we shall not have time
to answer and refute them. The whole convocation is attached to this
kingdom. Why compose S’âstras? Your realms are defended on all sides by
high mountains under the guardianship of Yakshas." <span
id="fr_256"></span>[\*](#fn_255)

Is it stretching a point to say that the high-handed monarch, although
he yielded on this occasion, still exerted a pressure which was
by-and-bye successful?

In point of fact, the religion of Ceylon is a vast cosmical
amalgamation. A and B, let us say, are carrying C in a rickshaw. A has
been a shining Deva in Tavateinza, wearing a golden crown shaped like
the pinnacle of a temple, but his Karma being exhausted and his moral
nature deteriorated, he has come to earth as a punishment. B was a
banker in one of the stars that whirls round a distant sun in the Milky
Way, only just discernible with the largest telescope at Greenwich. But
certain faults in his accounts have brought him likewise to the Karma of
carrying heavy people about in rickshaws. C in his last rebirth was in
hell, and was beaten by red demons with heavy clubs, but he bowed to the
Chaitya, or Lingam, several thousand times, and the Karma of this good
action makes him now an elegant young prince receiving the saalam of the
crowd as he passes along. There is no death, only change. The Kosmos is
a vast penitentiary. Buddha, it is said, was once a Yaksha, a foul
corpse-eating ghoul. And as Mr. Upham tells us, he was once Sekkraia,
the God Indra, and he "ruled the Tavateinza heavens with thirty-two
Nat-devas as his Counsellors." <span id="fr_257"></span>[†](#fn_256)
Then again he was

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

plainly Yama-râjah, the Lord of Hell, in the splendid parable of the
plague-stricken pig. In fact, in Ceylon, as elsewhere, S’ivism deals
very cavalierly with Indian gods. S’iva in one legend knocked off one of
Brahma's four heads; and in the life of Buddha, Brahmâ, with a funny
parasol, is made into a comic character, during Buddha's great struggle
with Mara the tempter.

"Maha Brahmâ offers flowers to the cloth that cleans my feet." <span
id="fr_258"></span>[\*](#fn_257) Dr. Rhys Davids tells us that Buddha
had been six times on the earth as Brahma, and the Tibetans have "Buddha
devils" in their hells. In point of fact, the lines that mark off hell
from heaven, and a corpse-eating Yaksha from a bright Deva with a golden
crown have been a little obliterated by time. Saman Deva Râjah, although
he is Bhairava, or what we call "evil" in the divine economy, sits in a
palace at times in the Tavateinza Heavens amongst the elect, and
Sekkraia, who is Nature in her most benign aspects, has to put on the
mask of Yama-râjah, the Lord of Hell, and judge the dead.

But we now come to a graver question. What is the "Inebriating Festival
of the Buddha?" (p. 56). Mr. Upham himself is aghast at this question,
and although he knows nothing of our S’iva-Buddha theories, visions of
foul Bacchantic mysteries in Babylon and Eleusis float before his eyes.

Indians prefer fables to Athanasian Creeds for religious instruction.
The story runs that Deva Râjah, the Lord of Hell, cast his eyes on a man
of renowned probity named Mâga, and was astounded to note that this man
with thirty-two followers was constantly levelling the roads for the
Great Buddha, Dipankara, to pass—an infallible token that he was about
to become the new Buddha himself. To frustrate this the demon hatched an
infamous plot. He

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

invited him to the initiatory Bacchantic Festival, that afterwards got
to be called the "Inebriating Festival of the Buddha." A "Japani" (some
mess of rice) was prepared, steeped in the juice of the inebriating
tree. Mâga, who was S’âkya Muni, came with his thirty-two followers, but
scenting the deceit, only made a pretence of eating, and made Deva Rajah
and his followers blind drunk. He then drove him and his Yakshas out of
hell. Here we have, without doubt, Buddha's descent into Hell, an
experience which was a prominent point of all the old Bacchantic
Mysteries. It is added that Buddha being compassionate, caused a
floating island called Jak Girri to come, and upon that he installed the
Yakshas. <span id="fr_259"></span>[\*](#fn_258)

I will show later on from five bas reliefs of the Amarâvatî Tope now at
the British Museum, that this story must have been much valued in the
Buddhist Kingdoms in touch with Nalanda. And Mr. Upham shows plainly
that Tappooism, even when supervised by English or Dutch magistrates,
had pregnant secrets. Why did Mr. Fox's native attendant show such fear
when his master proposed to approach the Devil dancers? Why did those
gruesome ghosts fade away into the enshrouding night?

At Galle, in December, 1817, Kali Singar-Karegay Gerrensoe, a tom-tom
beater, was examined by a sort of commission then sitting. These are
some of his answers:—

*Q*.—Who are the people that sing and prepare the Bali?

*A*.—There are only two castes—Berewaya and Olia.

*Q*.—Who are the people who dance the devil's dances?

*A*.—*I am not able to tell, as the Kappoerales will know it*. (This
answer Mr. Upham properly prints in italics.)

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

*Q*.—What are the four deities—who act as priests to the four
deities—and who worship the four deities?

*A*.—This also I am unable to say, but the Kappoerales will know it.

*Q*.—For what sickness, or what reasons, are the devil dances?

*A*.—The Kappoerales are the people who make them.

*Q*.—Do they dance the devil-dances for the same purposes as they make
the Bali?

*A*.—This also the Kappoerales will know.

All this points to vows of secrecy and gruesome rites. And Mr. Upham's
drawings, selected at hazard, show that the goddess Pattinee and her
corpse-eating subordinates were as fond of human blood in Ceylon as they
were on the other side of Adam's Bridge, and also in Alexandria. Thus
the "Giant Rirey" (Plate 40 in Upham's Book) has a woman's head in one
hand and a knife in the other. Whilst the "Demon Ammoosihon" seems to
prefer entrails, as he is depicted tearing them from a human victim.

The Rev. John Colloway gives us a translation of a Cingalese masque. It
is a very different affair from the outspoken "Body of the Dead Year" in
Tibet, but in the presence of Dutch and English magistrates a poet had
to be cautious. The grotesque masks seem much the same in the Kolan
Nattanawa, the Cingalese masque, as those who figured on the Tibetan
stage, being chiefly versions of S’iva and Durgâ. And there is
absolutely no plot to the drama: the characters come on one by one and
describe their masks. But one point struck me. A bevy of handsome women,
nearly naked, support each other in the air and make up a pyramid, the
apex being crowned with a "cup." The native poet says frankly that all
this is intended to excite the animal passions of "gallants." <span
id="fr_260"></span>[\*](#fn_259) Now the Tibetan mystery gives the

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

cannibalism of the known S’ivan rites and the "Inebriating Festival of
the Buddha" gives the drunkenness. The Ceylon masque certainly adds the
third ingredient, the erotic stimulant. I have more to say about the
pyramid of women in the next chapter.

And even in Ceylon there are hints of human sacrifices. Images of human
beings in rice are used in Ceylon mysteries. This fact, of course, like
the dough images of Tibet, points to repressed cannibalism.

And Spence Hardy writes thus:—

"Europeans are not allowed to enter the dewâles, and it is difficult to
ascertain the exact nature of the rites therein performed." <span
id="fr_261"></span>[\*](#fn_260)

That difficulty might have been overcome if the writer had studied the
religion of S’iva as clearly as he shows in his admirable work that he
has studied the religion of Buddha. The Devalayas are temples of Deva or
S’iva, and on the other side of Adam's Bridge the missionaries could
have shown him plenty of them, and told him gruesome secrets. Material
for S’ri's sensuous "Chakra" would be ready in plenty in these Temples
in the shape of the "Servants of the God" the "Brides of the God." Miss
Wilson Carmichæl, a missionary lady, gives a pathetic picture of a sweet
little Hindu child that she knew, very affectionate and prettily
petulant. She sang to her one day some Christian verses, and the little
lady with a pout replied in the Indian sing-song manner with an Indian
psalm, declaring that she liked hers best, as her religion had been in
existence hundreds of years before that of Miss Wilson Carmichæl. Two
days afterwards she saw the child in the hands of two grave men,
"dignified, educated men." What were they doing to her?

The men laughed. "We are taking her to the Temple, there to marry her to
the god."

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

"The child had one hand free," says Miss Carmichæl. "She waved it to me
and smiled, and then the dark trees hid her from me." <span
id="fr_262"></span>[\*](#fn_261)

The little thing had joined the bands of temple women who dance and sing
in the processions and feasts. Some are carried off like this, even when
they are five years old. A phrase used in the south shows how difficult
it is to get clear of S’iva symbolism. These Brides of the God are said
to be "tied to the Stone."

In Tibet, women see nothing immoral unless the offending party is a
married woman. Polyandry still exists there. "In Ceylon," says Sir
Emerson Tennant, "the lower classes exhibit a licentiousness so shocking
and practices so inconceivably vile as would scarcely obtain credence."

We learn also from him that polyandry is winked at by the Buddhist
priests. <span id="fr_263"></span>[†](#fn_262)

*Apropos* of human sacrifices. Mr. M. Conway gives a story from Ceylon
which is very instructive. There was a Cingalese King whose wife had
several miscarriages. The King consulted the Kappooists, and they told
him that a demon named Bahirawa lived in a mountain near Kandi, and that
she could never have a son unless she sacrificed a "virgin" to this
demon once a year. This was done until the Queen was an old woman. Then
the sacrifice was stopped, but so many diseases fell upon the royal
family that the sinister remedy was renewed until the arrival of the
British in Kandi in 1815. <span id="fr_264"></span>[‡](#fn_263) If all
this was done openly as late as that, what may have been done and may be
doing even now in secret?

Sir Emerson Tennant affirms that for magical purposes children were
slaughtered when he was in

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

the island. In 1849, a case came before him of a sorcerer who was
accustomed to cut off the heads of young children. The little skull was
scraped, and denuded of the flesh, and cabalistic figures were drawn
upon it, and the name of a person whose death was desired was inserted
on it. Then it was taken to a graveyard, and for forty nights the evil
spirits were invoked to destroy the proposed victim. <span
id="fr_265"></span>[\*](#fn_264)

These skulls the "Tamil Doctor" obtained, sometimes by murder, at others
by the baby farming of his wife. The man got away, but left behind him a
book containing various charms and invocations, all addressed to "S’iva
the Destroyer," suitable for every imaginable purpose.

The festival of the "Perahar" described by the sailor Knox, shows how
completely the religion of S’iva reigned in his day supreme in the
Island. <span id="fr_266"></span>[†](#fn_265) A branch of a tree covered
with flowers was the chief object of worship (S’iva as the Tavateinza
tree). This paraded the streets on a magnificent elephant, with many
drums and trumpets; and S’iva's son, Cottaragom (Kattragam or
Karttikeya), and Potting Dio (Pattinee?) on other elephants shared the
honours. Maskers as giants (the Yakshas are all gigantic), and about
fifty elephants were in the procession. "Thousands of ladies and
gentlemen" and "all the beauties of Zelone" (Ceylon) turned out. And it
used to be a custom of the King and his Court to come. One king tried to
stop the show and in the year 1664 there was no Perahar; but a rebellion
in consequence promptly caused the monarch to restore it.

The three chief gods have each a separate pagoda. Knox tells us that the
Cingalese worship as a chief

<span id="img_pl23"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 23.&lt;br&gt;
DURGÂ AS A GIANTESS.&lt;br&gt; From Amarâvatî](tn/pl23.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl23.jpg)  
PLATE 23.  
DURGÂ AS A GIANTESS.  
From Amarâvatî  
</span>

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

god "Ossa polowa maupt dio (the Creator of Heaven and Earth)," and
neglect "Buddou."

And modern travellers tell the same story. Professor Rhys Davids tells
us that in the quadrangle of almost every Buddhist temple is a dewale—a
shrine to the Devas.

And Spence Hardy and Sir Emerson Tennant tell us that in the Mahâ-Dewayo
Wihara Durgâ as Pattinee, and Saman Deva Rajah (S’iva) with his son
Kattragam (Karttikeya), have their statues in the temple itself. <span
id="fr_267"></span>[\*](#fn_266)

I conclude this chapter with a design very popular in Ceylon. Is this
the model from which the Java of Mr. Crawfurd received its jawless
S’iva?

<span id="img_26100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Design from
Ceylon](tn/26100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26100.jpg)  
  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_248"></span>[245:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_249) Copleston "Buddhism
Primitive and Present," p. 11.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[246:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_250) Copleston,
"Buddhism," p. 11.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[247:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_251) Sir Emerson Tennant,
"Ceylon," Vol. I., p. 380.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[248:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_252) The legend is taken
from the Mahâwanso where is an account of Sumano Devah Rajah and of
Buddha frightening the Yakkos in the garden of the Great Serpent by
making his "carpet of skin fringe" fling forth flames in all directions.
See "Mahâwanso," Turnour's translation, p. 3.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[248:†](ipc19.htm#fr_253) Deva means the Deva
of Devas, S’iva (Benfey's "Sanskrit Dictionary").

<span id="fn_253"></span>[249:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_254) Upham "Hist.
Buddhism," p. 130.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[250:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_255) Upham, "Hist.
Buddhism." p. 121.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[254:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_256) "Memoires de Hiouen
Tsiang," Vol. I., p. 194.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[254:†](ipc19.htm#fr_257) Upham, "Buddhism," p.
62.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[255:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_258) Hardy's "Manual," p.
185.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[256:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_259) Upham "History of
Buddhism," pp. 22, 59. See also "Asiatic Researches," vi. 207.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[257:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_260) Calloway, "Kolan
Nattanowa," p. 46.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[258:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_261) Spence Hardy,
"Eastern Monachism," p. 201.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[259:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_262) Amy Wilson
Carmichael, "Things as they are," p. 218.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[259:†](ipc19.htm#fr_263) Sir Emerson Tennant,
"Ceylon," II., 428.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[259:‡](ipc19.htm#fr_264) M. Conway,
"Demonology," Vol. I., pp. 260, 266.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[260:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_265) Sir E. Tennant,
"Ceylon," II., 428.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[260:†](ipc19.htm#fr_266) Knox, "Relation of
Ceylon," p. 157.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[261:\*](ipc19.htm#fr_267) Spence Hardy, p.
203.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. Alexandria](ipc20)
