[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc14)  [Next](ipc16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

### CHAPTER XII

#### MORE COINCIDENCES

<span class="small">Twelve Disciples—Love one another—Buddhist
Beatitudes—The Sower—Blind Guides—Early Buddhism a religion of
joy—Buddhist Baptismal Rites—Other Coincidences.</span>

I HAVE shown certain curious points of contact between the Buddhist and
the Christian scriptures. Here are a few more:—

<span class="small">"THEN WAS JESUS LED UP BY THE SPIRIT INTO THE
WILDERNESS, TO BE TEMPTED OF THE DEVIL."</span>

Comfortable dowagers driving to church three times on Sunday would be
astonished to learn that the essence of Christianity is in this passage.
Its meaning has quite passed away from Protestantism, almost from
Christendom. The "Lalita Vistara" fully shows what that meaning is.
Without Buddhism it would be lost. Jesus was an Essene, and the Essene,
like the Indian Yogi, sought to obtain divine union and the "gifts of
the Spirit" by solitary reverie in retired spots. In what is called the
"Monastery of our Lord" on the Quarantania, a cell is shown with rude
frescoes of Jesus and Satan. There, according to tradition, the demoniac
hauntings that all mystics speak of occurred.

<span class="small">"I HAVE NEED TO BE BAPTISED OF THEE."</span>

A novice in Yoga has a guru, or teacher. Buddha, in riding away from the
palace, by-and-by reached

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

a jungle near Vaisâlî. He at once put himself under a Brahmin Yogi named
Arâta Kâlâma, but his spiritual insight developed so rapidly that in a
short time the Yogi offered to Buddha the arghya, the offering of rice,
flowers, sesamun, etc., that the humble novice usually presents to his
instructor, and asked him to teach instead of learning. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[\*](#fn_176)

<span class="small">THIRTY YEARS OF AGE.</span>

M. Ernest de Bunsen, in his work, "The Angel Messiah," says that Buddha,
like Christ, commenced preaching at thirty years of age. He certainly
must have preached at Vaisâlî, for five young men became his disciples
there, and exhorted him to go on with his teaching. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[†](#fn_177) He was twenty-nine when he left the
palace, therefore he might well have preached at thirty. He did not turn
the wheel of the law until after a six years’ meditation under the Tree
of Knowledge.

<span class="small">"AND WHEN HE HAD FASTED FORTY DAYS AND FORTY
NIGHTS."</span>

Buddha, immediately previous to his great encounter with Mâra, the
tempter, fasted forty-nine days and nights. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[‡](#fn_178)

<span class="small">"COMMAND THAT THESE STONES BE MADE BREAD."</span>

The first temptation of Buddha, when Mâra assailed him, appealed to his
hunger, as we have seen.

<span class="small">THE TWELVE GREAT DISCIPLES.</span>

"Except in my religion, the twelve great disciples are not to be
found." <span id="fr_180"></span>[§](#fn_179) Speech by Buddha.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

<span class="small">"THE DISCIPLE WHOM JESUS LOVED."</span>

One disciple was called Upatishya (the beloved disciple). In a former
existence he and Maudgalyâyana had prayed that they might sit, the one
on the right hand and the other on the left. Buddha granted this prayer.
The other disciples murmured much. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[\*](#fn_180)

<span class="small">"GO YE INTO ALL THE WORLD."</span>

From Benares Buddha sent forth the sixty-one disciples. "Go ye forth,"
he said, "and preach Dharma, no two disciples going the same way." <span
id="fr_182"></span>[†](#fn_181)

<span class="small">"THE SAME CAME TO JESUS BY NIGHT."</span>

Professor Rhys Davids points out that Yâsas, a young rich man, came to
Buddha by night, for fear of his rich relations.

<span class="small">PAX VOBISCUM.</span>

On one point I have been a little puzzled. The password of the Buddhist
Wanderers was "Sadhu!" which does not seem to correspond with the "Pax
Vobiscum!" (Matt. x. 13) of Christ's disciples. But I have just come
across a passage in Renan, <span id="fr_183"></span>[‡](#fn_182) which
shows that the Hebrew word was "Schalom!" (bonheur!) This is almost a
literal translation of "Sadhu!"

<span class="small">"A NEW COMMANDMENT GIVE I YOU, THAT YE LOVE ONE
ANOTHER."</span>

"By love alone can we conquer wrath. By good alone can we conquer evil.
The whole world dreads violence. All men tremble to the presence of
death. Do to others that which ye would have them do to you. Kill not.
Cause no death." <span id="fr_184"></span>[§](#fn_183)

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="small">THE BEATITUDES.</span>

The Buddhists, like the Christians, have got their Beatitudes. They are
plainly arranged for chant and response in the temples. It is to be
noted that the Christian Beatitudes were a portion of the early
Christian ritual.

The "long suffering and meek," those "who follow a peaceful calling,"
those who are not "weary in well-doing," are included in the catalogue.

Here is one verse:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">10 *Self-restraint* and *purity*,  
The knowledge of noble truths,  
The attainment of Nirvâna—  
This is the greatest blessing.</span>

</div>

<span class="small">THE ONE THING NEEDFUL.</span>

Certain subtle questions were proposed to Buddha, such as:—"What will
best conquer the evil passions of men?" "What is the most savoury gift
for the alms-bowl of the mendicant?" "Where is true happiness to be
found?" Buddha replied to them all with one word "Dharma" (the heavenly
life). <span id="fr_185"></span>[\*](#fn_184)

<span class="small">"WHOSOEVER SHALL SMITE THEE ON THY RIGHT CHEEK,
OFFER HIM THE OTHER ALSO."</span>

A merchant from Sûnaparanta having joined Buddha's society, was desirous
of preaching to his relations, and is said to have asked the permission
of the master so to do.

"The people of Sûnaparanta," said Buddha, "are exceedingly violent; if
they revile you what will you do?"

"I will make no reply," said the mendicant.

"And if they strike you?"

"I will not strike in return," said the mendicant.

"And if they kill you?"

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

"Death," said the missionary, "is no evil in itself. Many even desire it
to escape from the vanities of life." <span
id="fr_186"></span>[\*](#fn_185)

<span class="small">BUDDHA'S THIRD COMMANDMENT.</span>

"Commit no adultery." Commentary by Buddha: "This law is broken by even
looking at the wife of another with a lustful mind." <span
id="fr_187"></span>[†](#fn_186)

<span class="small">THE SOWER.</span>

It is recorded that Buddha once stood beside the ploughman
Kasibhâradvaja, who reproved him for his idleness. Buddha answered thus:
"I, too, plough and sow, and from my ploughing and sowing I reap
immortal fruit. My field is religion. The weeds that I pluck up are the
passions of cleaving to this life. My plough is wisdom, my seed
purity." <span id="fr_188"></span>[‡](#fn_187)

On another occasion he described almsgiving as being like "good seed
sown on a good soil that yields an abundance of fruits. But alms given
to those who are yet under the tyrannical yoke of the passions are like
a seed deposited in a bad soil. The passions of the receiver of the alms
choke, as it were, the growth of merits." <span
id="fr_189"></span>[§](#fn_188)

<span class="small">"NOT THAT WHICH GOETH INTO THE MOUTH DEFILETH A
MAN."</span>

In the "Sûtta Nipâta" (chap. 11.) is a discourse on the food that
defiles a man (Âmaghanda). Therein it is explained at some length that
the food that is eaten cannot defile a man, but "destroying living
beings, killing, cutting, binding, stealing, falsehood, adultery, evil
thoughts, murder"—this defiles a man, not the eating of flesh.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="small">"WHERE YOUR TREASURE IS."</span>

"A man," says Buddha, "buries a treasure in a deep pit, which lying
concealed therein day after day profits him nothing, but there is a
treasure of charity, piety, temperance, soberness, a treasure secure,
impregnable, that cannot pass away, a treasure that no thief can steal.
Let the wise man practice Dharma. This is a treasure that follows him
after death." <span id="fr_190"></span>[\*](#fn_189)

<span class="small">THE HOUSE ON THE SAND.</span>

"It (the seen world) is like a city of sand. Its foundation cannot
endure." <span id="fr_191"></span>[†](#fn_190)

<span class="small">BLIND GUIDES.</span>

"Who is not freed cannot free others. The blind cannot guide in the
way." <span id="fr_192"></span>[‡](#fn_191)

<span class="small">"AS YE SOW, SO SHALL YE REAP."</span>

"As men sow, thus shall they reap." <span
id="fr_193"></span>[§](#fn_192)

<span class="small">"A CUP OF COLD WATER TO ONE OF THESE LITTLE
ONES."</span>

"Whosoever piously bestows a little water shall receive an ocean in
return." <span id="fr_194"></span>[+](#fn_193)

<span class="small">"BE NOT WEARY IN WELL-DOING."</span>

"Not to be weary in well-doing." <span
id="fr_195"></span>[\*\*](#fn_194)

<span class="small">"GIVE TO HIM THAT ASKETH."</span>

"Give to him that asketh, even though it be but a little." <span
id="fr_196"></span>[††](#fn_195)

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

<span class="small">"DO UNTO OTHERS," ETC.</span>

"With pure thoughts and fulness of love I will do towards others what I
do for myself." <span id="fr_197"></span>[\*](#fn_196)

<span class="small">"PREPARE YE THE WAY OF THE LORD!"</span>

Buddha's triumphant entry into Rajâgriha (the "City of the King") has
been compared to Christ's entry into Jerusalem. Both, probably, never
occurred, and only symbolise the advent of a Divine Being to earth. It
is recorded in the Buddhist scriptures that on these occasions a
"Precursor of Buddha" always appears. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[†](#fn_197)

<span class="small">"WHO DID SIN, THIS MAN OR HIS PARENTS, THAT HE WAS
BORN BLIND?"  
(John ix. 3).</span>

Professor Kellogg, in his work entitled "The Light of Asia and the Light
of the World," condemns Buddhism in nearly all its tenets. But he is
especially emphatic in the matter of the metempsychosis. The poor and
helpless Buddhist has to begin again and again "the weary round of birth
and death," whilst the righteous Christians go at once into life
eternal.

Now, it seems to me that this is an example of the danger of contrasting
two historical characters when we have a strong sympathy for the one and
a strong prejudice against the other. Professor Kellogg has conjured up
a Jesus with nineteenth century ideas, and a Buddha who is made
responsible for all the fancies that were in the world B.C. 500.
Professor Kellogg is a professor of an American university, and as such
must know that the doctrine of the *gilgal* (the Jewish name for the
metempsychosis) was as widely spread in Palestine A.D. 30, as it was in
Râjâgriha

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> B.C. 500. An able
writer in the "Church Quarterly Review" of October, 1885, maintains that
the Jews brought it from Babylon. Dr. Ginsberg, in his work on the
"Kabbalah," shows that the doctrine continued to be held by the Jews as
late as the ninth century of our era. He shows, too, that St. Jerome has
recorded that it was "propounded amongst the early Christians as an
esoteric and traditional doctrine."

The author of the article in the "Church Quarterly Review" in proof of
its existence adduces the question put by the disciples of Christ in
reference to the man that was born blind. And if it was considered that
a man could be born blind as a punishment for sin, that sin must have
been plainly committed before his birth. Oddly enough, in the "White
Lotus of Dharma," there is an account of the healing of a blind man.
"Because of the sinful conduct of the man (in a former birth) this
malady has risen."

But a still more striking instance is given in the case of the man sick
with the palsy (Luke v. is). The Jews believed, with modern Orientals,
that grave diseases like paralysis were due, not to physical causes in
this life, but to moral causes in previous lives. And if the account of
the cure of the paralytic is to be considered historical, it is quite
clear that this was Christ's idea when He cured the man, for He
distinctly announced that the cure was effected not by any physical
processes, but by annulling the "sins" which were the cause of his
malady.

Traces of the metempsychosis idea still exist in Catholic Christianity.
The doctrine of original sin is said by some writers to be a
modification of it. Certainly the fancy that the works of supererogation
of their saints can be transferred to others is the Buddhist idea of
good karma, which is transferable in a similar manner.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="small">"IF THE BLIND LEAD THE BLIND, BOTH SHALL FALL INTO
THE DITCH"  
(Matt. xv. 14).</span>

"As when a string of blind men are clinging one to the other neither can
the foremost see, nor the middle one see, nor the hindmost see. Just so,
methinks, Vâsettha is the talk of the Brahmins, versed in the Three
Vedas." <span id="fr_199"></span>[\*](#fn_198)

<span class="small">"EUNUCHS FOR THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN'S SAKE."</span>

In the days of St. Thomas à Kempis the worshipper was modelled on the
Christ. In our days the Christ seems modelled on the worshipper. The
Bodleian professor of Sanskrit writes thus:—"Christianity teaches that
in the highest form of life love is intensified; Buddhism teaches that
in the highest state of existence all love is extinguished. According to
Christianity, Go and earn your own bread, and support yourself and your
family. Marriage, it says, is honourable, and undefiled, and married
life a field where holiness can grow."

But history is history; and a French writer has recently attacked Christ
for attempting to bring into Europe the celibacy and pessimism of
Buddhism. This author in his work, "Jésus Bouddha," cites Luke xiv. 26:—

"If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and *wife*,
and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple."

He adduces also:—

"Let the dead bury their dead.

"Think not that I have come to send peace on earth: I come not to send
peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law. And a man's foes shall be they of his own
household" (Matt. x. 34-36).

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

"And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father
the child; and the children shall rise up against their parents, and
cause them to be put to death" (*Ibid*, ver. 21).

"So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not all that he
hath, he cannot be my disciple" (Luke xiv. 33).

The author says that all this is pure nihilism, and Essene communism.
"The most sacred family ties are to be renounced, and man to lose his
individuality, and become a unit in a vast scheme to overturn the
institutions of his country."

"Qu’importe au fanatisme la ruine de la societé humaine."

Here also is a remarkable passage from an American writer:—

"The anticosmic tendency of the Christian doctrine," says Mr. Felix
Oswald, <span id="fr_200"></span>[\*](#fn_199) distinguishes it from all
religions except Buddhism. In the language of the New Testament the
'world' is everywhere a synonym of evil and sin, the flesh everywhere
the enemy of the spirit. . . . The gospel of Buddha though pernicious,
is, however, a perfectly consistent doctrine. Birth, life, and re-birth
is an eternal round of sorrow and disappointment. The present and the
future are but the upper and lower tyre of an ever-rolling wheel of woe.
The only salvation from the wheel of life is an escape to the peace of
Nirvâna. The attempt to graft this doctrine upon the optimistic theism
of Palestine has made the Christian ethics inconsistent and
contradictory. A paternal Jehovah, who yet eternally and horribly
tortures a vast plurality of his children. An earth the perfect work of
a benevolent God; yet a vale of tears not made to be enjoyed, but only
to be despised and renounced. An omnipotent heaven, and yet unable to
prevent the intrigues

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

and constant victories of hell. Christianity is evidently not a
homogeneous but a composite, a hybrid religion and considered in
connection with the indications of history, and the evidence of the
above-named ethical and traditional analogies these facts leave no
reasonable doubt that the founder of the Galilean Church was a disciple
of Buddha S’âkya muni" (p. 139).

A propos of this "pessimism," is it certain that early Buddhism and
S’iva Buddhism were quite in harmony?

Asoka certainly believed that Buddhism was an optimism. "On my subjects
I confer happiness both in this world and the next." Buddha called his
message "Subhashita" (the glad tidings), and declared that the man who
was spiritually awakened had joy for his accompanying shadow. The
Burmese are the happiest of God's creatures.

<span class="small">"THEN ALL HIS DISCIPLES FORSOOK HIM AND
FLED."</span>

It is recorded that on one occasion when a "must" elephant charged
furiously, "all the disciples deserted Buddha. Ânanda alone
remained." <span id="fr_201"></span>[\*](#fn_200)

<span class="small">"IF THE RIGHT EYE OFFEND THEE."</span>

Mr. Felix Oswald <span id="fr_202"></span>[†](#fn_201) announces,
without, however, giving a more detailed reference, that according to
Max Müller's translation of the "Ocean of Worlds," a young monk meets a
rich woman, who pities his hard lot.

"Blessed is the woman who looks into thy lovely eyes!"

"Lovely!" replied the monk. "Look here!" And plucking out one of his
eyes he held it up, bleeding and ghastly, and asked her to correct her
opinion.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="small">WALKING ON THE WATER.</span>

Certain villagers, hard of belief, were listening to Buddha on the shore
of a mighty river. Suddenly by a miracle the great teacher caused a man
to appear walking on the water from the other side, without immersing
his feet. <span id="fr_203"></span>[\*](#fn_202)

<span class="small">"AND, LO! THERE WAS A GREAT CALM."</span>

Pûrna, one of Buddha's disciples, had a brother in danger of shipwreck
in a "black storm." But the guardian spirits of Pûrna informed him of
this. He at once transported himself through the air from the distant
inland town to the deck of the ship. "Immediately the black tempest
ceased as if Sumeru had arrested it." <span
id="fr_204"></span>[†](#fn_203)

<span class="small">"WHY EATETH YOUR MASTER WITH PUBLICANS AND
SINNERS?"  
(Matt. ix. 11).</span>

The courtesan Amrapalî invited Buddha and his disciples to a banquet in
the mango grove at Vaisâli. Buddha accepted. Some rich princes,
sparkling in emeralds, came and gave him a similar invitation. He
refused. They were very angry to see him sit at meat with Amrapalî. He
explained to his disciples that the harlot might enter the kingdom of
Dharma more easily than the prince. <span
id="fr_205"></span>[‡](#fn_204)

<span class="small">THE PENITENT THIEF.</span>

Buddha confronts a terrible bandit in his mountain retreat and converts
him. <span id="fr_206"></span>[§](#fn_205)

<span class="small">"THERE WAS WAR IN HEAVEN."</span>

Professor Beal, in his "Catena of Buddhist Scriptures" (p. 52), tells us
that, in the "Saddharma

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prâkasa Sasana
Sûtra," a great war in heaven is described. In it the "wicked dragons"
assault the legions of heaven. After a terrible conflict they are driven
down by Indra and the heavenly hosts.

<span class="small">"THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS LIKE UNTO A MERCHANTMAN
SEEKING GOODLY PEARLS, WHO, WHEN HE HAD FOUND ONE PEARL OF GREAT PRICE,
WENT AND SOLD ALL THAT HE HAD AND BOUGHT IT"  
(Matt. xiii. 45).</span>

The most sacred emblem of Buddhism is called the maṇi (pearl), and in
the Chinese biography a merchant seeking goodly pearls finds it, and
unfortunately drops it into the sea. Rather than lose it he tries to
drain the sea dry. <span id="fr_207"></span>[\*](#fn_206)

<span class="small">THE VOICE FROM THE SKY.</span>

This sounds often in the Buddhist narratives. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[†](#fn_207)

<span class="small">FAITH.</span>

"Faith is the first gate of the Law." <span
id="fr_209"></span>[‡](#fn_208)

"All who have faith in me obtain a mighty joy." <span
id="fr_210"></span>[§](#fn_209)

<span class="small">"THOU ART NOT YET FIFTY YEARS OLD, AND HAST THOU
SEEN ABRAHAM?"</span>

In the "White Lotus of Dharma" (chap. xiv.), Buddha is asked how it is
that, having sat under the bo-tree only forty years ago, he had been
able, according to his boast, to see many Buddhas and saints who died
hundreds of years previously. He answers that he has lived many hundred
thousand myriads of Kotis, and that though in the form of a Buddha, he
is in reality Swayambhu, the Self-Existent, the Father of the million
worlds. In proof of this

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

statement he causes two Buddhas of the Past, Prabhûtaratna and another,
to appear in the sky. The first pronounces loudly these words: "It is
well! It is well!" These Buddhas appear with their sepulchral canopies
(stûpas) of diamonds, red pearls, emeralds, etc. Peter, at the scene of
the Transfiguration, said to Christ:—

"Let us make here three tabernacles—one for Thee, one for Moses, and one
for Elias." Why should Peter want to adopt a Buddhist custom and build
tabernacles for the dead Moses and the dead Elias? Why, also, should
Moses come from the tomb to support a teacher who had torn his covenant
with Yahve to shreds?

<span class="small">"HE WAS TRANSFIGURED BEFORE THEM."</span>

Buddha, leaving Maudgalyâyana and another disciple to represent him,
went off through the air to the Devaloka, to the Heaven Tuśita, to
preach to the spirits in prison and to convert his mother. When he came
down from the mountain (Mienmo), a staircase of glittering diamonds,
seen by all, helped his descent. His appearance was blinding. The "six
glories" glittered on his person. Mortals and spirits hymned the benign
Being who emptied the hells. <span id="fr_211"></span>[\*](#fn_210)

In the "Gospel according to the Hebrews" is a curious passage which Baur
and Hilgenfeld hold to be the earliest version of the Transfiguration
narrative. "Just now my mother, the Holy Spirit, took me, by one of my
hairs and bore me up on to the great mountain of Tabor."

This is curious. Buddha and Jesus reach the Mount of Transfiguration,
each through the influence of his mother. But perhaps the Jewish writer
did not like the universalism inculcated in the Buddhist narrative.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="small">"HE BEGAN TO WASH THE DISCIPLES’ FEET"  
(John xiii. 5).</span>

In a vihâra at Gândhâra was a monk so loathsome and stinking, on account
of his maladies, that none of his brother disciples dare go near him.
The great Teacher came and tended him lovingly and washed his
feet. <span id="fr_212"></span>[\*](#fn_211)

<span class="small">THE GREAT BANQUET OF BUDDHA.</span>

In the "Lalita Vistara" (p. 51) it is stated that those who have faith
will become "sons of Buddha," and partake of the "food of the kingdom."
Four things draw disciples to his banquet—gifts, soft words, production
of benefits, conformity of benefits.

<span class="small">BAPTISM.</span>

In a Chinese life of Buddha by Wung Puh, <span
id="fr_213"></span>[†](#fn_212) it is announced that Buddha at Vaisâlî
delivered a Sûtra entitled "The Baptism that Rescues from Life and Death
and confers Salvation."

<span class="small">"AND NONE OF THEM IS LOST BUT THE SON OF
PERDITION."</span>

Buddha like Christ had a treacherous disciple, Devadatta. He schemed
with a wicked prince, who sent men armed with bows and swords to
slaughter Buddha. Devadatta tried other infamous stratagems. His end was
appalling. Coming in a palanquin to arrest Buddha, he got out to stretch
himself. Suddenly fierce flames burst out, and he was carried down to
the hell Avîchi (the Rayless Place). There, in a red-hot cauldron,
impaled by one red bar and pierced by two others, he will stay for a
whole Kalpa. Then he will be forgiven." <span
id="fr_214"></span>[‡](#fn_213)

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="small">THE LAST SUPPER.</span>

Buddha had his last supper or repast with his disciples. A treacherous
disciple changed his alms-bowl, and apparently he was poisoned. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[\*](#fn_214) Fierce pains seized him as he journeyed
afterwards. He was forced to rest. He sent a message to his host, Kunda,
the son of the jeweller, to feel no remorse although the feast had been
his death. Under two trees he now died.

It will be remembered that during the last supper of Jesus a treacherous
disciple "dipped into his dish," but as Jesus was not poisoned, the
event had no sequence.

<span class="small">"NOW FROM THE SIXTH HOUR THERE WAS DARKNESS OVER ALL
THE LAND UNTIL ABOUT THE NINTH HOUR."</span>

The critical school base much of their contention that the Gospels do
not record real history on this particular passage. They argue that such
an astounding event could not have escaped Josephus and Tacitus. When
Buddha died, the "sun and moon withdrew their shining," and dust and
ashes fell like rain. "The great earth quaked throughout. The crash of
the thunder shook the heavens and the earth, rolling along the mountains
and valleys." <span id="fr_216"></span>[†](#fn_215) The Buddhist account
is certainly not impossible, for the chronicler takes advantage of the
phenomena of an Indian dust-storm to produce his dark picture. At
Lucknow, before the siege, I remember a storm so dense at midday that
some ladies with my regiment thought the Day of Judgment had arrived.

<span class="small">"AND MANY BODIES OF THE SAINTS WHICH SLEPT
AROSE."</span>

When Buddha died at Kusinâgara, Ânanda and another disciple saw many
denizens of the unseen world in the city, by the river Yigdan. <span
id="fr_217"></span>[‡](#fn_216)

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

The Buddhist baptism has striking analogies with that of the Christians.
The Swastika Cross is the only cross in the Catacombs, and for this
baptism a large Swastika cross is marked on the ground called Sastika
Asan. On this sits the postulant, and holy water is sprinkled on his
head. That head is shaved, a rope is put round his neck. His name is
changed, and he is made to vow that he "will not amass property of any
kind," nor "go near a woman," nor touch intoxicating liquors of any
kind, nor animal food. He vows to devote himself to the worship of the
Chaitya and the Trinity, Buddha (Spirit) Dharma (Matter), Sangha, who is
Padmapani, the Gnostic "Christos" as distinguished from Jesus.

<span class="small">"TO ANOINT MY BODY TO THE BURYING"  
(Mark xiv. 8).</span>

The newly-discovered fragments of the Gospel of Peter give us a curious
fact. They record that Mary Magdalene, "taking with her her friends,"
went to the sepulchre of Jesus to "place themselves beside him and
perform the rites" of wailing, beating breasts, etc. Amrapalî and other
courtesans did the same rites to Buddha, and the disciples were
afterwards indignant that impure women should have "washed his dead body
with their tears." <span id="fr_218"></span>[\*](#fn_217)

In the Christian records are three passages, all due, I think, to the
Buddhist narrative. In one, "a woman" anoints Jesus; in John (xii. 7),
"Mary" anoints him; in Luke, a "sinner," who kisses and washes His feet
with her hair. Plainly these last passages are quite irrational. No
woman could have performed the washing and other burial rites on a man
alive and in health.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="small">"THEY PARTED MY GARMENTS."</span>

The Abbé Huc tells us <span id="fr_219"></span>[\*](#fn_218) that on the
death of the Bokté Lama, his garments are cut into little strips and
prized immensely.

<span class="small">"HE APPEARED UNTO MANY."</span>

"Buddha prophesied that he would appear after his death." <span
id="fr_220"></span>[†](#fn_219) In a Chinese version quoted by
Eitel, <span id="fr_221"></span>[‡](#fn_220) Buddha, to soothe his
mother, who had come down weeping from the skies, opens his coffin lid
and appears to her. In the temple sculptures he is constantly depicted
coming down to the altar during worship.

<span class="small">THE "GREAT WHITE THRONE."</span>

Mr. Upham, in his "History of Buddhism," (pp. 56, 57), gives a
description of the Buddhist heaven. There is a "high mountain," and a
city "four square" with gates of gold and silver, adorned with precious
stones. Seven moats surround the city. Beyond the last one is a row of
marble pillars studded with jewels. The great throne of the god stands
in the centre of a great hall, and is surmounted by a white canopy.
Round the great throne are seated heavenly ministers, who record men's
actions in a "golden book." A mighty tree is conspicuous in the garden.
In the Chinese heaven is the "Gem Lake," by which stands the peach-tree,
whose fruit gives immortality. <span id="fr_222"></span>[§](#fn_221)

<span class="small">THE ATONEMENT.</span>

The idea of transferred good Karma, the merits of the former lives of an
individual being passed on to another individual, is, of course, quite
foreign to the lower Judaism, which believed in no after life at all. In
the view of the higher Buddhism, Sâkya

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Muni saved the
world by his teaching; but to the lower, the Buddhism of offerings and
temples and monks, this doctrine of Karma was the life-blood. It was
proclaimed that Buddha had a vast stock of superfluous Karma, and that
offerings at a temple might cause the worshipper in his next life to be
a prince instead of a pig or a coolie. In the "Lalita Vistara" <span
id="fr_223"></span>[\*](#fn_222) it is announced that when Buddha
overcame Mâra, all flesh rejoiced, the blind saw, the deaf heard, the
dumb spake, the hells were cleared, and all by reason of Buddha's Karma
in previous lives.

St. Paul is very contradictory about the atonement. This passage seems
pure Buddhism.

"As by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation,
even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto
justification of life." (Rom. v. 18).

Contrast this with another passage:—

"Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in His
blood, to declare His righteousness for the remission of sins" (Rom.
iii. 25).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_176"></span>[201:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_177) Foucaux, "Lalita
Vistara," p. 228.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[201:†](ipc15.htm#fr_178) Foucaux, "Lalita
Vistara," p. 236.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[201:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_179) Chinese Life," by
Wung Puh.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[201:§](ipc15.htm#fr_180) "Bigandet," p. 301.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[202:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_181) Bigandet, p. 153.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[202:†](ipc15.htm#fr_182) *Ibid*, p. 126.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[202:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_183) "Les Apôtres," p. 22.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[202:§](ipc15.htm#fr_184) "Sûtra of Forty-two
Sections," v. 129.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[203:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_185) "Bigandet," p. 225.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[204:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_186) "Bigandet," p. 216.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[204:†](ipc15.htm#fr_187) Buddhaghosa's
"Parables," by Max Müller and Rodgers, p. 153.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[204:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_188) "Hardy" "Manual," p.
215.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[204:§](ipc15.htm#fr_189) "Bigandet," p. 211.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[205:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_190) "Khuddaka Pâtha," p.
13.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[205:†](ipc15.htm#fr_191) "Lalita Vistara," p.
172.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[205:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_192) *Ibid*, p. 199.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[205:§](ipc15.htm#fr_193)
"Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun," serm. 57.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[205:+](ipc15.htm#fr_194) *Ibid*, serm. 20.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[205:\*\*](ipc15.htm#fr_195) "Mahâmangala
Sutta," ver. 7.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[205:††](ipc15.htm#fr_196) "Udânavarga," chap.
xx., ver. 15.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[206:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_197) "Lalita Vistara."
Chap. v.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[206:†](ipc15.htm#fr_198) "Bigandet," p. 147.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[208:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_199) Buddha, in the
"Tevigga Sutta," I., 15.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[209:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_200) "Secret of the
East," p. 27.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[210:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_201)
"Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, IV., 21.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[210:†](ipc15.htm#fr_202) "Chinese Dhammapada,"
p. 51.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[211:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_203) "The Secret of the
East," p. 134.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[211:†](ipc15.htm#fr_204) Burnouf,
"Introduction," p. 229.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[211:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_205) "Bigandet," p. 251.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[211:§](ipc15.htm#fr_206) "Chinese Dhammapada,"
p. 98.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[212:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_207) "Rom. Hist., p. 228.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[212:†](ipc15.htm#fr_208) See Beal, "Rom.
Hist.," p. 105.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[212:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_209) "Lalita Vistara," p.
39.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[212:§](ipc15.htm#fr_210) *Ibid*, p. 188.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[213:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_211) "Bigandet," p. 209.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[214:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_212) "Chinese Dhammapada,
p. 94.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[214:†](ipc15.htm#fr_213) See Beal, "Journ. As.
Soc.," Vol. XX., p. 172.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_214) "Bigandet," p. 244.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_215) See Rockhill's,
"Buddha," p. 133

<span id="fn_215"></span>[215:†](ipc15.htm#fr_216)
"Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king," v. 26.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[215:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_217) Rockhill's "Life of
the Buddha," p. 133.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[216:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_218) Rockhill, "Thibetan
Life," p. 153.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[217:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_219) "Voyages," II., p.
278.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[217:†](ipc15.htm#fr_220) "Lotus," p. 144.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[217:‡](ipc15.htm#fr_221) "Three Lectures," p.
57.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[217:§](ipc15.htm#fr_222) See illustrations to
my "Buddhism in Christendom."

<span id="fn_222"></span>[218:\*](ipc15.htm#fr_223) Chinese version, p.
225.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Rites](ipc16)
