[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc11)  [Next](ipc13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

### CHAPTER IX

#### ARCHITECTURE

<span class="small">Mr. James Fergusson—The "Sangharâma of Kasyapa"—Was
it Elora?—Points of contact—Kailâs—Importance of the head of
Avalokitishwara—Found on all S’ivan buildings ancient and
modern—Buddhist arch, the head of the Cobra—Serpent not worshipped in
Buddhism until union with S’ivism—Fergusson on the Lingam—Calls it a
"Dagoba"—Believes the Kailâs temples at Elora, and the Mahabalipur
Rathas, to have been intended for dormitories of Buddhist
monks—Proposition contested—Strange discovery that Avalokitishwara's
head is very plentiful on both these old groups of rock-detached
temples.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Victor Hugo</span> affirms that art throws more
light on an early creed than literature, for literature, unfortunately,
can be much falsified by mistaken religious zeal. Can art help our
present inquiry?

A puerile story in the sacred books of the natives of India sometimes
means much, as we have seen. I commence with a legend from the Purânas.

One Andheke, a Daitya, that is, one of a non-Aryan race, conquered the
Dikpalas in fight, and obliged them to take refuge in the "Immoveable
Mountain" (Mandara Achala), the lofty home of the Brahman gods. But the
Dikpalas, assisted by their gods, returned in great force, and put
Andheke and his army to flight; and the Daitya had to take refuge in a
cave, twelve Kos (twenty-four miles) deep. In these straits he
sacrificed to S’iva, who came to help him, and after the victory the god
remained with him in the cave under the title of Andhekisvara.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

The legend was, of course, written to account for the Cave-worship of
the followers of S’iva. They seemed to have used caves as early
certainly as the date of the Rig Veda, when Bala detained the cows there
until struck with the bolt of Indra. A distinguished French Orientalist
tells us that Bala was the father of the Asuras (demons) and the cave
that he frequented was the mighty darkness of night, and the cows the
morning rays. This may be the case, but the poet in his boldest flights
has probably something concrete to go upon. Might he not have known of a
real Bala, in a real cave, with real cows? At a place called Bolor, the
Chinese Pilgrim, Hiouen Thsiang, saw folks who, to escape the cold,
occupied the caverns around in company with their beasts.

We must now consider S’iva from the point of view of Architecture.

And the subject is beset with difficulty. If we can produce evidence
that the worship of large fragments of bed-rock in a cave as a symbol of
life, and its giver, has been utilitarian, open, and long anterior to
the Sex worship in Egypt and Assyria, we strengthen our case that the
religion of Bal, Bel, Ba’al, Belenus, takes its origin in India; but to
establish this in at all a satisfactory manner will require a separate
chapter, for a celebrated authority on Indian
[architecture](errata.htm#26) has got half India to believe that the
cave temples of S’iva are very modern, in fact that they are mere copies
of the cave temples of the Buddhists.

Mr. James Fergusson came out to India as a merchant about the year 1826;
and having amassed, fortunately for himself (and still more fortunately
for the world), an Indian fortune, he went home and became an architect
with a view to a profound study of the architecture of India, which from
the first seems to have interested him very much. He was gifted with a
quick intelligence and great industry; and he

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

brought out many valuable works, revealing to the English public the
wealth of topes and caves and Dravidian Gopuras and Salukian shrines,
which in those days were crumbling away unheeded and misvalued.

But Mr. Fergusson, as all who knew him can testify, was very decided in
his opinions and very masterful—witness the fact that he persuaded the
Home Government to place him on a Committee with half-a-dozen military
experts, to settle what heavy guns, and what casemates, should be set up
to make the south coast of England secure against hostile battleships,
although there is no evidence that Mr. Fergusson had ever been in a
casemate in his life.

I do not, of course, propose to write a treatise on Indian architecture.
It will be enough for my special study if I examine four statements of
Mr. Fergusson, which contain the pith of the matter.

\(1\) He held that the Cave temple of Elora was a Buddhist Cave temple
dating some time between 750 and 950 A.D. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[\*](#fn_141)

\(2\) He believed that the large lump of bedrock that figures in most of
the caves, and which the natives of India call a "lingam," was a
Buddhist "Dagoba." This word is written "Dhatugarbha" in the Mahâwânso
(womb or enclosure of a portion of the human body).

\(3\) He held that the Cave temples of the followers of S’iva came into
existence after the Cave temples of the Buddhists.

\(4\) He asserts that the five Raths or detached, rock-cut edifices of
Mahavalipur were executed in the fifth or sixth century A.D. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[†](#fn_142)

Early Buddhism had for its temples large numbers of funereal cairns
spread over India, each containing, or said to contain, the ashes of
Buddha or other saintly

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

human ashes. The worship, in a word, was the worship of Buddha by
peregrination round a cairn.

Kaniska changed all this. A theory was started that Buddha was
non-existent; that great Buddhas on obtaining the Buddha-hood were
absorbed into the divinity. The Cave temple was introduced and cairn
worship discouraged.

In the year 400 A. D. a Buddhist pilgrim from China named Fa Hian
visited the Dekhan. He describes a great "Sangharâma of a former Buddha,
Kasyapa." Until Mr. Fergusson's day most Orientalists declared that this
must be Elora. "It was constructed out of a great mountain of rock,"
says the Chinese traveller, "hewn to the proper shape." This seems to
point to a detached rock-cut temple like Kailâs in Elora, or the Raths
of Mahâbalipur. Fa Hian describes many cave temples, but never uses such
language about them. The Chinese traveller did not see the temple. The
country around was uninhabited and dangerous to the
traveller[;](errata.htm#27) indeed, the pilgrim was advised to fly. "The
law of Buddha was unknown."

Now the first question to ask is, Where is this great temple? If it was
in the Dekhan at the date of Fa Hian it must be there still. A large
rock-cut temple is one of the few things that cannot be conjured away.
Was it Elora?

In 1825, Captain Seely, an Indian officer, published a work, "The
Wonders of Elora," which gives a careful and very minute description of
the rock excavations. Let us compare this and the Chinese account of
Kasyapa's "Sangharâma."

To begin with, there is a statue of Kasyapa at Elora. He was one of the
Seven Great Saints of the Brahmans (the Seven Rishis), but also one of
the Seven Mânushi, or Mortal Buddhas. We can understand that the Chinese
pilgrim, when hearing from outsiders a number of unfamiliar names,
Brahman gods and saints,

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

warriors, giants, demons,—would have fastened on that most familiar with
a Buddhist. Fa Hian was told the temple had five storeys, "the lowest is
made with elephant shapes, and has five hundred stone cells."

"On entering," says Captain Seely, "various figures are represented,
especially Bhavânî (Durgâ) sitting on a lotus, and two elephants with
their trunks entwined by her. On either side under a ledge of rock,
which serves as a bridge for communicating with the great temple, and
the rooms over the entrance, are two elephants in a mutilated
state." <span id="fr_144"></span>[\*](#fn_143)

"The second (storey)," says Fa Hian, "is made with lion shapes and has
four hundred chambers. The third is made with horse shapes and has three
hundred chambers."

"On the eastern and southern sides of the great temple," says Seely,
"are two flights of stairs winding inwards half way up, thirty-six in
number. These bring you to a portico.

"On the top of this portico are the remains of a lion, and on the inside
two figures of Sphinxes"; but our author tells us that numbers of
elephants, lions, and other animals abound, sculptured in part, but with
much of their bodies buried away as if they were in the act of
supporting the vast mass of rock above. Amongst these the informants
consulted by Fa Hian might easily have found their "horse."

Says Fa Hian, "The fourth is made with ox shapes and has two hundred
chambers; the fifth is made with dove shapes and has one hundred
chambers."

At this point Professor Beal, the acute Chinese scholar, intervenes, and
convicts Fa Hian of misreading the word "Po lo yu," which he renders
"Pârâvita," (a pigeon), whereas it should have been "Pârvatî" (Durgâ).
Now above the portico already described there is a separate room built,
with a fine

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "figure of Nandi,"
the bull of S’iva, with the god and Durgâ riding upon it, bulls being
plentiful at Elora. Turning to Captain Seely's frontispiece, a view of
the Cave of Indra, we see that above the excavations was a patch of bare
hill, but across this higher up was a wall or entablature with
sculptured figures. This might be called an additional storey, Pârvatî's
storey. Pârvatî means "mountain" as well as the goddess. Hiouen Thsiang,
another Buddhist traveller, describes a fine five-storeyed Sangharâma
with large halls, and Buddhas cast in gold. This spot he calls
Brahmaragiri (the mountain of Brahmara, or Durgâ). Professor Beal
suggests that these two mountains, Pârvatî mountain, and Brahmaragiri
mountain, and the two temples, are probably one and the same.

Neither of these Chinese travellers saw this temple, we must recollect,
and each calls it a Sangharâma. But all the old travellers call Elora a
Hindu temple. Captain Seely, who made the closest study of all, calls it
a temple of S’iva and Durgâ, and says that the lingam is everywhere.

At the great entrance of Kailâs are two enormous statues of S’iva and
Durgâ, one on each side. The Holy of Holies, says Captain Seely, is a
bare cave with a lingam in the middle. Two mighty giants with clubs
guard the Sacullum, and a great statue of Nandi, the bull, also stands
sentry by it.

Heeren, the learned German, makes a strong point in favour of the
antiquity of these temples. He says that the inscriptions are in
Sanskrit, which points to a date when Sanskrit was a spoken language in
India. A pious donor erecting, say a fine hospital in Manchester, would
not record the fact in the language of the Ancient Britons. Sanskrit was
no longer a spoken language about 300 B.C.

Professor Beal mentions that the rock temple described by Hiouen Tsiang
was according to that

<span id="img_pl11"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 11.&lt;br&gt;
KAILÂS, SEEN FROM THE TOP.](tn/pl11.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl11.jpg)  
PLATE 11.  
KAILÂS, SEEN FROM THE TOP.  
</span>

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

authority erected by King Sadvaha at the instance of Nâgârjuna, <span
id="fr_145"></span>[\*](#fn_144) who for the mighty outlay necessary for
the purpose changed all the "great stones" to gold. It is possible that
Nâgârjuna influenced the King, and it is possible that this monk, as
Beal thinks, was the chief agent in effecting the great Buddhist change
of front. But if he was mixed up in any way with Elora it must have been
only in burnishing it up with a little Buddhist polish. Recollect that
according to Fa Hian there were fifteen hundred cells for the monks in
his temple, according to Hiouen Tsiang one thousand. Elora, according to
Seely and Heeren, has many "dormitories," but not so many as this. What
an enormous rock temple it must have been that the Chinese describe. If
it was not Elora, where is it? Says Heeren, "The completion of these
surprising works must, according to our calculations, have required some
hundreds of years.

"Let the reader imagine to himself a chain of rocky mountains consisting
principally of very hard granite, and in a semi-circular or rather
horse-shoe form, with a distance of nearly five miles between the
extreme points. In this range is found a series of grotto temples, some
of two and even three storeys in height, partly in juxtaposition with
each other and partly separated by intervals, which in their turn are
filled with a number of smaller temples, and the whole ornamented with
innumerable reliefs. All that is great, splendid, and ornamental in
architecture above ground, is here seen—also, beneath the
earth—peristyles, staircases, bridges, chapels, columns, porticos,
obelisks, colossal statues."

Seely follows suit and says that although Kailas, being rock detached,
is one of the wonders of the world, the Tin Tal (three storeyed) cave at
Elora is

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

really finer as a cave, and the Viśvakarma, and a number of the other
caves are very grand.

"What must have been the labour and zeal of the workmen in thus
attacking a mountain formed of the firm, primeval rock, and cutting
hundreds of thousands of feet of that hard material by the aid of an
iron instrument <span id="fr_146"></span>[\*](#fn_145) (a chisel four
inches long)."

All this about the immense labour expended upon Elora is important,
because, if Sadvaha constructed it at all, he must have finished it in a
lifetime; for at his death, says Hiouen Tsiang, the Brahmans seized the
cave temple and "strongly barricaded the place" to keep the Buddhists
out. <span id="fr_147"></span>[†](#fn_146) The same difficulty surges up
if we suppose that Elora was begun and finished in the lifetime of
Kanis’ka. Says the Chinese traveller: "After Kanis’ka's death the
Kritiya race again assumed the government, banished the priesthood, and
overthrew religion." <span id="fr_148"></span>[‡](#fn_147)

Another difficulty is this: Why should the Buddhists in constructing a
matchless temple make it what we might call an Encyclopædia of the
Brahman religion, a Pantheon of the gods that Buddhism came into the
world to specially attack? a Kylâs where every saint and hero of India
finds his dwelling-place?

Elora is the most eclectic of fanes. Indra is there, and Brahma with his
four heads, and Lakshmî, but the latter, says Heeren, figures as a
menial attendant at the great marriage of S’iva and Durgâ; and the
statues and bas reliefs of the Brahmin gods are insignificant <span
id="fr_149"></span>[§](#fn_148) compared with those of S’iva and Durgâ.

At Elora is one portentous cavern, a grotto driven into the hard rock
one hundred and thirteen feet, so

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Captain Seely
assures us <span id="fr_150"></span>[\*](#fn_149). Unlike the rest of
the profusely sculptured caves, it is very dark, very solemn, quite bare
of decoration. Here we have plainly the "Sanctuary of the S’iva-linga,"
the most exalted Mahâdeo of S’iva worship. And on this stone Mahâdeo, a
Buddha has been cut. He sits on the lotus throne of Padmapani. Does not
this seem to have been intended to accentuate the fact that Adi Buddha
and S’iva are one? The cave is named after Visvakarma, which is a name
for S’iva, as well as for a Brahman god.

I now propose to show the immense importance of the head without a jaw
which the Hindu in Java assured Mr. Crawfurd always meant S’iva. If this
detached head really means S’iva, it is evident that it pulverises Mr.
Fergusson's theory that Elora, Karle, etc., are purely Buddhist
excavations. Captain Seely gives as his frontispiece a fine engraving of
the façade of the cavern of Indra at Elora, and there are two heads of
Avalokitishwara plainly visible. In the Buddhist temple of Boro Bador in
Java, we are assured by Crawfurd there are four hundred of these heads
in one colonnade. Mr. Fergusson himself almost caps this, for he gives
us a drawing of a portion of the railing at Kinheri, which is quite
plentifully furnished with Avalokitishwaras. Plainly, Mr. Fergusson
attached little importance to the symbol, for sometimes, whether by
accident or design, he omits it even in the designs that he copies. Thus
Râm Râz and Mr. Fergusson both give the Vimâna of S’rî Rangam. That of
Râm Râz is capped with an arch of the S’ivan horse-shoe pattern, and a
very prominent Avalokitishwara. Mr. Fergusson omits it in his copy. He
omits, too, the two down-looking heads that Captain Seely gives in the
façade of the Indra Cave at Elora. Râm Râz was a Hindu gentleman in
government employment.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He wrote an able
work on Hindu architecture. Avalokitishwara grins on all the Vimânas and
Gopuras of his copious illustrations.

Another discovery that came to me at this time was that the serpent
symbolism dates in Buddhism from its great change of front. In earlier
Buddhism there was no serpent worship. This also is important. I will
take it up completely later on.

That a huge dome-shaped lump of bedrock like the Lingam of Karle should
be deemed a relic casket (Dhâtu garbha) by any native of India seems
impossible. What receptacle for relics has ever been discovered in any
one of them? And if any folks were specially opposed to such an idea it
would be the ministers of King Kanis’ka who were doing their utmost to
eliminate relic worship from Buddhism altogether. I have been carefully
through the narratives of the Buddhist travellers in India from China,
and I can nowhere find any hint of relic worship inside a cave. The
large halls of cave temples are always called "preaching halls," and the
Dâgoba, when it is mentioned, is plainly with them, as with all
Buddhists, a cairn out in the open. Thus Fa Hian, describing
Anuradapura, talks of the Sangharâma with a hall containing a figure of
Buddha in the middle. But the "stûpa," or cairn outside, seems specially
to attract his attention, "adorned with gold and silver, and every
precious substance." Dâgoba worship was necessarily out in the open, as
the early Buddhists were forbidden the shelter of a house.

Mr. Athol Forbes, in an article in the "Pall Mall Magazine," a short
time ago, assured us that there are over a thousand cave temples in
India, and almost all of them are crowded with lingams. Little Lingam
temples are built in groups, eight, sixteen, thirty-six, etc. The
Buddhist travellers speak of "tens of Deva temples."

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

Heeren believes that the evolution of Indian temples proceeded something
after this fashion:—First, cave excavations and work chiefly inside;
next, work outside as well, culminating in the attempt to detach the
fane from the mountain, as at Kailas in Elora, and the Raths of
Mahâbalipur; this suggested the art of building in the open.

Mr. Gwilt in his "[Cyclopædia](errata.htm#28) of Architecture," has much
the same idea. Humanity had three stages of progress. First the hunter,
who had no protection from the elements except his cave; secondly, the
shepherd, who had invented the tent; and thirdly the agriculturist, who
had learned to build in the open.

Mr. Gwilt quotes Pliny as asserting that the Egyptians from time
immemorial dwelt in caves. He holds that Egyptian architecture sprang
from cave temples.

"Everything points to its origin; its simplicity, not to say monotony;
its solidity, almost heaviness, form its principal characteristics. Then
the want of profile and the paucity of members, the small projection of
its mouldings, the absence of apertures, the enormous diameter of the
columns employed, much resembling the pillars left in quarrying for
supports, the pyramidal form of the doors, the omission of roofs and
pediments, the ignorance of the arch, all enable us to recur to the type
from which we have set out." He adds that "all the upper parts are
constructed without reference to anything but stone work."

It seems to me that from these two writers we get a right idea of the
rise of Indian architecture. Bala or S’iva at the date of the Rig Veda
lived in his cave, like the modern Aghora. By-and-by he made it into a
temple by judicious enlargement and decoration. Then he began to
ornament and shape the mountain

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

outside. Finally, he detached it and formed the large pyramidal Ratha of
Mahâbalipur.

Has not early Indian architecture all the characteristics detailed by
Mr. Gwilt, simplicity, monotony, heaviness, want of profile, small
projection of mouldings? From base to the very summit it is decorated
with stone carvings of the pattern that we might call Chinese card-case
ornamentation, a speciality learned probably in a cave temple, where
from want of height the ornament was never very far from the observer's
eye. And we all know that early Indian columns are usually enormous at
top and slender below, a topsy-turvy feature also learned in a cave
temple.

Râm Râz shows that when the Hindus began to build temples out in the
open, each temple consisted of two parts:—

\(1\) Of a magnificent pyramidal structure which seemed on the surface
to have no religious functions at all. It was called a "Gopura." Râm Râz
calls these gopuras "towers over the gateways of temples." He does not
seem to know of any uses which we would call distinctly religious.

\(2\) A very much smaller and very much less pretentious building was
erected for sacrifices, rites, etc., in old as well as modern times.
This was called the "Vimâna."

Do the titles of these structures throw any light on their origin?

Gopura, the "City of the Bull." S’iva is the great Bull—and his "City"
would be the same as the "Kailas" of Elora. It would be the Paradise of
his followers. The pyramid is one of his special symbols.

Vimâna. This word is applied to the moveable pavilion of drapery and
boards and tinsel which bears a special god in the processions. The god
of a Vimâna would plainly be much lower in rank and importance than the
Supreme God of the Gopura.

<span id="img_pl12"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 12.&lt;br&gt;
MADRAS GOPURA.](tn/pl12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl12.jpg)  
PLATE 12.  
MADRAS GOPURA.  
</span>

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

Can we draw up the evolution of the Gopura?

The Aghora dwelt in a natural cavern. But this by-and-by changed into a
temple, and when a rude observatory was required, to regulate
agriculture by the stars, the outside would be roughly raised up by
piling up stones; and a rude pyramid would be the convenient form.
Numbers of little yogi-cells are to be seen all over India of this
fashion; and the Egyptian pyramid was evolved somewhat in the same way.

But as time advanced, and rock chiselling had became an important
operation inside the temple, a bold thought came to the temple producer.
Instead of piling up a few rough stones to make a rude pyramid, why not
remove with a chisel the stone masses from the top? Why not change a
mountain into a Gopura?

But a second peculiarity, difficult at first to understand, is that this
Gopura is often found without any subordinate buildings near it; the
ornamental and apparently useless part of the Temple alone is set up.

We must remember that in the old days in India the favourite form of
religious expression was the pilgrimage. In the great epic, the
Mahâbhârata, there is no mention of temples. A sage says to Arjuna: "It
is the greatest mystery of the Rishis, O excellent son of Bharata. The
holy pilgrimage to the Tîrthas is more important than sacrifices to the
gods." The Tîrtha was the sacred <span id="fr_151"></span>[\*](#fn_150)
tank so necessary in pilgrimages.

Now this passage explains the solitary rock-detached pyramid, which
viewed by Mr. Fergusson's theories is quite inexplicable. Pilgrimages
meant money, and it came into the head of one set of priests to produce
an unexampled "Home of S’iva." They executed a pyramid of solid stone,
ornamented as richly as the temple interiors; and produced it
practically in the open. Round this could be set a tank,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

and the ordinary fripperies of the pilgrimages and processions. A
pilgrimage to such a building would eclipse all rivals, like the Kaâba
in the religion of Mahomet, which is also called the "Home of God."

Thus with a chisel was evolved the Gopura; and stone Vimânas were by and
by added.

In the year 1772, a gentleman named Chambers went from Madras to examine
some ruins at no great distance off; "ruins," he says, "hitherto little
observed." They were on the sea; and as he approached a fine pyramid
broke the sky line, a lofty pile used as "a guide to mariners." <span
id="fr_152"></span>[\*](#fn_151) By the pyramid were four other temples,
all rock detached and ornamented with sculptures, but the pyramid was
much higher than these. The place was called Mahvellipuram, the Tamulian
for Mahâbalipur, its old Sanskrit name, the second language having no
*h* in it and using *v* for *b*. Now the word Mahâbalipur is practically
the same word as describes the Gopura, S’iva's pyramid, the "City of
S’iva," the "City of the Bull." And the stone temples were called
"Rathas," which is a synonym for the word "Vimâna." Each describes the
carriage made of drapery and wood of a god at the festivals.

The City of Mahâbalipur was an amazing sight. The waves were gradually
eating it up. Mr. Chambers saw a fine temple half demolished by the sea;
and other buildings that no traveller now can see. The natives told him
that not long before the glitter of the metal on the spires of temples
could be seen a long way from the shore. They told him also that this
city was once the most famous city of the East, that some strange
cataclysm had visited it. He was also told that it had had from the most
ancient days another name, the "Seven Pagodas," which fact induced Mr.
Chambers to come to the conclusion that the Rathas had once been

<span id="img_pl13"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 13.&lt;br&gt;
THE PYRAMID, MAHÂBÂLIPUR.&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;From a
photograph&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/pl13.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl13.jpg)  
PLATE 13.  
THE PYRAMID, MAHÂBÂLIPUR.  
*From a photograph*.  
</span>

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

seven, and that two of them had been demolished by the advancing tide.

Mahâbalipur is the famous Maliarpha of Ptolemy. Whether it had anything
to do with the "Sheba," or "Tarshish," or "Pout," of the Egyptians and
Jews we have not space to inquire.

And now what is the date of this Gopura pyramid? Perhaps Mr. Fergusson
is right when he tells us confidently that it came into being 500 A.D.
On the other hand there are potentialities of distant ages that make us
tremble. With a chisel of four inches how long would it take to change a
range of rocky hills into a range of temples? Then, how long would it
take for a mighty city to rise up step by step, and to powerfully
influence the civilised world, under the wing of the God of the Gopura?
Then again, how long would it take the sea to destroy a large city? And
a more crucial question, how long would it take for the soft lapping
waves to reduce to sand and hide quite away two Rathas of solid rock?

I give a drawing of the Rathas done on the spot by that excellent artist
Daniell a hundred years ago. (See [Frontispiece](ipc00.htm#img_front)).
The taller pyramid from its position does not quite show how much taller
it is than its neighbours.

I also give by the same excellent artist a view of the Kailâs
rock-detached temples of Elora as seen from the top. ([Pl.
11](#img_pl11), page [147](#page_147)). The two viewed together bring
out some striking facts.

1\. Each is a group of minor buildings dominated by a great pyramid.

2\. These pyramids have practically the same name, the City of S’iva
(Mahâbalipur, Kailas, Gopura).

3\. The minor buildings have the same name Vimânas at Elora, Rathas at
Mahâbalipur, synonyms for processional god-carriages.

4\. In both cases we have a mountain changed into a group of temples by
the aid of a small chisel.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

5\. The tall pyramid had steps cut out that it might be used as an
observatory.

6\. It is plainly the parent, first of solid pyramids built up of small
stones; and when the arch had been discovered, of doorway pyramids
pierced with a small passage, like the huge traditional "Gopuras" of
Southern India.

But a more startling discovery is in reserve. It quite blows to the
winds Mr. Fergusson's theories.

Daniell's drawing of Kailâs is folio size; and from it I discovered a
strange fact not to be detected in any of Mr. Fergusson's drawings of
the same piles. The Kailâs piles are crowded with heads of
Avalokitishwara in little windows or archways. And if the photo of the
Mahâbalipur pyramid is viewed with a powerful magnifying glass, the same
fact emerges there. I enlarge

<span id="img_15600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Detail of the
temple at Mahabalipuram](tn/15600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15600.jpg)  
  
</span>

one of these heads from Daniell's drawing. Above is a second head,
Ganga, pouring down the Ganges on S’iva.

And on the point of history Mr. Fergusson breaks down. Râm Râz cites the
great poem of the Râmâyana

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

to show that Ayodhyâ was "adorned with arched gateways," and was "full
of buildings erected close to one another," and palaces with gardens
"like the celestial mansions which the Siddhas obtain through the
virtues of their austerity." <span id="fr_153"></span>[\*](#fn_152)

Then the S’iva-Buddha alliance did not last. By and by it changed from
admiration to fierce war, and S’ivan persecution. Huguenots flying from
a Dragonnade are not the sort of people who build a Nôtre Dame Cathedral
or an Egyptian pyramid. Van Heeren thinks that Elora must have taken
several centuries to complete, and Mr. Fergusson seems to have chosen
for its construction the very centuries when the fierce followers of
S’iva, Kumârilla Bhatta (A.D. 700), and Sankara Âchârya (750), were
spreading Hindustan with Buddhist blood.

Fa Hian, who visited the Dekhan about A. D. 400, found that the
Buddhists had long been chased away from those regions. Let us suppose
that they came back again A.D. 750, Fergusson's date, and commenced the
mighty works of Elora. Kumârilla Bhatta and Sankara Achârya would have
soon made the operations impossible. Supposing, on the other hand, that
they delayed the commencement until Mr. Fergusson's other date, A.D.
950. How could the few sparse Buddhists left in India find the money for
such a gigantic enterprise. Also, why did they build a temple with all
the distinctive features of the temples of their sanguinary persecutors?
"Sankara" is one of the names of S’iva. "Achârya" means "Teacher."

A practical question! If the structures of Mahâbalipur and Elora were
intended for the dormitories of monks, traces of this would be found in
them. Mr. Fergusson admits that this is not the case, but he says, that
they are all unfinished, except the "little Ratha" at Mahâbalipur. He
makes a further confession that

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

this has also no dormitories, but he says that in form it is a "mere
pansil" (hut of leaves and boughs of an ascetic in a jungle <span
id="fr_154"></span>[\*](#fn_153)). May not this be a solution of the
puzzle? The earliest stone structure in the open was suggested to the
Indians by pansils and tents.

The dormitory theory is the most weak part of Mr. Fergusson's case. Fa
Hian tells us that there were fifteen hundred dormitories in the
Sangharâma that he talks of. Now we learn from Heeren that at Elora
there is "a vast number of smaller grottoes," where priests can rest and
where, what seems most important, many thousands of pilgrims and
penitents can be put up. Remember that this Sangharâma was in the
Dekhan. Remember also that it was not a mere rock temple, but was
"constructed out of a great mountain of rock, hewn to the proper shape."
Where else in the Dekhan is a hint of these dormitories?

Sir Alexander Cunningham in his work the "Stûpa of Bharhut," gives a bas
relief representing some buildings of the period (B.C. 270). I reproduce
it here.

<span id="img_15800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Indian temple: the
Stûpa of Bharhut](tn/15800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/15800.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mr. Fergusson
calls it a round temple and part of a palace." Compare this with the
small Ratha of Mahâbalipur, as drawn by Daniell. Can we really believe
with Mr. Fergusson that a race which B.C. 270 could build thus in the
open would six hundred years after this waste half a century or so to
produce with a small chisel an edifice like the Mahâbalipur Pansil.

To sum up, in ancient India there were three main religions.

\(1\) The religion of S’iva, which dates from the Caveman, Mr. Gwilt's
first stage. The Aryans found this god flourishing in India as Ahi the
Serpent, Bala, the Lingam, etc. The Zend Avestha also takes note of him
as Shouru, who seduced some of the Eranians to heresies performed in his
cave. That cave was supplied with a number of dark recesses for the
impressive horrors of the S’ivan mystery, and vast halls for the Kailas
illuminations; the temple being made apparently to suit the worship and
the worship to suit the temple.

\(2\) The pastoral period of Mr. Gwilt. The Aryan shepherds crossed the
Hindu Kush and invaded India with their flocks and many gods. At the
date of Megasthenes their priests lived in the open. In the early epics
there are no temples.

\(3\) The early Buddhists—forbidden by the "Twelve Observances" to sleep
more than one night in one place, and forbidden the protection of a
roof. What good would a vast pile like Elora be to them? The monks could
not enter it. The same remark applies to the rock-detached Rathas of
Mahâbalipur. Whatever their design it could not have been dormitories
for folks who used no dormitories at all. Indeed, the great topes like
the Sanchi seem to accentuate the fact that the worship for which they
were designed was entirely open-air worship,—circumambulation round a
pathway between the great hemisphere of

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

earth and the richly carved stone railings. This purely open-air worship
was carried on even when kings, converted to S’iva-Buddhism, had seized
the S’iva rock temples.

Thus we find two distinct religions and two distinct architectural modes
of giving effect to them.

\(1\) The worship of a man (deified) by perambulation round his relics
in a cairn in the open.

\(2\) The worship of the Supreme God by an ancient and elaborate mystery
which required large halls, dark grottoes, deep gloom, flashes of light,
and Lingams composed of large lumps of bed-rock. There are more than a
thousand rock temples in India all plentifully furnished with Lingams.
Can we believe with Mr. Fergusson that these are all due to the
Buddhists, who in his view originated the pattern.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[143:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_142) Fergusson, "Hist.
Ind. Architecture," p. 337.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143:†](ipc12.htm#fr_143) Fergusson, "Hist.
Ind. Architecture," p. 326.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[145:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_144) Seely, "Elora" p.
101.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[147:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_145) "Buddhist Records,"
II., 217.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[148:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_146) "Elora," 175.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[148:†](ipc12.htm#fr_147) Beal, "Buddhist
Records," Vol. II., 217.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148:‡](ipc12.htm#fr_148) *Ibid*, Vol. I., p.
156.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[148:§](ipc12.htm#fr_149) Heeren, "Historical
Researches," Vol. II., p. 60.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[149:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_150) Seely, "Elora," page
203.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[153:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_151) "Mahab. Vanaparva,"
v. 4059.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[154:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_152) (See [Pl.
13](#img_pl13).) From a photograph given by Mr. Fergusson.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[157:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_153) Râm Râz,
"Architecture of the Hindus," p. 48.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[158:\*](ipc12.htm#fr_154) Fergusson, "Indian
Architecture," p. 230.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Essenes](ipc13)
