[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc21)  [Next](ipc23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

### CHAPTER XIX

#### DESCENT INTO HELL

<span class="small">New evidence—Five bas reliefs of the Amarâvatî
Tope—They illustrate Buddha's Descent into Hell—Details of Amarâvatî
Tope imitate details of an early tope—Tree Worship—Tree stem a
lingam—Cairn Worship—Cairn a lingam—Roman Catholics maintain that their
rites give the life of Jesus in epitome—Question examined—Not the life
of the Jesus of the first three gospels—A "willing victim"—Suffers at
night—Herod Antipas, the "King of the Jews"—An originality of Luke—Why
brought in—His dress the same as that of a Catholic Bishop—The "Amice"
the Hood-winking rag of the Freemasons—The spear thrust—Blood and
water—Baby New Year in Alexandria and Tibet—Covered with
flour—Tertullian on "Eleusinian dissipations."</span>

FROM Tibet and from Ceylon we have obtained evidence that there was in
S’iva Buddhism a sacrifice of the year-god of a S’ivan type. Is it
corroborated? On this point I have accidentally come across some very
startling matter and evidence, given by the sculptures of the Amarâvatî
Tope in the British Museum. I came upon this evidence only very
recently, but I do not regret the position it occupies in my little
work, as without these last three chapters its full importance would not
be made evident. It completely confirms all I have said about the
Tibetan Mystery of the "Sacrificial Body of the Dead Year," and also the
"Inebriating Festival of the Buddha"; for five bas-reliefs, which I
shall reproduce, represent that festival seriatim.

The large topes were developed from the sepulchral cairn; and have for
ornament a handsome railing

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

and four gateways all covered with bas-reliefs and stone emblems. The
Amarâvatî Tope stood on the banks of the Kistna in Guntoor. It is
believed to be the Dhanakacheka visited by the Chinese traveller, Hiouen
Thsiang. It is believed also to be the Temple erected on the "Golden
Sands" when the tooth of Buddha was brought back to India from Ceylon,
after many romantic adventures in which the Princess Hemachala figured
as a heroine. The celebrated Sanchi Tope and the Amarâvatî Tope, before
it was broken up, must have presented at a distance a similar
appearance. The dates of these Topes are very uncertain. Mr. Fergusson
fixes the four gateways of the great Tope at Sanchi "within the limits
of the first century A.D."; and Sir Alexander Cunningham—from 19 to 37
A.D.; but the last authority holds that the mound was set up as early as
500 B.C. The Amarâvatî Tope, in the view of Mr. Fergusson, might have
been erected any time between 200 and 300 A.D. One fact in my mind
throws it further back in the past than some folks suppose. Comparing
this tope with the Sanchi Tope, a monument of early Buddhism, I was
startled to find that the Amarâvatî Tope was of fell purpose constructed
to exhibit the rites and legends of a Second Buddhism that proposed to
supersede the first. It wore a masquerade dress borrowed from early
Buddhism, which points to an epoch when such disguise was necessary.

That Buddhism was Saint Worship. There were seven great Saints or
Buddhas. Each had his Saint's day like the Saints of the Roman Catholic
Church. The rites were simple as we have shown, and centred round the
Cairn where the relics of the Saint were deposited. Each had for symbol
a tree in the forest; and received his flowers, food offerings, and
adoration. This was the blameless Buddhist substitute for cannibalism
and bloody sacrifices. With these simple

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

rites the sculptors of both the Sanchi and the Amarâvatî Topes covered
slab after slab, holy men adoring trees and holy men adoring relic
cairns.

Now S’iva Buddhism sought to wreck this reform, and re-introduce
cannibalism and the bloody altar. And if you narrowly scrutinise the
Tree Worship of Amarâvatî (), you see that it is not real tree worship.
The tree is the Tavateinza Tree, already described, that has a stem of
silver. In other words, it is the worship of the Columnar Lingam of
S’iva.

A second plate () shows this very plainly. Here we get the worship of
this Columnar Lingam, and a few branches are put at the top to suggest
the Tavateinza Tree, the Tree of S’iva and his intoxication, the Soma
Tree (*Æsclapius acida*). There are five or six large slabs at Amarâvatî
exhibiting this worship of the Columnar Lingam. Mark, too, at the base
of the smaller Lingam in this plate, the Charan or impress of Buddha's
feet. Plainly, it has been cleverly converted into a grinning head of
Avalokitishvara, the balls of the feet are his everlasting eyes, and the
toes his terrible teeth.

In Chapter five I have already dealt with the dome-shaped lingam.
Ornamental models of it are everywhere at Amarâvatî. On them is usually
the five-headed Serpent; and often five Columnar Lingams, the five
Dhyâni Buddhas, are sculptured on the little dome and present the
appearance of the barrels of a cathedral organ. Why they are always five
is a puzzle. The five Indrayas (five senses), the five Bhûtas (five
material elements) have been suggested. Hodgson tells us that they are
at the base of every Mahâ Chaitya (Lingam Temple) in Nepal.

It is a very important gain if we can show that at the date of the
Amarâvatî Tope the story of the "Inebriating Festival of the Buddha "was
in the

<span id="img_pl26"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 26.&lt;br&gt;
WORSHIP OF THE SILVER TREE-STEM.](tn/pl26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl26.jpg)  
PLATE 26.  
WORSHIP OF THE SILVER TREE-STEM.  
</span>

<span id="img_pl27"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 27.&lt;br&gt;
LINGAM WORSHIP.](tn/pl27.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl27.jpg)  
PLATE 27.  
LINGAM WORSHIP.  
</span>

<span id="img_pl28"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 28.&lt;br&gt;
THREE SCENES IN THE INEBRIATING FESTIVAL.](tn/pl28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl28.jpg)  
PLATE 28.  
THREE SCENES IN THE INEBRIATING FESTIVAL.  
</span>

<span id="img_pl29"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 29.&lt;br&gt;
THE CUP.](tn/pl29.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl29.jpg)  
PLATE 29.  
THE CUP.  
</span>

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

ritual of the Buddhism on the mainland of Hindustan,—somewhere about 150
A.D.; and that it is depicted in ineffaceable characters on five slabs
of one of its temples. I commence with slab One (See bottom of [Pl.
28](#img_pl28)).

"On the left," says Mr. Fergusson, "a chief seated on a throne is
listening to the animated eloquence of a warrior who seems addressing a
youth seated cross-legged on the ground." The second, he thinks, shows
the King on an elephant with his army; the third the enemy fly without
striking a blow."

My interpretation is different. It seems to me that the man that Mr.
Fergusson takes to be an orator is about to strike off the head of the
young man by him with a weapon very like the Kukri of the Nepaulese, a
weapon that can sweep off a buffalo's head at one blow. The victim is
tied to a post. A darikhâna, with jewelled throne and costly cushions,
is hardly the place for a commonplace execution; and the young man is
handsome and calm. This suggests a willing victim, as was required in
the S’ivan mysteries. In fact, we have here the great Inebriating
Festival.

When Sakya Muni as Mâga went down to hell and cleared out those regions
of suffering, after the manner of Buddhas, the Nâgas became very drunk,
and they fled from the kingdom without striking a blow. (Slab 3). The
White Elephant in the second plate shows that their pursuer was Buddha
in person, and the mighty "Cup" on the fourth bas-relief (.) shows the
mixture of blood and spirit, the immortal drink. The framer of this
[weird](errata.htm#39) story of Buddha-Silenus thought to make it a
little less preposterous by announcing that Buddha himself only
pretended to drink. But he forgot that to take in Nâgas you must imitate
their favourite rites to the letter. The warm blood from a human victim
requires that that victim be slain on the spot. To avoid making Buddha

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

a toper he is made treacherous and an assassin. Mr. Fergusson thinks
that the vessel holding the drink that the assembled multitude is
calling for in their corybantic frenzy is Buddha's alms-bowl, but would
an alms bowl be as big as a sitz bath, and require five or six people to
hold it up?

In the fifth of these tablets ([Pl. 30](#img_pl30)) we have a startling
piece of corroborative evidence making plain that this group of
bas-reliefs really tells the story of Mâga. In the Cingalese Masque, the
Kolan Nattanawa, as translated by the Rev. John Calloway, a pyramid of
scantily clothed women supporting each other in the air is a prominent
factor. <span id="fr_304"></span>[\*](#fn_302)

Here is a similar pyramid, six women. The Cingalese group consisted of
five.

Matter declared that it was held in the old days that the word "Abrasax"
contained tremendous mysteries. The Roman Catholic priest with his
amice, his wafer, his bell, his ornamental bandages, professes to give
in epitome the whole story of Christ. This may be so but it is certainly
not that of the Jesus of the first three Gospels, but it may be that of
Abrasax.

To begin with, Jesus prayed that the "cup" might be passed away from
him, whereas the S’ivan Year-god was a willing victim. Jesus was
crucified in the daytime. Abrasax requires imposing tenebræ, the
"Paschal Candles," "New Fire." He suffers at night.

Commonplace occurrences may acquire in the process of time tremendous
meanings. The sun sinks into the sea in the evening. It rises again in
glory in the morning, having passed through, in that interval,
portentous and unknown terrors in the bowels of the earth. The ancients
believed it passed through hell. The story of Sita, the story of Ceres,
the story of

<span id="img_pl30"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 30.&lt;br&gt;
PYRAMID OF WOMEN.](tn/pl30.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl30.jpg)  
PLATE 30.  
PYRAMID OF WOMEN.  
</span>

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Buddha, all hinge
on this; and we saw that hell was also the theatre of the "Religious
King Devil" in Tibet. Deva Rajah, too, in Ceylon was in hell, and the
mighty darkness with which Buddha frightened his Nagâs, and the
miraculous flames that issued from the "carpet of skin" on which he sat,
can certainly claim cousinship with the tapers that are miraculously
lighted in Christ's sepulchre in Jerusalem, when the Patriarch of the
Holy City goes into it at Easter, and then brings them out as a prize
for his zealous but combatant congregation, who wrestle for them
wildly. <span id="fr_305"></span>[\*](#fn_303)

The death of the year-god by all ancient nations was fixed at the Spring
equinox. He died always on March 25th. This gives a much graver aspect
to the change of date introduced in the Fourth Gospel (John xix. 14).
From the three first gospels we learn that Jesus was upon the cross from
6 p.m. to 9 p.m. on Saturday. He ate the Passover with His disciples the
day before, and he appeared to James on the night of the Crucifixion.
This we learn from St. Jerome, who gives us a passage from the "Gospel
according to the Hebrews."

"The Lord, after giving his shroud to the servant of the High Priest,
went forth and appeared unto James. Now James, since he had drunk in the
cup of the Saviour, had made oath not to eat bread until he had seen him
risen from the dead. The Lord then said, 'Bring me a table and some
bread.' And when he had received that which he commanded he took the
bread and blessed it and brake it, and gave it to James saying, 'My
brother, eat this bread, because the Son of Man has risen from the
dead.'"

From this two facts emerge:—

\(1\) It confirms our contention that Jesus was a water-drinking
Nazarite, for James, who according

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

to Eusebius was a Nazarite, bound by solemn oath to abstain from wine
for life, could not have drunk out of the Lord's cup unless it was water
only.

\(2\) That he was crucified on the day after the Passover and not on the
day of the Passover, as John would make us believe.

Jesus is arrested by a vast "multitude armed with swords and staves."
They include the "chief priests, the captains of the Temple, and
Elders." They accuse him of calling himself the King of the Jews, and
hand him over to Pilate, who learning that this offence took place in
Galilee transfers Him to Herod Antipas. And now in the splendid palace
of the Tetrarch a strange scene occurs. Jesus is dressed up in royal
robes, and a white bandage blinds His eyes. Then all the soldiers of the
palace, headed by the sober Tetrarch himself (Luke xxiii. 2) indulge in
a sort of game of the "Blind Man's Buff" pattern. Individuals slyly
pinch and hit Him, and cry, "Prophesy unto us who is it that smote
thee"; and the farcical dressing up is carried into the solemn hall of
judgment of Pilate, the representative of the most powerful monarch in
the world. This officer, instead of severely punishing the soldiers for
their mistimed buffoonery, joins in the mirth; and sets up a burlesque
description on the Cross, although quite convinced of the innocence of
the accused. And the chief priests are found even there, mocking him and
"wagging their heads" (Matt. xxvii. 55). Ever since the arrest in
Gethsemane they seem to have been amongst the mob. The same must be
said, I think, of the "great company of women" that knew him in Galilee
(Luke xxiii. 49). They seem ever present; indeed, He halts on His last
fatal journey to preach to them, and even from the cross addresses an
exhortation to His mother, though the buffooneries of the chief priests
who were "wagging their heads"

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

there would have prevented her from hearing most of it.

Now do we get here sober history or a drama like the "Sacrificial Body
of the Dead Year." Is this Tertullian's "Mystery" of the Resurrection?
We see many characters dressed up—kings, chief priests, centurions,
soldiers, thieves, multitudes,—actors remaining on the stage when they
should be off it, and speaking set speeches in most unlikely places. And
also as in the "Sacrificial Body of the Dead Year" we see a crowd of
women, for according to Philo dancing and concerted song were prominent
features in the nocturnal feasts of the Therapeuts.

In the midst of all this hurly-burly one prominent fact emerges. The
"Christ" in the hall of Herod Antipas is not the historical Jesus. If it
were really true that Pilate had found that he had no jurisdiction, and
that he had handed over the prisoner to be judged by Antipas—the
judgment pronounced by that ruler would, of course, have been final, and
Jesus would have been at once released. But Strauss has shown that this
"Herod" is a phantom due to the genius of the not very honest "Luke."
Neither the first two gospels, nor the traditions that they drew from,
knew anything of, this "Herod," and the Fourth Gospel also ignores him.

And the puzzle, if probed at all, shows many new difficulties. Herod
Antipas, the "King of the Jews," is a creation of mere fiction, and yet
he is the keynote of the mystery. The dress that he wears, the dress
that he hands over to the sacramental "King of the Jews," is apparently
the same dress as the dress of the Roman Catholic bishop when performing
mass. A little official catechism, sold broadcast for two pence, at the
Roman Catholic libraries, tells us that the "alb," or white tunic that
descends to the feet of the priest, "represents the white garment that
Herod

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

put on our Lord." It tells us also that the "Chasuble" represents the
purple garment with which Jesus was clothed in derision as a mock king,
the "amice" is the white rag that blinded His eyes, the "girdle,
maniple, stole" are the cords that bound Him. The Eastern Church call
the circle of hair left on the monk's head after the tonsure the "Crown
of Thorns." Give to the bishop in addition to all this his pastoral
staff which is imperative when he performs mass, and we have—Herod
Antipas.

Now, premising that we have proved that the "Herod" of the Crucifixion
story is a creation of fiction, several questions crowd upon us. Why is
Herod Antipas dragged in at all? Why, too, is he dressed like a Catholic
Bishop? Is "Herod" God Almighty handing over His dress (divine powers)
to a mortal representative? If so, why is he placed in the camp of
Baal-zebub? Why is the "amice" (the most ignoble part of the story) so
highly prized? Has it any connection with the hood-winking rag of the
Freemasons, who indulge in Bacchantic horseplay whilst the postulant is
blinded?

All is a puzzle. To settle what was in the fourth Gospel at the date of
Valentinus and what has been added since seems hopeless. If the
proposition were presented for arbitration to—say an intelligent native
of Japan—he might hold doubts whether the Jews were dealing with an
evildoer who had earned the death penalty, or a man so blameless as to
be able to claim the "glorification" of personating the Year-god at
Easter.

"Take ye him and crucify him, for I find no fault in him" (John xix. 6).

This astounding *non-sequiter* of Pilate is capped by Caiaphas, who in
the first three Gospels wants to kill everybody who dares to read the
sacred books except in the most literal manner. In the Fourth

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gospel, however,
this cruel old bigot seems to have quite adopted the explaining away of
the Alexandrian Jews, and even their sacrifice of the Year-god.

"It is expedient for us that one man should die for the people" (John
xi. 50). And the reason he gives is still more strange. He wants to make
Israel into one camp. What camp? Plainly the camp of those who believed
in the Year-god Abrasax.

It is a curious fact to start with, that "Herod" and his dress, if it
were that of a Catholic Bishop, must have figured on the stage of a
Buddhist Mystery play quite two hundred years before A.D. 30, for the
French naturalist, Victor Jacquemont, who saw a Lâma performing a
"Buddhist mass" in Tibet, declares that his dress was exactly that of a
Roman Catholic Bishop in the same ceremony. And in the Tibetan play we
saw bishops, priests, acolytes all properly dressed, and a Pope under a
silken Baldachino.

Then the bell in a Buddhist country is a summons to gods to a feast, and
in Tibet the "Religious King Devil" sounds his directly he begins to
stab the "Sacrificial Body of the Dead Year." The Roman Catholic priest
also sounds his bell directly he begins to immolate the wafer, as a
summons to a feast. The body is already dead in Tibet, and there comes
from it red wine which is lifted high in the air in a "cup." To John's
Gospel has been added the account of a spear thrust delivered to the
dead Christ, from whom comes blood and water, an incident that cannot be
historical if the body were dead. But death by exhaustion, which is the
result of a crucifixion, is inappropriate if we want a "cup" full of the
fresh blood of the victim, for ceremonial purposes. This might be the
reason why the spear-thrust was added by John. As in Tibet the Catholic
priest lifts the cup into the air. It is sacramental "blood" and water,
for a drop of the last has been added to signify Christ's

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

mortal as well as His divine nature. Other points may or may not have
significance.

Herod and his host pursuing the little infant suggest the "corpse
devils" in Tibet, stabbing at the baby New-year with their spears.

Then the arrest is all unreal in John's Gospel. "Father, the hour is
come, glorify thy son," says Jesus, and He gives Himself up and seems to
desire the proceedings to be hurried along. Before Pilate He refuses to
plead, and in the Gospel of Nicodemus He declares that Moses and the
Prophets have foretold His passion and resurrection, and He speaks like
a fatalist.

One point more seems to have suggested a difficulty. Jesus in the three
first gospels rises up a full-grown man, but Abrasax, as his name
implies, is an infant when the New Year begins. That may explain the
invention of Simon of Cyrene. Valentinus declared that he perished
instead of Christ.

There is one point more. The Jesus of the first three Gospels had,
according to His disciples, a concise formulary.

"Repent and be baptised for the remission of sins" (Acts ii. 38).

The Christ of Valentinus had one equally short.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you" (John vi. 53).

Now the interpretation of this in the Roman Church is that all who fail
to drink the blood of Christ sacramentally every Easter will be punished
everlastingly in hell fire. No two schemes of perfection could be more
antagonistic. One sought to train the conscience of the individual by
making him dwell over his own short-comings. The other would have him
ponder not on his own sins, but on an arbitrary condemnation that he
might incur for neglecting a shameful savage rite. For one hundred
years, at least, the first was the only

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "remission of sin"
of the rising church. This is proved by the recently discovered Didache
which gives the words of the early eucharistic rite as used about the
year 130 A. D. The cup is called the "holy vine of David thy Servant."
There is nothing about the body and blood of Christ. The allusion is to
Psalm lxxx. 8, where Palestine is called a fruitful vineyard.

In Tibet the New Year, as we have seen, was a baby, and Buddha, under a
baldachino of satin like the pope in the old days of Rome, comes in
attended by priests and acolytes with orthodox chasubles, and albs, and
he protects the little infant with a coating of flour, or, as I suggest,
S’iva's white ash. Now one fact stands out in the troubled water of
early Christian controversy, and that is that some sects in Alexandria,
whether followers of Christ or Serapis is here unimportant, introduced a
baby covered with flour in their occult rites.

There is nothing about a descent into hell in the story of Jesus as read
in the first three Gospels, or even in the earliest version of the
Apostle's Creed. Again we can separate the Gnostic Christ from Jesus.
But without doubt Origen, Clement of Alexandria, Augustine, Cyril and
others believed in this descent, and even debated such horrible
questions as whether Jesus felt the torments of the flames, and whether
like Buddha he cleared out hell or only took away the orthodox.

In the old days in France on Rogation Sunday a great dragon went before
the Cross in the procession with a long tail filled with chaff. This
chaff represented the souls in hell. And the third day, for the festival
lasted three days, the tail was empty, "by which it was understood,"
says Hone, "that the first two days the devil reigned in the world, but
that on the third day he was dispossessed of his kingdom." <span
id="fr_306"></span>[\*](#fn_304)

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

This short interval in ancient days was depicted on the stage with the
most abominable and licentious orgies even in Christian churches. Smooth
apologists deny this, but we know historically that up to the
Reformation such scenes did occur in Christian edifices. Hone in his
"Mysteries" describes these "Bacchanalian and Calendary rites," monks
disguised as mummers, mummers disguised as monks, the Paternoster read
backwards, a donkey brought up to the Communion Table and a mock litany
pronounced with imitation of a donkey's braying, "demoniacal dances,"
"ballads borrowed from the streets and brothels."

The Therapeuts, according to Philo, represented Miriam and Moses on the
stage with elaborate part-singing and solemn dances, and the Buddhists
had their Inebriating Festival.

Philo, an initiate of the Religion of Serapis, living in Alexandria,
describes these "impure mysteries."

"Indecency approaches and insults the most holy temples." He tells us of
"devotees performing unhallowed sacrifices," "offering victims that
ought not to be offered." He talks of an "impure piety, a debauched
service." <span id="fr_307"></span>[\*](#fn_305)

The worship of Serapis reached Rome 146 A.D.; "but the Senate soon
found," says Jacobi ("Dictionnaire Mythologique") "its rites so
licentious that they were forced to forbid them."

Tertullian assails the "Eleusinian dissipations" of the followers of
Valentinus, who imitated the oaths of secrecy, the long initiations, the
reticences and pious falsehoods of their model.

"All the divinity lies in their secret recesses. There are revealed all
the aspirations of the fully initiated, the entire mystery of the sealed
tongue, the symbol of virility." <span id="fr_308"></span>[†](#fn_306)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_302"></span>[286:\*](ipc22.htm#fr_304) See page
[259](ipc19.htm#page_259).

<span id="fn_303"></span>[287:\*](ipc22.htm#fr_305) Picart, "Ceremonies,
etc.," III. p. 143.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[293:\*](ipc22.htm#fr_306) Hone, "Ancient
Mysteries described," p. 134.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[294:\*](ipc22.htm#fr_307) Philo. "Cain and his
birth," sect. 28.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[294:†](ipc22.htm#fr_308) Tertullian. "Adversus
Valent." cap, I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Glossary and Index](ipc23)
