[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo08)  [Next](flo10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE ADVENTURES OF THE BEGGAR'S SON.

When the Son of the Chan arrived as before at the cold Forest of Death,
he exclaimed with threatening gestures at the foot of the amiri-tree,
"Thou dead one, descend, or I will hew down the tree." Ssidi descended.
The son of Chan placed him in

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the sack, bound the sack fast with the rope, ate of his provender, and
journeyed forth with his burden. Then spake the dead one these words,
"Since we have a long journey before us, do you relate a pleasant story
by the way, or I will do so." But the Son of the Chan merely shook his
head without speaking a word. Whereupon Ssidi commenced the following
tale:—

"A long time ago there was a mighty Chan who was ruler over a country
full of market-places. At the source of the river which ran through it
there was an immense marsh, and in this marsh there dwelt two
crocodile-frogs, who would not allow the water to run out of the marsh.
And because there came no water over their fields, every year did both
the good and the bad have cause to mourn, until such times as a man had
been given to the frogs for the pests to devour. And at length the lot
fell upon the Chan himself to be an offering to them, and needful as he
was to the welfare of the kingdom, denial availed him not; therefore
father and son communed sorrowfully together, saying, 'Which of us two
shall go?'

"I am an old man," said the father, "and shall leave no one to lament
me. I will go, therefore. Do you remain here, my son, and reign
according as it is appointed."

"'O Tângâri,' exclaimed the son, 'verily this is not as it should be!
Thou hast brought me up with care, O my father! If the Chan and the wife

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of the Chan remain, what need is there of their son? I then will go, and
be as a feast for the frogs.'

"Thus spake he, and the people walked sorrowfully round about him, and
then betook themselves back again. Now the son of the Chan had for his
companion the son of a poor man, and he went to him and said, 'Walk ye
according to the will of your parents, and remain at home in peace and
safety. I am going, for the good of the kingdom, to serve as a sacrifice
to the frogs.' At these words the son of the poor man said, weeping and
lamenting, 'From my youth up, O Chan, thou hast carefully fostered me. I
will go with thee, and share thy fate."

"Then they both arose and went unto the frogs; and on the verge of the
marsh they heard the yellow frog and the blue frog conversing with one
another. And the frogs said, 'If the son of the Chan and his companion
did but know that if they only smote off our heads with the sword, and
the son of the Chan consumed me, the yellow frog, and the son of the
poor man consumed thee, the blue frog, they would both cast out from
their mouths gold and brass, then would the country be no longer
compelled to find food for frogs.'

"Now, because the son of the Chan understood all sorts of languages, he
comprehended the discourse of the frogs, and he and his companion smote
the heads of the frogs with their swords; and when they had devoured the
frogs, they threw out from

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

their mouths gold and brass at their heart's pleasure. Then said the
wanderers, 'The frogs are both slain—the course of the waters will be
hemmed in no more. Let us then turn back unto our own country.' But the
son of the Chan agreed not to this, and said, 'Let us not turn back into
our own country, lest they say they are become spirits; therefore it is
better that we journey further.'

"As they thereupon were walking over a mountain, they came to a tavern,
in which dwelt two women, beautiful to behold—mother and daughter. Then
said they, 'We would buy strong liquor that we might drink.' The women
replied, 'What have ye to give in exchange for strong liquor?' Thereupon
each of them threw forth gold and brass, and the women found pleasure
therein, admitted them into their dwelling, gave them liquor in
abundance, until they became stupid and slept, took from them what they
had, and then turned them out of doors.'

"Now when they awoke the son of the Chan and his companion travelled
along a river and arrived in a wood, where they found some children
quarrelling one with another. 'Wherefore,' inquired they, 'do you thus
dispute?'

"'We have,' said the children, 'found a cap in this wood, and every one
desires to possess it.' Of what use is the cap?'

"'The cap has this wonderful property, that whosoever places it on his
head can be seen neither

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

by the Tângâri, nor by men, nor by the Tschadkurrs' (evil spirits).

"'Now go all of ye to the end of the forest and run hither, and I will
in the meanwhile keep the cap, and give it to the first of you who
reaches me.'

"Thus spoke the son of the Chan; and the children ran, but they found
not the cap, for it was upon the head of the Chan. Even now it was
here,' said they, 'and now it is gone.' And after they had sought for
it, but without finding it, they went away weeping.

"And the son of the Chan and his companion travelled onwards, and at
last they came to a forest in which they found a body of Tschadkurrs
quarrelling one with another, and they said, 'Wherefore do ye thus
quarrel one with another?'

"'I,' exclaimed each of them, 'have made myself master of these boots.'

"'Of what use are these boots?' inquired the son of the Chan.

"'He who wears these boots,' replied the Tschadkurrs, 'is conveyed to
any country wherein he wishes himself.'

"'Now,' answered the son of the Chan, 'go all of you that way, and he
who first runs hither shall obtain the boots.'

"And the Tschadkurrs, when they heard these words, ran as they were
told; but the son of the Chan

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

had concealed the boots in the bosom of his companion, who had the cap
upon his head. And the Tschadkurrs saw the boots no more; they sought
them in vain, and went their way.

"And when they were gone, the prince and his companion drew on each of
them one of the boots, and they wished themselves near the place of
election in a Chan's kingdom. They wished their journey, laid themselves
down to sleep, and on their awaking in the morning they found themselves
in the hollow of a tree, right in the centre of the imperial place of
election. It was, moreover, a day for the assembling of the people, to
throw a Baling (a sacred figure of dough or paste) under the guidance of
the Tângâri. 'Upon whose head even the Baling falls, he shall be our
Chan.' Thus spake they as they threw it up; but the tree caught the
Baling of Destiny. 'What means this?' exclaimed they all with one
accord. 'Shall we have a tree for our Chan?'

"'Let us examine,' cried they one to another, 'whether the tree
concealeth any stranger.' And when they approached the tree the son of
the Chan and his companion stepped forth. But the people stood yet in
doubt, and said one to another thus, 'Whosoever ruleth over the people
of this land, this shall be decided to-morrow morning by what proceedeth
from their mouths.' And when they had thus spoken, they all took their
departure.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

"On the following morning some drank water, and what they threw from
their mouths was white; others ate grass, and what they threw from their
mouths was green. In short, one threw one thing, and another another
thing. But because the son of the Chan and his companion cast out from
their mouths gold and brass, the people cried, 'Let the one be Chan of
this people—let the other be his minister.' Thus were they nominated
Chan and minister! And the daughter of the former Chan was appointed the
wife of the new Chan.

"Now in the neighbourhood of the palace wherein the Chan dwelt was a
lofty building, whither the wife of the Chan betook herself every day.
'Wherefore,' thought the minister, 'does the wife of the Chan betake
herself to this spot every day?' Thus thinking, he placed the wonderful
cap upon his head, and followed the Chan's wife through the open doors,
up one step after another, up to the roof. Here the wife of the Chan
gathered together silken coverlets and pillows, made ready various
drinks and delicate meats, and burnt for their perfume tapers and
frankincense. The minister being concealed by his cap, which made him
invisible, seated himself by the side of the Chan's wife, and looked
around on every side.

"Shortly afterwards a beautiful bird swept through the sky. The wife of
the Chan received it with fragrance-giving tapers. The bird seated
itself

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

upon the roof and twittered with a pleasing voice; but out of the bird
came Solangdu, the Son of the Tângâri, whose beauty was incomparable,
and he laid himself on the silken coverlets and fed of the dainties
prepared for him. Then spake the son of the Tângâri, Thou hast passed
this morning with the husband whom thy fate has allotted to thee. What
thinkest thou of him?' The wife of the Chan answered, 'I know too little
of the prince to speak of his good qualities or his defects.' Thus
passed the day, and the wife of the Chan returned home again.

"On the following day the minister followed the wife of the Chan as he
had done before, and heard the son of the Tângâri say unto her,
'To-morrow I will come like a bird of Paradise to see thine husband.'
And the wife of the Chan said, 'Be it so.'

"The day passed over, and the minister said to the Chan, 'In yonder
palace lives Solangdu, the beauteous son of the Tângâri.' The minister
then related all that he had witnessed, and said, 'Tomorrow early the
son of the Tângâri will seek thee, disguised like a bird of Paradise. I
will seize the bird by the tail, and cast him into the fire; but you
must smite him in pieces with the sword.'

"On the following morning, the Chan and the wife of the Chan were seated
together, when the son of the Tângâri, transformed into a bird of

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Paradise, appeared
before them on the steps that led to the palace. The wife of the Chan
greeted the bird with looks expressive of pleasure, but the minister,
who had on his invisible-making cap, seized the bird suddenly by the
tail, and cast him into the fire. And the Chan smote at him violently
with his sword; but the wife of the Chan seized the hand of her husband,
so that only the wings of the bird were scorched. 'Alas, poor bird!'
exclaimed the wife of the Chan, as, half dead, it made its way, as well
as it could, through the air.

"On the next morning the wife of the Chan went as usual to the lofty
building, and this time, too, did the minister follow her. She collected
together, as usual, the silken pillows, but waited longer than she was
wont, and sat watching with staring eyes. At length the bird approached
with a very slow flight, and came down from the birdhouse covered with
blood and wounds, and the wife of the Chan wept at the sight. 'Weep
not,' said the son of the Tângâri; 'thine husband has a heavy hand. The
fire has so scorched me that I can never come more.'

"Thus spoke he, and the wife of the Chan replied, 'Do not say so, but
come as you are wont to do, at least come on the day of the full moon.'
Then the son of the Tângâri flew up to the sky again, and the wife of
the Chan began from that time to love her husband with her whole heart.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

"Then the minister placed his wonderful cap upon his head, and, drawing
near to a pagoda, he saw, through the crevice of the door, a man, who
spread out a figure of an ass, rolled himself over and over upon the
figure, thereupon took upon himself the form of an ass, and ran up and
down braying like one. Then he began rolling afresh, and appeared in his
human form. At last he folded up the paper, and placed it in the hand of
a burchan (a Calmuc idol). And when the man came out the minister went
in, procured the paper, and remembering the ill-treatment which he had
formerly received, he went to the mother and daughter who had sold him
the strong liquor, and said, with crafty words, 'I am come to you to
reward you for your good deeds.' With these words he gave the women
three pieces of gold; and the women asked him, saying, 'Thou art,
indeed, an honest man, but where did you procure so much gold?' Then the
minister answered, 'By merely rolling backwards and forwards over this
paper did I procure this gold.' On hearing these words, the women said,
'Grant us that we too may roll upon it.' And they did so, and were
changed into asses. And the minister brought the asses to the Chan, and
the Chan said, 'Let them be employed in carrying stones and earth.'

"Thus spake he, and for three years were these two asses compelled to
carry stones and earth; and

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

their backs were sore wounded, and covered with bruises. Then saw the
Chan their eyes filled with tears, and he said to the minister, 'Torment
the poor brutes no longer.'

"Thereupon they rolled upon the paper, and after they had done so they
were changed to two shrivelled women."

"Poor creatures!" exclaimed the Son of the Chan. Ssidi replied, "Ruler
of Destiny, thou hast spoken words: Ssarwala missdood jakzank!" Thus
spoke he, and flew out of the sack through the air.

And Ssidi's second relation treats of the adventures of the Poor Man's
Son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Adventures of Massang](flo10)
