[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo02)  [Next](flo04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### THE COBBLER ASTROLOGER.

Persian

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the great city of Isfahan lived Ahmed
the [cobbler](errata.htm#0), an honest and industrious man, whose wish
was to pass through life quietly; and he might have done so, had he not
married a handsome wife, who, although she had condescended to accept of
him as a husband, was far from being contented with his humble sphere of
life.

Sittâra, such was the name of Ahmed's wife, was ever forming foolish
schemes of riches and grandeur; and though Ahmed never encouraged them,
he was too fond a husband to quarrel with what gave her pleasure. An
incredulous smile or a shake of the head was his only answer to her
often-told day-dreams; and she continued to persuade herself that she
was certainly destined to great fortune.

It happened one evening, while in this temper of mind, that she went to
the Hemmâm, where she saw a lady retiring dressed in a magnificent robe,
covered with jewels, and surrounded by slaves. This was the very
condition Sittâra had always

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

longed for, and she eagerly inquired the name of the happy person who
had so many attendants and such fine jewels. She learned it was the wife
of the chief astrologer to the king. With this information she returned
home. Her husband met her at the door, but was received with a frown,
nor could all his caresses obtain a smile or a word; for several hours
she continued silent, and in apparent misery. At length she said—

"Cease your caresses, unless you are ready to give me a proof that you
do really and sincerely love me."

"What proof of love," exclaimed poor Ahmed, "can you desire which I will
not give?"

"Give over cobbling; it is a vile, low trade, and never yields more than
ten or twelve dinars a day. Turn astrologer! your fortune will be made,
and I shall have all I wish, and be happy."

"Astrologer!" cried Ahmed,—"astrologer! Have you forgotten who I am—a
cobbler, without any learning—that you want me to engage in a profession
which requires so much skill and knowledge?"

"I neither think nor care about your qualifications," said the enraged
wife; "all I know is, that if you do not turn astrologer immediately I
will be divorced from you to-morrow."

The cobbler remonstrated, but in vain. The figure of the astrologer's
wife, with her jewels and her slaves, had taken complete possession of
Sittâra's

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

imagination. All night it haunted her; she dreamt of nothing else, and
on awaking declared she would leave the house if her husband did not
comply with her wishes. What could poor Ahmed do? He was no astrologer,
but he was dotingly fond of his wife, and he could not bear the idea of
losing her. He promised to obey, and, having sold his little stock,
bought an astrolabe, an astronomical almanac, and a table of the twelve
signs of the zodiac. Furnished with these he went to the market-place,
crying, "I am an astrologer! I know the sun, and the moon, and the
stars, and the twelve signs of the zodiac; I can calculate nativities; I
can foretell everything that is to happen!"

No man was better known than Ahmed the cobbler. A crowd soon gathered
round him. "What! friend Ahmed," said one, "have you worked till your
head is turned?" "Are you tired of looking down at your last," cried
another, "that you are now looking up at the planets?" These and a
thousand other jokes assailed the ears of the poor cobbler, who,
notwithstanding, continued to exclaim that he was an astrologer, having
resolved on doing what he could to please his beautiful wife.

It so happened that the king's jeweller was passing by. He was in great
distress, having lost the richest ruby belonging to the crown. Every
search had been made to recover this inestimable jewel, but to no
purpose; and as the jeweller knew he

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

could no longer conceal its loss from the king, he looked forward to
death as inevitable. In this hopeless state, while wandering about the
town, he reached the crowd around Ahmed and asked what was the matter.
"Don't you know Ahmed the cobbler?" said one of the bystanders,
laughing; "he has been inspired, and is become an astrologer."

A drowning man will catch at a broken reed: the jeweller no sooner heard
the sound of the word astrologer, than he went up to Ahmed, told him
what had happened, and said, "If you understand your art, you must be
able to discover the king's ruby. Do so, and I will give you two hundred
pieces of gold. But if you do not succeed within six hours, I will use
all my influence at court to have you put to death as an impostor."

Poor Ahmed was thunderstruck. He stood long without being able to move
or speak, reflecting on his misfortunes, and grieving, above all, that
his wife, whom he so loved, had, by her envy and selfishness, brought
him to such a fearful alternative. Full of these sad thoughts, he
exclaimed aloud, "O woman, woman! thou art more baneful to the happiness
of man than the poisonous dragon of the desert!"

The lost ruby had been secreted by the jeweller's wife, who, disquieted
by those alarms which ever attend guilt, sent one of her female slaves
to watch her husband. This slave, on seeing her master

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

speak to the astrologer, drew near; and when she heard Ahmed, after some
moments of apparent abstraction, compare a woman to a poisonous dragon,
she was satisfied that he must know every- thing. She ran to her
mistress, and, breathless with fear, cried, "You are discovered, my dear
mistress, you are discovered by a vile astrologer. Before six hours are
past the whole story will be known, and you will become infamous, if you
are even so fortunate as to escape with life, unless you can find some
way of prevailing on him to be merciful." She then related what she had
seen and heard; and Ahmed's exclamation carried as complete conviction
to the mind of the terrified mistress as it had done to that of her
slave.

The jeweller's wife, hastily throwing on her veil, went in search of the
dreaded astrologer. When she found him, she threw herself at his feet,
crying, "Spare my honour and my life, and I will confess everything!"

"What can you have to confess to me?" exclaimed Ahmed in amazement. "Oh,
nothing! nothing with which you are not already acquainted. You know too
well that I stole the ruby from the king's crown. I did so to punish my
husband, who uses me most cruelly; and I thought by this means to obtain
riches for myself, and to have him put to death. But you, most wonderful
man, from whom nothing is hidden, have

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

discovered and defeated my wicked plan. I beg only for mercy, and will
do whatever you command me."

An angel from heaven could not have brought more consolation to Ahmed
than did the jeweller's wife. He assumed all the dignified solemnity
that became his new character, and said, "Woman! I know all thou hast
done, and it is fortunate for thee that thou hast come to confess thy
sin and beg for mercy before it was too late. Return to thy house, put
the ruby under the pillow of the couch on which thy husband sleeps; let
it be laid on the side furthest from the door; and be satisfied thy
guilt shall never be even suspected."

The jeweller's wife returned home, and did as she was desired. In an
hour Ahmed followed her, and told the jeweller he had made his
calculations, and found by the aspect of the sun and moon, and by the
configuration of the stars, that the ruby was at that moment lying under
the pillow of his couch, on the side furthest from the door. The
jeweller thought Ahmed must be crazy; but as a ray of hope is like a ray
from heaven to the wretched, he ran to his couch, and there, to his joy
and wonder, found the ruby in the very place described. He came back to
Ahmed, embraced him, called him his 1 dearest friend and the preserver
of his life, and gave him the two hundred pieces of gold, declaring that
he was the first astrologer of the age.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

These praises conveyed no joy to the poor cobbler, who returned home
more thankful to God for his preservation than elated by his good
fortune. The moment he entered the door his wife ran up to him and
exclaimed, "Well, my dear astrologer! what success?"

"There!" said Ahmed, very gravely,—"there are two hundred pieces of
gold. I hope you will be satisfied now, and not ask me again to hazard
my life, as I have done this morning." He then related all that had
passed. But the recital made a very different impression on the lady
from what these occurrences had made on Ahmed. Sittâra saw nothing but
the gold, which would enable her to vie with the chief astrologer's wife
at the Hemmâm. "Courage!" she said, "courage! my dearest husband. This
is only your first labour in your new and noble profession. Go on and
prosper, and we shall become rich and happy."

In vain Ahmed remonstrated and represented the danger; she burst into
tears, and accused him of not loving her, ending with her usual threat
of insisting upon a divorce.

Ahmed's heart melted, and he agreed to make another trial. Accordingly,
next morning he sallied forth with his astrolabe, his twelve signs of
the zodiac, and his almanac, exclaiming, as before, "I am an astrologer!
I know the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the twelve signs of the
zodiac; I

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

can calculate nativities; I can foretell everything that is to happen!"
A crowd again gathered round him, but it was now with wonder, and not
ridicule; for the story of the ruby had gone abroad, and the voice of
fame had converted the poor cobbler Ahmed into the ablest and most
learned astrologer that was ever seen at Isfahan.

While everybody was gazing at him, a lady passed by veiled. She was the
wife of one of the richest merchants in the city, and had just been at
the Hemmâm, where she had lost a valuable necklace and earrings. She was
now returning home in great alarm lest her husband should suspect her of
having given her jewels to a lover. Seeing the crowd around Ahmed, she
asked the reason of their assembling, and was informed of the whole
story of the famous astrologer: how he had been a cobbler, was inspired
with supernatural knowledge, and could, with the help of his astrolabe,
his twelve signs of the zodiac, and his almanac, discover all that ever
did or ever would happen in the world. The story of the jeweller and the
king's ruby was then told her, accompanied by a thousand wonderful
circumstances which had never occurred. The lady, quite satisfied of his
skill, went up to Ahmed and mentioned her loss, saying: "A man of your
knowledge and penetration will easily discover my jewels; find them, and
I will give you fifty pieces of gold."

The poor cobbler was quite confounded, and looked

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

down, thinking only how to escape without a public exposure of his
ignorance. The lady, in pressing through the crowd, had torn the lower
part of her veil. Ahmed's downcast eyes noticed this; and wishing to
inform her of it in a delicate manner, before it was observed by others,
he whispered to her, "Lady, look down at the rent." The lady's head was
full of her loss, and she was at that moment endeavouring to recollect
how it could have occurred. Ahmed's speech brought it at once to her
mind, and she exclaimed in delighted surprise: "Stay here a few moments,
thou great astrologer. I will return immediately with the reward thou so
well deservest." Saying this, she left him, and soon returned, carrying
in one hand the necklace and earrings, and in the other a purse with the
fifty pieces of gold. "There is gold for thee," she said, "thou
wonderful man, to whom all the secrets of Nature are revealed! I had
quite forgotten where I laid the jewels, and without thee should never
have found them. But when thou desiredst me to look at the rent below, I
instantly recollected the rent near the bottom of the wall in the
bathroom, where, before undressing, I had hid them. I can now go home in
peace and comfort; and it is all owing to thee, thou wisest of men!"

After these words she walked away, and Ahmed returned to his home,
thankful to Providence for his preservation, and fully resolved never
again to tempt it. His handsome wife, however, could not

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

yet rival the chief astrologer's lady in her appearance at the Hemmâm,
so she renewed her entreaties and threats, to make her fond husband
continue his career as an astrologer.

About this time it happened that the king's treasury was robbed of forty
chests of gold and jewels, forming the greater part of the wealth of the
kingdom. The high treasurer and other officers of state used all
diligence to find the thieves, but in vain. The king sent for his
astrologer, and declared that if the robbers were not detected by a
stated time, he, as well as the principal ministers, should be put to
death. Only one day of the short period given them remained. All their
search had proved fruitless, and the chief astrologer, who had made his
calculations and exhausted his art to no purpose, had quite resigned
himself to his fate, when one of his friends advised him to send for the
wonderful cobbler, who had become so famous for his extraordinary
discoveries. Two slaves were immediately despatched for Ahmed, whom they
commanded to go with them to their master. "You see the effects of your
ambition," said the poor cobbler to his wife; "I am going to my death.
The king's astrologer has heard of my presumption, and is determined to
have me executed as an impostor."

On entering the palace of the chief astrologer, he was surprised to see
that dignified person come forward to receive him, and lead him to the
seat of

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

honour, and not less so to hear himself thus addressed: "The ways of
Heaven, most learned and excellent Ahmed, are unsearchable. The high are
often cast down, and the low are lifted up. The whole world depends upon
fate and fortune. It is my turn now to be depressed by fate; it is thine
to be exalted by fortune."

His speech was here interrupted by a messenger from the king, who,
having heard of the cobbler's fame, desired his attendance. Poor Ahmed
now concluded that it was all over with him, and followed the king's
messenger, praying to God that he would deliver him from this peril.
When he came into the king's presence, he bent his body to the ground,
and wished his majesty long life and prosperity. "Tell me, Ahmed," said
the king, "who has stolen my treasure?"

"It was not one man," answered Ahmed, after some consideration; "there
were forty thieves concerned in the robbery."

"Very well," said the king; "but who were they? and what have they done
with my gold and jewels?"

"These questions," said Ahmed, "I cannot now answer; but I hope to
satisfy your Majesty, if you will grant me forty days to make my
calculations."

"I grant you forty days," said the king; "but when they are past, if my
treasure is not found, your life shall pay the forfeit."

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Ahmed returned to his house well pleased; for he resolved to take
advantage of the time allowed him to fly from a city where his fame was
likely to be his ruin.

"Well, Ahmed," said his wife, as he entered, "what news at Court?"

"No news at all," said he, "except that I am to be put to death at the
end of forty days, unless I find forty chests of gold and jewels which
have been stolen from the royal treasury."

"But you will discover the thieves."

"How? By what means am I to find them?"

"By the same art which discovered the ruby and the lady's necklace."

"The same art!" replied Ahmed. "Foolish woman! thou knowest that I have
no art, and that I have only pretended to it for the sake of pleasing
thee. But I have had sufficient skill to gain forty days, during which
time we may easily escape to some other city; and with the money I now
possess, and the aid of my former occupation, we may still obtain an
honest livelihood."

"An honest livelihood!" repeated his lady, with scorn. "Will thy
cobbling, thou mean, spiritless wretch, ever enable me to go to the
Hemmâm like the wife of the chief astrologer I Hear me, Ahmed! Think
only of discovering the king's treasure. Thou hast just as good a chance
of doing so as thou hadst of finding the ruby, and the necklace and
earrings.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At all events, I
am determined thou shalt not escape; and shouldst thou attempt to run
away, I will inform the king's officers, and have thee taken up and put
to death, even before the forty days are expired. Thou knowest me too
well, Ahmed, to doubt my keeping my word. So take courage, and endeavour
to make thy fortune, and to place me in that rank of life to which my
beauty entitles me."

The poor cobbler was dismayed at this speech; but knowing there was no
hope of changing his wife's resolution, he resigned himself to his fate.
"Well," said he, "your will shall be obeyed. All I desire is to pass the
few remaining days of my life as comfortably as I can. You know I am no
scholar, and have little skill in reckoning; so there are forty dates:
give me one of them every night after I have said my prayers, that I may
put them in a jar, and, by counting them may always see how many of the
few days I have to live are gone."

The lady, pleased at carrying her point, took the dates, and promised to
be punctual in doing what her husband desired.

Meanwhile the thieves who had stolen the king's treasure, having been
kept from leaving the city by fear of detection and pursuit, had
received accurate information of every measure taken to discover them.
One of them was among the crowd before the palace on the day the king
sent for Ahmed;

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

and hearing that the cobbler had immediately declared their exact
number, he ran in a fright to his comrades, and exclaimed, "We are all
found out! Ahmed, the new astrologer, has told the king that there are
forty of us."

"There needed no astrologer to tell that," said the captain of the gang.
"This Ahmed, with all his simple good-nature, is a shrewd fellow. Forty
chests having been stolen, he naturally guessed that there must be forty
thieves, and he has made a good hit, that is all; still it is prudent to
watch him, for he certainly has made some strange discoveries. One of us
must go to-night, after dark, to the terrace of this cobbler's house,
and listen to his conversation with his handsome wife; for he is said to
be very fond of her, and will, no doubt, tell her what success he has
had in his endeavours to detect us."

Everybody approved of this scheme; and soon after nightfall one of the
thieves repaired to the terrace. He arrived there just as the cobbler
had finished his evening prayers, and his wife was giving him the first
date. "Ah!" said Ahmed, as he took it, "there is one of the forty."

The thief, hearing these words, hastened in consternation to the gang,
and told them that the moment he took his post he had been perceived by
the supernatural knowledge of Ahmed, who immediately told his wife that
one of them was there.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The spy's tale was
not believed by his hardened companions; something was imputed to his
fears; he might have been mistaken;—in short, it was determined to send
two men the next night at the same hour. They reached the house just as
Ahmed, having finished his prayers, had received the second date, and
heard him exclaim, "My dear wife, to-night there are two of them!"

The astonished thieves fled, and told their still incredulous comrades
what they had heard. Three men were consequently sent the third night,
four the fourth, and so on. Being afraid of venturing during the day,
they always came as evening closed in, and just as Ahmed was receiving
his date, hence they all in turn heard him say that which convinced them
he was aware of their presence. On the last night they all went, and
Ahmed exclaimed aloud, "The number is complete! To-night the whole forty
are here!"

All doubts were now removed. It was impossible that Ahmed should have
discovered them by any natural means. How could he ascertain their exact
number? and night after night, without ever once being mistaken? He must
have learnt it by his skill in astrology. Even the captain now yielded,
in spite of his incredulity, and declared his opinion that it was
hopeless to elude a man thus gifted; he therefore advised that they
should make a friend of the cobbler, by confessing everything to him,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

and bribing him to secrecy by a share of the booty.

His advice was approved of, and an hour before dawn they knocked at
Ahmed's door. The poor man jumped out of bed, and supposing the soldiers
were come to lead him to execution, cried out, "Have patience! I know
what you are come for. It is a very unjust and wicked deed."

"Most wonderful man!" said the captain, as the door was opened, "we are
fully convinced that thou knowest why we are come, nor do we mean to
justify the action of which thou speakest. Here are two thousand pieces
of gold, which we will give thee, provided thou wilt swear to say
nothing more about the matter."

"Say nothing about it!" said Ahmed. "Do you think it possible I can
suffer such gross wrong and injustice without complaining, and making it
known to all the world?"

"Have mercy upon us!" exclaimed the thieves, falling on their knees;
"only spare our lives, and we will restore the royal treasure."

The cobbler started, rubbed his eyes to see if he were asleep or awake;
and being satisfied that he was awake, and that the men before him were
really the thieves, he assumed a solemn tone, and said: "Guilty men! ye
are persuaded that ye cannot escape from my penetration, which reaches
unto the sun and moon, and knows the position and aspect of

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

every star in the heavens. Your timely repentance has saved you. But ye
must immediately restore all that ye have stolen. Go straightway, and
carry the forty chests exactly as ye found them, and bury them a foot
deep under the southern wall of the old ruined Hemmâm, beyond the king's
palace. If ye do this punctually, your lives are spared; but if ye fail
in the slightest degree, destruction will fall upon you and your
families."

The thieves promised obedience to his commands and departed. Ahmed then
fell on his knees, and returned thanks to God for this signal mark of
his favour. About two hours after the royal guards came, and desired
Ahmed to follow them. He said he would attend them as soon as he had
taken leave of his wife, to whom he determined not to impart what had
occurred until he saw the result. He bade her farewell very
affectionately; she supported herself with great fortitude on this
trying occasion, exhorting her husband to be of good cheer, and said a
few words about the goodness of Providence. But the fact was, Sittâra
fancied that if God took the worthy cobbler to himself, her beauty might
attract some rich lover, who would enable her to go to the Hemmâm with
as much splendour as the astrologer's lady, whose image, adorned with
jewels and fine clothes, and surrounded by slaves, still haunted her
imagination.

The decrees of Heaven are just: a reward suited

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

to their merits awaited Ahmed and his wife. The good man stood with a
cheerful countenance before the king, who was impatient for his arrival,
and immediately said, "Ahmed, thy looks are promising; hast thou
discovered my treasure?"

"Does your Majesty require the thieves or the treasure? The stars will
only grant one or the other," said Ahmed, looking at his table of
astrological calculations. "Your Majesty must make your choice. I can
deliver up either, but not both."

"I should be sorry not to punish the thieves," answered the king; "but
if it must be so, I choose the treasure."

"And you give the thieves a full and free pardon?"

"I do, provided I find my treasure untouched."

"Then," said Ahmed, "if your majesty will follow me, the treasure shall
be restored to you."

The king and all his nobles followed the cobbler to the ruins of the old
Hemmâm. There, casting his eyes towards heaven, Ahmed muttered some
sounds, which were supposed by the spectators to be magical
conjurations, but which were in reality the prayers and thanksgivings of
a sincere and pious heart to God for his wonderful deliverance. When his
prayer was finished, he pointed to the southern wall, and requested that
his majesty would order his

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

attendants to dig there. The work was hardly begun, when the whole forty
chests were found in the same state as when stolen, with the treasurer's
seal upon them still unbroken.

The king's joy knew no bounds; he embraced Ahmed, and immediately
appointed him his chief astrologer, assigned to him an apartment in the
palace, and declared that he should marry his only daughter, as it was
his duty to promote the man whom God had so singularly favoured, and had
made instrumental in restoring the treasures of his kingdom. The young
princess, who was more beautiful than the moon, was not dissatisfied
with her father's choice; for her mind was stored with religion and
virtue, and she had learnt to value beyond all earthly qualities that
piety and learning which she believed Ahmed to possess. The royal will
was carried into execution as soon as formed. The wheel of fortune had
taken a complete turn. The morning had found Ahmed in a wretched hovel,
rising from a sorry bed, in the expectation of losing his life; in the
evening he was the lord of a rich palace, and married to the only
daughter of a powerful king. But this change did not alter his
character. As he had been meek and humble in adversity, he was modest
and gentle in prosperity. Conscious of his own ignorance, he continued
to ascribe his good fortune solely to the favour of Providence. He
became daily more attached to the beautiful and

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

virtuous princess whom he had married; and he could not help contrasting
her character with that of his former wife, whom he had ceased to love,
and of whose unreasonable and unfeeling vanity he was now fully
sensible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend of the Terrestrial Paradise of Sheddád, The Son Of
’A’d](flo04)
