[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo14)  [Next](flo16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE PAINTER AND THE WOOD-CARVER.

When the Son of the Chan had, as on all the former occasions, spoken the
words of threatening, placed the dead one in the sack, and journeyed
forth with him, Ssidi spake this time also as follows: 'The day is long,
and the distant journey will tire us: do you relate a tale unto me, or I
will relate one unto you." But the Son of the Chan shook his head
without saying a word, and Ssidi began as follows:—

"Many years ago there lived in the land of Gujassmunn a Chan, whose name
was Gunisschang. This Chan, however, died, and his son Chamuk Sakiktschi
was elected Chan in his place. Now there lived among the people of that
country a painter and a wood-carver, who bore similar names, and were
evilly disposed towards each other.

"Once upon a time the painter, Gunga, drew nigh unto the Chan, and said
unto him, 'Thy father hath been borne into the kingdom of the Tângâri,
and hath said unto me, "Come unto me!" Thither I went, and found thy
father in great power and

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

splendour; and I have brought for you this letter from him.' With these
words the painter delivered unto the Chan a forged letter, the contents
of which were as follows:—

"'This letter is addressed to my son Chamuk Sakiktschi.

"'When I departed this life, I was borne to the kingdom of the Tângâri.
An abundance of all things reigns in this land; but since I am desirous
of erecting a pagoda, and there are no wood-carvers to be found here, do
you despatch unto me Cunga, the wood-carver. The means by which he is to
reach this place he may learn from the painter.'

"After he had perused this letter, the Chan of Gujassmunn said, 'If my
father has really been carried into the realms of the Tângâri, that
would indeed be a good thing. Call hither the woodcarver?' The
wood-carver was called, and appeared before the Chan, and the Chan said
unto him, 'My father has been carried into the realms of the Tângâri. He
is desirous of erecting a pagoda, and because there are no wood-carvers
there he is desirous that you should be despatched unto him.'

"With these words the Chan displayed the forged letter, and when he had
read it, the wood-carver said unto himself, 'Of a surety Gunga, the
painter, has played me this trick; but I will try if I cannot overreach
him.'

"Thus thinking, he inquired of the painter, 'By

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

what means can I reach the kingdom of the Tângâri?'

"To these words the painter replied, 'When thou hast prepared all thy
tools and implements of trade, then place thyself upon a pile of fagots,
and when thou hast sung songs of rejoicing and set light to the pile of
fagots, thus wilt thou be able to reach the kingdom of the Tângâri.'
Thus spake he, and the seventh night from that time was appointed for
the carver's setting forth on his journey.

"When the wood-carver returned home unto his wife, he spake unto her
these words:—'The painter hath conceived wickedness in his mind against
me; yet I shall try means to overreach him.'

"Accordingly he secretly contrived a subterranean passage, which reached
from his own house into the middle of his field. Over the aperture in
the field he placed a large stone, covered the stone with earth, and
when the seventh night was come, the Chan said, 'This night let the
wood-carver draw nigh unto the Chan, my father.' Thereupon, agreeably to
the commands of the Chan, every one of the people brought out a handful
of the fat of the Gunsa (a beast). A huge fire was kindled, and the
wood-cutter, when he had sung the songs of rejoicing, escaped by the
covered way he had made back to his own house.

"Meanwhile the painter was greatly rejoiced, and pointed upwards with
his finger, and said, 'There

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

rideth the wood-carver up to heaven.' All who had been present, too,
betook themselves home, thinking in their hearts, 'The wood-carver is
dead, and gone up above to the Chan.'

"The wood-carver remained concealed at home a whole month, and allowed
no man to set eyes upon him, but washed his head in milk every day, and
kept himself always in the shade. After that he put on a garment of
white silk, and wrote a letter, in which stood the following words:—

"'This letter is addressed to my son Chamuk Sakiktschi. That thou rulest
the kingdom in peace; it is very good. Since thy wood-carver has
completed his work, it is needful that he should be rewarded according
to his deserts. Since, moreover, for the decoration of the pagoda, many
coloured paintings are necessary, send unto me the painter, as thou hast
already sent this man.'

"The wood-carver then drew nigh unto the Chan with this letter. 'What!'
cried the Chan, 'art thou returned from the kingdom of the Tângâri?' The
wood-carver handed the letter unto him, and said, 'I have, indeed, been
in the kingdom of the Tângâri, and from it I am returned home again.'

"The Chan was greatly rejoiced when he heard this, and rewarded the
wood-carver with costly presents. 'Because the painter is now required,'
said the Chan, 'for the painting of the pagoda, let him now be called
before me.'

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

"The painter drew nigh accordingly, and when he saw the wood-carver,
fair, and in white-shining robes, and decorated with gifts, he said unto
himself, Then he is not dead!' And the Chan handed over to the painter
the forged letter, with the seal thereto, and said, 'Thou must go now.'

"And when the seventh night from that time arrived, the people came
forward as before with a contribution of the fat of the Gunsa; and in
the midst of the field a pile of fagots was kindled. The painter seated
himself in the midst of the fire, with his materials for painting, and a
letter and gifts of honour for the Chan Gunisschang, and sang songs of
rejoicing; and as the fire kept growing more and more intolerable, he
lifted up his voice and uttered piercing cries; but the noise of the
instruments overpowered his voice, and at length the fire consumed him."

"He was properly rewarded!" exclaimed the Son of the Chan.

"Ruler of Destiny, thou hast spoken words! Ssarwala missdood jakzang!"
Thus spake Ssidi, and burst from the sack through the air.

Thus Ssidi's eighth relation treats of the Painter and the Wood-carver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Stealing of the Heart](flo16)
