[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo22)  [Next](flo24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED.

Arabian?

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> was a man, of those possessed of
houses and riches, who had wealth and servants and slaves and other
possessions; and he departed from the world to receive the mercy of God
(whose name be exalted!), leaving a young son. And when the son grew up,
he took to eating and drinking, and the hearing of instruments of music
and songs, and was liberal and gave gifts, and expended the riches that
his father had left to him until all the wealth had gone. He then betook
himself to the sale of the male black slaves, and the female slaves, and
other possessions, and expended all that he had of his father's wealth
and other things, and became so poor that he worked with the labourers.
In this state he remained for a period of years. While he was sitting
one day beneath a wall, waiting to see who would hire him, lo! a man of
comely countenance and apparel drew near to him and saluted him. So the
youth said to him, "O uncle, hast thou known me before now?" The man
answered him, "I have not known thee, O my son, at all;

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

but I see the traces of affluence upon thee, though thou art in this
condition." The young man replied, "O uncle, what fate and destiny have
ordained hath come to pass. But hast thou, O uncle, O comely-faced, any
business in which to employ me?" The man said to him, "O my son, I
desire to employ thee in an easy business." The youth asked, "And what
is it, O uncle?" And the man answered him, "I have with me ten sheykhs
in one abode, and we have no one to perform our wants. Thou shalt
receive from us, of food and clothing, what will suffice thee, and shalt
serve us, and thou shalt receive of us thy portion of benefits and
money. Perhaps, also, God will restore to thee thine affluence by our
means." The youth therefore replied, "I hear and obey." The sheykh then
said to him, "I have a condition to impose upon thee." "And what is thy
condition, O uncle?" asked the youth. He answered him, "O my son, it is
that thou keep our secret with respect to the things that thou shalt see
us do; and when thou seest us weep, that thou ask us not respecting the
cause of our weeping." And the young man replied, "Well, O uncle."

So the sheykh said to him, "O my son, come with us, relying on the
blessing of God (whose name be exalted!)." And the young man followed
the sheykh until the latter conducted him to the bath; after which he
sent a man, who brought him

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

a comely garment of linen, and he clad him with it, and went with him to
his abode and his associates. And when the young man entered, he found
it to be a high mansion, with lofty angles, ample, with chambers facing
one another, and saloons; and in each saloon was a fountain of water,
and birds were warbling over it, and there were windows overlooking, on
every side, a beautiful garden within the mansion. The sheykh conducted
him into one of the chambers, and he found it decorated with coloured
marbles, and its ceiling ornamented with blue and brilliant gold, and it
was spread with carpets of silk; and he found in it ten sheykhs sitting
facing one another, wearing the garments of mourning, weeping, and
wailing. So the young man wondered at their case, and was about to
question the sheykh who had brought him, but he remembered the
condition, and therefore withheld his tongue. Then the sheykh committed
to the young man a chest containing thirty thousand pieces of gold,
saying to him, "O my son, expend upon us out of this chest, and upon
thyself, according to what is just, and be thou faithful, and take care
of that wherewith I have intrusted thee." And the young man replied, "I
hear and obey." He continued to expend upon them for a period of days
and nights, after which one of them died; whereupon his companions took
him, and washed him and shrouded him, and buried him in a garden behind
the mansion. And death

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

ceased not to take of them one after another, until there remained only
the sheykh who had hired the young man. So he remained with the young
man in that mansion, and there was not with them a third; and they
remained thus for a period of years. Then the sheykh fell sick; and when
the young man despaired of his life, he addressed him with courtesy, and
was grieved for him, and said to him, "O uncle, I have served you, and
not failed in your service one hour for a period of twelve years, but
have acted faithfully to you, and served you according to my power and
ability." The sheykh replied, "Yes, O my son, thou hast served us until
these sheykhs have been taken unto God (to whom be ascribed might and
glory!), and we must inevitably die." And the young man said, "O my
master, thou art in a state of peril, and I desire of thee that thou
inform me what hath been the cause of your weeping, and the continuance
of your wailing and your mourning and your sorrow." He replied, "O my
son, thou hast no concern with that, and require me not to do what I am
unable; for I have begged God (whose name be exalted!) not to afflict
any one with my affliction. Now if thou desire to be safe from that into
which we have fallen, open not that door," and he pointed to it with his
hand, and cautioned him against it; "and if thou desire that what hath
befallen us should befall thee, open it, and thou wilt know the cause of
that which thou

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

hast beheld in our conduct; but thou wilt repent, when repentance will
not avail thee." Then the illness increased upon the sheykh, and he
died; and the young man washed him with his own hands, and shrouded him,
and buried him by his companions.

He remained in that place, possessing it and all the treasure; but
notwithstanding this, he was uneasy, reflecting upon the conduct of the
sheykhs. And while he was meditating one day upon the words of the
sheykh, and his charge to him not to open the door, it occurred to his
mind that he might look at it. So he went in that direction, and
searched until he saw an elegant door, over which the spider had woven
its webs, and upon it were four locks of steel. When he beheld it, he
remembered how the sheykh had cautioned him, and he departed from it.
His soul desired him to open the door, and he restrained it during a
period of seven days; but on the eighth day his soul overcame him, and
he said, "I must open that door, and see what will happen to me in
consequence; for nothing will repel what God (whose name be exalted!)
decreeth and predestineth, and no event will happen but by His will."
Accordingly he arose and opened the door, after he had broken the locks.
And when he had opened the door he saw a narrow passage, along which he
walked for the space of three hours; and lo! he came forth upon the bank

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

of a great river. At this the young man wondered. And he walked along
the bank, looking to the right and left; and behold! a great eagle
descended from the sky, and taking up the young man with its talons, it
flew with him, between heaven and earth, until it conveyed him to an
island in the midst of the sea. There it threw him down, and departed
from him.

So the young man was perplexed at his case, not knowing whither to go;
but while he was sitting one day, lo! the sail of a vessel appeared to
him upon the sea, like the star in the sky; wherefore the heart of the
young man became intent upon the vessel, in the hope that his escape
might be effected in it. He continued looking at it until it came near
unto him; and when it arrived, he beheld a bark of ivory and ebony, the
oars of which were of sandal-wood and aloes-wood, and the whole of it
was encased with plates of brilliant gold. There were also in it ten
damsels, virgins, like moons. When the damsels saw him, they landed to
him from the bark, and kissed his hands, saying to him, "Thou art the
king, the bridegroom." Then there advanced to him a damsel who was like
the shining sun in the clear sky, having in her hand a kerchief of silk,
in which were a royal robe, and a crown of gold set with varieties of
jacinths. Having advanced to him, she clad him and crowned him; after
which the damsels carried him in their arms

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

to the bark, and he found in it varieties of carpets of silk of divers
colours. They then spread the sails, and proceeded over the depths of
the sea.

"Now when I proceeded with them," says the young man, "I felt sure that
this was a dream, and knew not whither they were going with me. And when
they came in sight of the land, I beheld it filled with troops, the
number of which none knew but God (whose perfection be extolled, and
whose name be exalted!) clad in coats of mail. They brought forward to
me five marked horses, with saddles of gold, set with varieties of
pearls and precious stones; and I took a horse from among these and
mounted it. The four others proceeded with me; and when I mounted, the
ensigns and banners were set up over my head, the drums and the cymbals
were beaten, and the troops disposed themselves in two divisions, right
and left. I wavered in opinion as to whether I were asleep or awake, and
ceased not to advance, not believing in the reality of my stately
procession, but imagining that it was the result of confused dreams,
until we came in sight of a verdant meadow, in which were palaces and
gardens, and trees and rivers and flowers, and birds proclaiming the
perfection of God, the One, the Omnipotent. And now there came forth an
army from among those palaces and gardens, like the torrent when it
poureth down, until it filled the meadow. When the troops drew

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

near to me, they hailed, and lo! a king advanced from among them, riding
alone, preceded by some of his chief officers walking."

The king, on approaching the young man, alighted from his courser; and
the young man, seeing him do so, alighted also; and they saluted each
other with the most courteous salutation. Then they mounted their horses
again, and the king said to the young man, "Accompany us; for thou art
my guest." So the young man proceeded with him, and they conversed
together, while the stately trains in orderly disposition went on before
them to the palace of the king, where they alighted, and all of them
entered, together with the king and the young man, the young man's hand
being in the hand of the king, who thereupon seated him on the throne of
gold and seated himself beside him. When the king removed the litham
from his face, lo! this supposed king was a damsel, like the shining sun
in the clear sky, a lady of beauty and loveliness, and elegance and
perfection, and conceit and amorous dissimulation. The young man beheld
vast affluence and great prosperity, and wondered at the beauty and
loveliness of the damsel. Then the damsel said to him, "Know, O king,
that I am the queen of this land, and all these troops that thou hast
seen, including every one, whether of cavalry or infantry, are women.
There are not among them any men. The men among us, in this land, till
and sow and

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

reap, employing themselves in the cultivation of the land, and the
building and repairing of the towns, and in attending to the affairs of
the people, by the pursuit of every kind of art and trade; but as to the
women, they are the governors and magistrates and soldiers." And the
young man wondered at this extremely. And while they were thus
conversing, the vizier entered; and lo! she was a grey-haired old woman,
having a numerous retinue, of venerable and dignified appearance; and
the queen said to her, "Bring to us the Kádee and the witnesses." So the
old woman went for that purpose. And the queen turned towards the young
man, conversing with him and cheering him, and dispelling his fear by
kind words; and, addressing him courteously, she said to him, "Art thou
content for me to be thy wife?" And thereupon he arose and kissed the
ground before her; but she forbade him; and he replied, "O my mistress,
I am less than the servants who serve thee." She then said to him,
"Seest thou not these servants and soldiers and wealth and treasures and
hoards?" He answered her, "Yes." And she said to him, "All these are at
thy disposal; thou shalt make use of them, and give and bestow as
seemeth fit to thee." Then she pointed to a closed door, and said to
him, "All these things thou shalt dispose of; but this door thou shalt
not open; for if thou open it, thou wilt repent, when repentance will
not avail thee." Her words were not

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

ended when the vizier, with the Kádee and the witnesses, entered, and
all of them were old women, with their hair spreading over their
shoulders, and of venerable and dignified appearance. When they came
before the queen, she ordered them to perform the ceremony of the
marriage-contract. So they married her to the young man. And she
prepared the banquets and collected the troops; and when they had eaten
and drunk, the young man took her as his wife. And he resided with her
seven years, passing the most delightful, comfortable, and agreeable
life.

But he meditated one day upon opening the door, and said, "Were it not
that there are within it great treasures, better than what I have seen,
she had not prohibited me from opening it." He then arose and opened the
door, and lo! within it was the bird that had carried him from the shore
of the great river, and deposited him upon the island. When the bird
beheld him, it said to him, "No welcome to a face that will never be
happy!" So, when he saw it and heard its words, he fled from it; but it
followed him and carried him off, and flew with him between heaven and
earth for the space of an hour, and at length deposited him in the place
from which it had carried him away; after which it disappeared. He
thereupon sat in that place, and, returning to his reason, he reflected
upon what he had seen of affluence and glory and honour, and the

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

riding of the troops before him, and commanding and forbidding; and he
wept and wailed. He remained upon the shore of the great river, where
that bird had put him, for the space of two months, wishing that he
might return to his wife; but while he was one night awake, mourning and
meditating, some one spoke (and he heard his voice, but saw not his
person), calling out, "How great were the delights! Far, far from thee
is the return of what is passed! And how many therefore will be the
sighs!" Co when the young man heard it, he despaired of meeting again
that queen, and of the return to him of the affluence in which he had
been living. He then entered the mansion where the sheykhs had resided,
and knew that they had experienced the like of that which had happened
unto him, and that this was the cause of their weeping and their
mourning; wherefore he excused them. Grief and anxiety came upon the
young man, and he entered his chamber, and ceased not to weep and moan,
relinquishing food and drink and pleasant scents and laughter, until he
died; and he was buried by the side of the sheykhs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fox and the Wolf](flo24)
