[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo20)  [Next](flo22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

### THE TRAVELLER'S ADVENTURE.

Arabian?

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is related that a man, mounted upon a
camel, in the course of travelling arrived at a place where others from
the same caravan had lighted a fire before proceeding on their journey.
The fan-like wind, breathing on the embers, had produced a flame; and
the sparks, flying over the jungle, the dry wood had become ignited, and
the whole plain glowed like a bed of tulips.

In the midst of this was an enormous snake, which, encircled by the
flames, possessed no means of escape, and was about to be broiled like a
fish, or kabobed like a partridge for the table. Blood oozed from its
poison-charged eyes; and, seeing the man and the camel, it thus
supplicated for assistance—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"What if in kindness thou vouchsafe me thy pity;  
 Loosen the knot with which my affairs are entangled."</span>

</div>

Now the traveller was a good man, and one who feared God. When he heard
the complaint of the snake, and saw its pitiable condition, he reasoned
thus with himself: "This snake is, indeed, the

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

enemy of man, but being in trouble and perplexity, it would be most
commendable in me to drop the seed of compassion, the fruit of which is
prosperity in this world, and exaltation in the next." Thus convinced,
he fastened one of his saddle-bags to the end of his spear, and extended
it to the snake, which, delighted at escape, entered the bag, and was
rescued from the flames. The man then opening the mouth of the bag,
addressed it thus: "Depart whither thou wilt, but forget not to offer up
thanksgiving for thy preservation; henceforth seek the corner of
retirement, and cease to afflict mankind, for they who do so are
dishonest in this world and the next

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Fear God—distress no one;  
This indeed is true salvation."</span>

</div>

The snake replied, "O young man, hold thy peace, for truly I will not
depart until I have wounded both thee and this camel."

The man cried out, "But how is this? Have I not rendered thee a benefit?
Why, then, is such to be my recompense?

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">On my part there was faithfulness,  
Why then this injustice upon thine?"</span>

</div>

The snake said, "True, thou hast shown mercy, but it was to an unworthy
object; thou knowest me to be an agent of injury to mankind,
consequently, when thou savedst me from destruction,

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

thou subjectedst thyself to the same rule that applies to the punishment
due for an evil act committed against a worthy object.

"Again, between the snake and man there is a long-standing enmity, and
they who employ foresight hold it as a maxim of wisdom to bruise the
head of an enemy; to thy security my destruction was necessary, but, in
showing mercy, thou hast forfeited vigilance. It is now necessary that I
should wound thee, that others may learn by thy example."

The man cried, "O snake, call but in the counsel of justice; in what
creed is it written, or what practice declares, that evil should be
returned for good, or that the pleasure of conferring benefits should be
returned by injury and affliction?"

The snake replied, "Such is the practice amongst men. I act according to
thy own decree; the same commodity of retribution I have purchased from
thee I also sell.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Buy for one moment that which thou sell’st for
years."</span>

</div>

In vain did the traveller entreat, the snake ever replying, "I do but
treat thee after the manner of men." This the man denied. "But," said
he, "let us call witnesses: if thou prove thy assertion, I will yield to
thy will." The snake, looking round, saw a cow grazing at a distance,
and said, "Come, we will ask this cow the rights of the question." When

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

they came up to the cow, the snake, opening its mouth, said, "O cow,
what is the recompense for benefits received?"

The cow said, "If thou ask me after the manner of men, the return of
good is always evil. For instance, I was for a long time in the service
of a farmer; yearly I brought forth a calf; I supplied his house with
milk and ghee; his sustenance, and the life of his children, depended
upon me. When I became old, and no longer produced young, he ceased to
shelter me, and thrust me forth to die in a jungle. After finding
forage, and roaming at my ease, I grew fat, and my old master, seeing my
plump condition, yesterday brought with him a butcher, to whom he has
sold me, and to-day is appointed for my slaughter."

The snake said, "Thou hast heard the cow; prepare to die quickly." The
man cried, "It is not lawful to decide a case on the evidence of one
witness, let us then call another." The snake looked about and saw a
tree, leafless and bare, flinging up its wild branches to the sky. "Let
us," said it, "appeal to this tree." They proceeded together to the
tree; and the snake, opening its mouth, said, "O tree, what is the
recompense for good?"

The tree said, "Amongst men, for benefits are returned evil and injury.
I will give you a proof of what I assert. I am a tree which, though
growing on one leg in this sad waste, was once flourishing

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and green, performing service to every one. When any of the human race,
overcome with heat and travel, came this way, they rested beneath my
shade, and slept beneath my branches; when the weight of repose
abandoned their eyelids, they cast up their eyes to me, and said to each
other, 'Yon twig would do well for an arrow; that branch would serve for
a plough; and from the trunk of this tree what beautiful planks might be
made!' If they had an axe or a saw, they selected my branches, and
carried them away. Thus they to whom I gave ease and rest rewarded me
only with pain and affliction.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Whilst my care overshadows him in perplexity,  
He meditates only how best to root me up."</span>

</div>

"Well," said the snake, "here are two witnesses; therefore, form thy
resolution, for I must wound thee." The man said, "True; but the love of
life is powerful, and while strength remains, it is difficult to root
the love of it from the heart. Call but one more witness, and then I
pledge myself to submit to his decree." Now it so wonderfully happened
that a fox, who had been standing by, had heard all the argument, and
now came forward. The snake on seeing it exclaimed, "Behold this fox,
let us ask it." But before the man could speak the fox cried out, "Dost
thou not know that the recompense for good is always evil? But what good
hast thou done in behalf of this snake, to render thee worthy

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

of punishment?" The man related his story. The fox replied, "Thou
seemest an intelligent person, why then dost thou tell me an untruth?

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">How can it be proper for him that is wise to speak
falsely?  
How can it become an intelligent man to state an untruth?"</span>

</div>

The snake said, "The man speaks truly, for behold the bag in which he
rescued me." The fox, putting on the garb of astonishment, said, "How
can I believe this thing? How could a large snake such as thou be
contained in so small a space?" The snake said, "If thou doubt me, I
will again enter the bag to prove it." The fox said, "Truly if I saw
thee there, I could believe it, and afterwards settle the dispute
between thee and this man." On this the traveller opened the bag, and
the snake, annoyed at the disbelief of the fox, entered it; which
observing, the fox cried out, "O young man, when thou hast caught thine
enemy, show him no quarter.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">When an enemy is vanquished, and in thy power,  
It is the maxim of the wise to show him no mercy."</span>

</div>

The traveller took the hint of the fox, fastened the mouth of the bag,
and, dashing it against a stone, destroyed the snake, and thus saved
mankind from the evil effects of its wicked propensities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seven Stages of Roostem](flo22)
