[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joh)  [Next](rom) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Acts

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The former treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Until the day in which he was taken up,
after that he through the Holy Spirit had given commandments to the
apostles whom he had chosen:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To whom also he showed himself alive after
his passion, by many infallible proofs, being seen by them forty days,
and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And being assembled with them, commanded
them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard from me.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For John truly baptized with water; but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days hence.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> When they therefore were come together,
they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again
the kingdom to Israel?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And he said to them, It is not for you to
know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own
power.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But ye shall receive power after the Holy
Spirit is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses to me, both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and to the uttermost part
of the earth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And when he had spoken these things, while
they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their
sight.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And while they looked steadfastly towards
heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Who also said, Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye gazing up to heaven? this same Jesus who is taken from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then they returned to Jerusalem, from the
mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a sabbath day's journey.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And when they had come in, they went into
an upper room, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew,
Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus,
and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> These all continued with one accord in
prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus,
and with his brethren.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And in those days Peter stood up in the
midst of the disciples, and said (the number of the names together were
about a hundred and twenty,)

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Men, brethren, This scripture must needs
have been fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit by the mouth of David spoke
before concerning Judas, who was guide to them that took Jesus.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he was numbered with us, and had
obtained part of this ministry.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now this man purchased a field with the
reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst,
and all his bowels gushed out.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And it was known to all the dwellers at
Jerusalem; so that that field is called in their proper tongue,
Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For it is written in the book of Psalms,
Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell in it: and, His
bishopric let another take.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Wherefore, of these men who accompanied
us, all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Beginning from the baptism of John, to
that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a
witness with us of his resurrection.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they appointed two, Joseph called
Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord,
who knowest the hearts of all men, show which of these two thou hast
chosen,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> That he may take part of this ministry
and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might
go to his own place.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And they gave forth their lots; and the
lot fell upon Matthias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And when the day of Pentecost was fully
come, they were all with one accord in one place.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And suddenly there came a sound from
heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And there appeared to them, cloven tongues
as of fire, and it sat upon each of them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And they were all filled with the Holy
Spirit, and began to speak in other languages, as the Spirit gave them
utterance.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews,
devout men, from every nation under heaven.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Now when this was noised abroad, the
multitude came together, and were confounded, because every man heard
them speak in his own language.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And they were all amazed, and marveled,
saying one to another, Behold, are not all these who speak Galileans?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And how do we hear every man in our own
language, wherein we were born?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the
dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and
Asia,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in
the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselytes,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Cretes and Arabians we hear them speak in
our languages the wonderful works of God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And they were all amazed, and were in
doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this?

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Others mocking, said, These men are full
of new wine.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But Peter standing up with the eleven,
lifted up his voice, and said to them, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that
dwell at Jerusalem, be this known to you, and hearken to my words:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For these are not drunken, as ye suppose,
seeing it is but the third hour of the day.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But this is that which was spoken by the
prophet Joel,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And it shall come to pass in the last
days, saith God, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and your
sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And on my servants, and on my
hand-maidens I will, in those days, pour out of my Spirit; and they
shall prophesy:

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will show wonders in heaven above,
and signs on the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord
come.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it shall come to pass, that whoever
shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus
of Nazareth, a man approved by God among you by miracles and wonders and
signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also
know:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Him, being delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands
have crucified and slain:

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Whom God hath raised up, having loosed
the pains of death: because it was not possible that he should be held
by it.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For David speaketh concerning him, I saw
the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I
should not be moved:

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my
tongue was glad; moreover also, my flesh shall rest in hope:

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Because thou wilt not leave my soul in
hell, neither wilt thou suffer thy Holy One to see corruption:

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Thou hast made known to me the ways of
life; thou wilt make me full of joy with thy countenance.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Men, brethren, let me freely speak to you
concerning the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his
sepulcher is with us to this day.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Therefore being a prophet, and knowing
that God had sworn to him with an oath, that from the fruit of his
loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his
throne;

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> He seeing this before, spoke of the
resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in hell, neither did
his flesh see corruption.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> This Jesus hath God raised up, of which
we all are witnesses.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Therefore being by the right hand of God
exalted, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy
Spirit, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> For David did not ascend into the
heavens, but he saith himself, The LORD said to my Lord, Sit thou on my
right hand,

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Until I make thy foes thy footstool.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Therefore let all the house of Israel
know assuredly, that God hath made that same Jesus whom ye have
crucified, both Lord and Christ.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Now when they heard this, they were
pricked in their heart, and said to Peter and to the rest of the
apostles, Men, brethren, what shall we do?

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> Then Peter said to them, Repent, and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> For the promise is to you, and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And with many other words did he testify
and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this perverse generation.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> Then they that gladly received his word,
were baptized: and the same day there were added to them about three
thousand souls.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And they continued steadfastly in the
apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in
prayers.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> And fear came upon every soul: and many
wonders and signs were done by the apostles.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And all that believed were together, and
had all things common;

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> And sold their possessions and goods, and
parted them to all men, as every man had need.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And they, continuing daily with one
accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, ate their
food with gladness and singleness of heart,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> Praising God, and having favor with all
the people. And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be
saved.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now Peter and John went up together into
the temple, at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And a certain man lame from his mother's
womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which
is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Who, seeing Peter and John about to go into
the temple, asked an alms.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Peter fastening his eyes upon him with
John, said, Look on us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he gave heed to them, expecting to
receive something from them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I
none; but such as I have I give thee: in the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, rise up and walk.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he took him by the right hand, and
lifted him up: and immediately his feet and ankle bones received
strength.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And he leaping up stood, and walked, and
entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising
God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And all the people saw him walking and
praising God:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And they knew that it was he who sat for
alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple: and they were filled with
wonder and amazement at that which had happened to him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And as the lame man who was healed held
Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is
called Solomon's, greatly wondering.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And when Peter saw it, he answered to the
people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so
earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this
man to walk?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob, the God of our fathers hath glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye
delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was
determined to let him go.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But ye denied the Holy One, and the Just,
and desired a murderer to be granted to you,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And killed the Prince of life, whom God
hath raised from the dead; of which we are witnesses.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And his name, through faith in his name,
hath made this man strong, whom ye see and know: yes, the faith which is
by him, hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you
all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And now, brethren, I know that through
ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But those things which God before had
shown by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he
hath so fulfilled.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall
come from the presence of the Lord,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And he will send Jesus Christ, who before
was preached to you:

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Whom the heaven must receive, until the
times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth
of all his holy prophets, since the world began.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> For Moses truly said to the fathers, A
Prophet will the Lord your God raise up to you, of your brethren, like
me; him shall ye hear in all things, whatever he shall say to you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And it shall come to pass, that every
soul who will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the
people.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And all the prophets also from Samuel,
and those that follow, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold
these days.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Ye are the children of the prophets, and
of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, And
in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> To you first, God having raised up his
Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from
his iniquities.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And as they were speaking to the people,
the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees came upon
them,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Being grieved that they taught the people,
and preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And they laid hands on them, and put them
in custody to the next day: for it was now evening.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But many of them who heard the word,
believed; and the number of the men was about five thousand.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
their rulers, and elders, and scribes,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas,
and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high
priest, were assembled at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And when they had set them in the midst,
they asked, By what power, or by what name have ye done this?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit,
said to them, Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> If we this day are examined concerning the
good deed done to the impotent man, by what means he is made sound.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Be it known to you all, and to all the
people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye
crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man
stand here before you sound.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> This is the stone which was set at naught
by you builders, which is become the head of the corner.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Neither is there salvation in any other:
for there is no other name under heaven given among men, by which we
must be saved.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now when they saw the boldness of Peter
and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they
marveled; and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with
Jesus.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And beholding the man who was healed
standing with them, they could say nothing against it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But when they had commanded them to
withdraw from the council, they conferred among themselves,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Saying, What shall we do to these men?
for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to
all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But that it may spread no further among
the people, let us strictly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to
no man in this name.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And they called them, and commanded them
not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But Peter and John answered and said to
them, Whether it is right in the sight of God to hearken to you rather
than to God, judge ye.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For we cannot but speak the things which
we have seen and heard.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> So when they had further threatened them,
they let them go, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of
the people: for all men glorified God for that which was done.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For the man was above forty years old on
whom this miracle of healing was performed.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And being dismissed, they went to their
own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said
to them.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And when they heard that, they lifted up
their voice to God with one accord, and said, Lord, thou art God, who
hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all that is in them;

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Who, by the mouth of thy servant David
hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things?

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> The kings of the earth stood up, and the
rulers were assembled against the Lord, and against his Christ.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For in truth against thy holy child
Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were assembled,

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> To do whatever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And now, Lord, behold their threatenings:
and grant to thy servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy
word,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> By stretching forth thy hand to heal; and
that signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And when they had prayed, the place was
shaken where they were assembled; and they were all filled with the Holy
Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And the multitude of them that believed
were of one heart, and of one soul: neither said any of them that aught
of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things
common.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with great power the apostles gave
testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was
upon them all.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Neither was there any among them that was
in want: for as many as were possessors of lands or houses sold them,
and brought the prices of the things that were sold,

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And laid them down at the apostles' feet:
and distribution was made to every man according as he had need.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And Joses, who by the apostles was
surnamed Barnabas, (which is, being interpreted, The son of
consolation,) a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus,

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Having land, sold it, and brought the
money, and laid it at the apostles' feet.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But a certain man named Ananias, with
Sapphira his wife, sold a possession,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And kept back part of the price, (his wife
also being privy to it) and brought a certain part, and laid it at the
apostles' feet.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But Peter said, Ananias, Why hath Satan
filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the
price of the land?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> While it remained, was it not thy own? and
after it was sold, was it not in thy own power? why hast thou conceived
this thing in thy heart? thou hast not lied to men, but to God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Ananias hearing these words, fell down,
and expired. And great fear came on all them that heard these things.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the young men arose, wound him up, and
carried him out, and buried him.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it was about the space of three hours
after, when his wife, not knowing what was done, came in.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And Peter answered to her, Tell me whether
ye sold the land for so much? And she said, Yes, for so much.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then Peter said to her, How is it that ye
have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? behold the feet of
them who have buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee
out.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Then she fell down immediately at his
feet, and expired. And the young men came in, and found her dead, and
carrying her forth, buried her by her husband.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And great fear came upon all the church,
and upon as many as heard these things.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And by the hands of the apostles were
many signs and wonders wrought among the people; (and they were all with
one accord in Solomon's porch.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And of the rest durst no man join himself
to them: but the people magnified them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And believers were the more added to the
Lord, multitudes both of men and women.)

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> So that they brought forth the sick into
the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the
shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of them.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> There came also a multitude out of the
cities around to Jerusalem, bringing sick persons, and them who were
afflicted with unclean spirits: and they were healed every one.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Then the high priest rose up, and all
they that were with him; (which is the sect of the Sadducees) and were
filled with indignation,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And laid their hands on the apostles, and
put them in the common prison.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But the angel of the Lord by night opened
the prison-doors, and brought them forth, and said,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Go, stand and speak in the temple to the
people all the words of this life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And when they heard that, they entered
into the temple early in the morning, and taught. But the high priest
came, and they that were with him, and called the council together, and
all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have
them brought.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But when the officers came, and found
them not in the prison, they returned, and told,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Saying, The prison truly we found shut
with all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors: but
when we had opened, we found no man within.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Now when the high priest, and the captain
of the temple, and the chief priests heard these things, they doubted of
them to what this would grow.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Then came one and told them, saying,
Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple, and
teaching the people.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Then went the captain with the officers,
and brought them without violence: for they feared the people, lest they
should have been stoned.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And when they had brought them, they set
them before the council: and the high priest asked them,

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Saying, Did we not strictly command you,
that ye should not teach in this name? and behold, ye have filled
Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blood upon
us.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Then Peter and the other apostles
answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
whom ye slew and hanged on a tree:

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Him hath God exalted with his right hand
to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And we are his witnesses of these things;
and so is also the Holy Spirit, whom God hath given to them that obey
him.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> When they heard that, they were cut to
the heart, and took counsel to slay them.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> Then stood up one in the council, a
Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among
all the people, and commanded to put the apostles forth a little time.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> And said to them, Ye men of Israel, take
heed to yourselves what ye intend to do concerning these men:

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> For before these days rose Theudas,
boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed
him, were scattered, and brought to naught.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> After this man rose Judas of Galilee, in
the days of the taxing, and drew away many people after him: he also
perished; and all, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And now I say to you, Refrain from these
men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work is from men,
it will come to naught:

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But if it is from God, ye cannot
overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And to him they assented: and when they
had called the apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they
should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And they departed from the presence of
the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And daily in the temple, and in every
house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And in those days, when the number of the
disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians
against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily
ministration.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Then the twelve called the multitude of the
disciples, and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of
God, and serve tables.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you
seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we
may appoint over this business.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But we will give ourselves continually to
prayer, and to the ministry of the word.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the saying pleased the whole multitude:
and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and
Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas
a proselyte of Antioch:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Whom they set before the apostles: and when
they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the word of God increased; and the
number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great
company of the priests were obedient to the faith.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And Stephen, full of faith and power,
performed great wonders and miracles among the people.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Then there arose certain of the synagogue,
which is called the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and
Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia, and of Asia, disputing with
Stephen.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they were not able to resist the
wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then they suborned men, who said, We have
heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And they stirred up the people, and the
elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and brought
him to the council,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And set up false witnesses, who said,
This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place,
and the law:

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For we have heard him say, that this
Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and will change the customs
which Moses delivered to us.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And all that sat in the council, looking
steadfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Then said the high priest, Are these things
so?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers,
hearken; The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And said to him, Depart from thy country,
and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall show thee.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then he came from the land of the
Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charran. And from thence, when his father was
dead, he removed him into this land in which ye now dwell.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And he gave him no inheritance in it, no
not so much as to set his foot on: yet he promised that he would give it
to him for a possession, and to his offspring after him, when as yet he
had no child.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And God spoke on this wise, That his
offspring should sojourn in a foreign land; and that they should bring
them into bondage, and treat them ill four hundred years.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And the nation to whom they shall be in
bondage will I judge, said God: and after that they shall come forth,
and serve me in this place.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And he gave him the covenant of
circumcision. And so Abraham begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth
day; and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold
Joseph into Egypt: but God was with him,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And delivered him from all his
afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king
of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt, and all his house.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now there came a dearth over all the land
of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction; and our fathers found no
sustenance.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But when Jacob heard that there was corn
in Egypt, he sent out our fathers first.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And at the second time Joseph was made
known to his brethren: and Joseph's kindred was made known to Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Then Joseph sent, and called his father
Jacob to him, and all his kindred, seventy five souls.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died,
he, and our fathers,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And were carried over into Sychem, and
laid in the sepulcher that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons
of Emmor the father of Sychem.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> But when the time of the promise drew
nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in
Egypt,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Till another king arose, who knew not
Joseph.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The same dealt subtilly with our kindred,
and ill-treated our fathers, so that they cast out their young children,
to the end they might not live.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> In which time Moses was born, and was
exceeding fair, and nourished in his father's house three months:

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And when he was cast out, Pharaoh's
daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And Moses was learned in all the wisdom
of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in deeds.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And when he was full forty years old, it
came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And seeing one of them suffer wrong, he
defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the
Egyptian:

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> For he supposed his brethren to
understand that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understood
not.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And the next day he showed himself to
them as they were contending, and would have constrained them to be at
peace again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren: why do ye wrong one to
another?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But he that did his neighbor wrong,
thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us?

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Wilt thou kill me, as thou didst the
Egyptian yesterday?

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Then Moses fled at this saying, and was a
stranger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sons.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And when forty years had expired, there
appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sina, an angel of the Lord in
a flame of fire in a bush.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> When Moses saw it, he wondered at the
sight; and as he drew near to behold it, the voice of the Lord came to
him,

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> Saying, I am the God of thy fathers, the
God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Then Moses
trembled, and durst not behold.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy
shoes from thy feet: for the place where thou standest is holy ground.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> I have seen, I have seen the affliction
of my people who are in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am
come down to deliver them. And now come, I will send thee into Egypt.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> This Moses, whom they refused, saying,
Who made thee a ruler and a judge? the same did God send to be a ruler
and a deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the
bush.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> He brought them out, after he had showed
wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the
wilderness forty years.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> This is that Moses, who said to the
children of Israel, A prophet will the Lord your God raise up to you of
your brethren, like me; him will ye hear.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> This is he, that was in the church in the
wilderness with the angel who spoke to him on the mount Sina, and with
our fathers: who received the living oracles to give to us:

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> Whom our fathers would not obey, but
thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt,

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> Saying to Aaron, Make us gods to go
before us: for as for this Moses, who brought us out of the land of
Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> And they made a calf in those days, and
offered sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own
hands.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> Then God turned, and gave them up to
worship the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the
prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and
sacrifices during forty years in the wilderness?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> Yes, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch,
and the star of your God Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them:
and I will carry you away beyond Babylon.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> Our fathers had the tabernacle of
testimony in the wilderness, as he had appointed, speaking to Moses,
that he should make it according to the fashion that he had seen.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> Which also our fathers, that came after,
brought in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God
drove out before the face of our fathers, to the days of David;

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> Who found favor before God, and desired
to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> But Solomon built him a house.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> Yet, the Most High dwelleth not in
temples made with hands, as saith the prophet,

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> Heaven is my throne, and earth is my
footstool: What house will ye build for me? saith the Lord: or what is
the place of my rest?

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Hath not my hand made all these things?

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Spirit: as your fathers
did, so do ye.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> Which of the prophets have not your
fathers persecuted? and they have slain them who showed before of the
coming of the Just One; of whom ye have been now the betrayers and
murderers;

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> Who have received the law by the
disposition of angels, and have not kept it.

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> When they heard these things, they were
cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their teeth.

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> But he, being full of the Holy Spirit,
looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God,

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> And said, Behold, I see the heavens
opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> Then they cried out with a loud voice,
and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord,

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> And cast him out of the city, and stoned
him: and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet,
whose name was Saul.

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> And they stoned Stephen, calling upon
God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> And he kneeled down and cried with a loud
voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said
this, he fell asleep.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And Saul was consenting to his death. And
at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was
at Jerusalem; and they were all dispersed throughout the regions of
Judea and Samaria, except the apostles.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And devout men carried Stephen to his
burial, and made great lamentation over him.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> As for Saul, he made havoc of the church,
entering into every house, and hauling men and women committed them to
prison.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Therefore they that were dispersed went
every where preaching the word.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Then Philip went down to the city of
Samaria, and preached Christ to them.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the people with one accord gave heed to
those things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles which
he performed.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For unclean spirits, crying with loud
voice, came out of many that were possessed: and many taken with
palsies, and that were lame, were healed.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And there was great joy in that city.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But there was a certain man called Simon,
who before in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of
Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> To whom they all gave heed, from the
least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And to him they had regard, because that
for a long time he had bewitched them with sorceries.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But when they believed Philip, preaching
the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ,
they were baptized both men and women.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then Simon himself believed also: and
when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding
the miracles and signs which were done.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Now when the apostles who were at
Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent to
them Peter and John:

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Who, when they had come down, prayed for
them that they might receive the Holy Spirit:

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> (For as yet he had fallen upon none of
them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.)

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then they laid their hands on them, and
they received the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And when Simon saw that through laying on
of the apostles' hands the Holy Spirit was given, he offered them money,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Saying, Give me also this power, that on
whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> But Peter said to him, Thy money perish
with thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be
purchased with money.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Thou hast neither part nor lot in this
matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Repent therefore of this thy wickedness,
and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> For I perceive that thou art in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to
the Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come
upon me.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And they, when they had testified and
preached the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the
gospel in many villages of the Samaritans.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And the angel of the Lord spoke to
Philip, saying, Arise, and go towards the south, to the way that goeth
down from Jerusalem to Gaza, which is desert.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he arose, and went: and behold, a man
of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace queen of the
Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to
Jerusalem to worship,

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Was returning; and sitting in his
chariot, read Isaiah the prophet.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> Then the Spirit said to Philip, Go near
and join thyself to this chariot.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Philip ran thither to him, and heard
him reading the prophet Isaiah, and said, Understandest thou what thou
readest?

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he said, How can I, except some man
should guide me? And he desired Philip that he would come up, and sit
with him.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> The place of the scripture which he read
was this, He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb
before his shearer, so he opened not his mouth:

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> In his humiliation his judgment was taken
away: and who shall declare his generation? for his life is taken from
the earth.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And the eunuch answered Philip, and said,
I pray thee, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some
other man?

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Then Philip opened his mouth, and began
at the same scripture, and preached to him Jesus.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And as they went on their way, they came
to a certain water: and the eunuch said, See, here is water; what doth
hinder me to be baptized?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> And Philip said, If thou believest with
all thy heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> And he commanded the chariot to stand
still: and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the
eunuch; and he baptized him.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> And when they had come up out of the
water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw
him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But Philip was found at Azotus: and
passing through, he preached in all the cities, till he came to Cesarea.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high
priest,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And desired from him letters to Damascus to
the synagogues, that if he should find any of this way, whether they
were men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus:
and suddenly there shined around him a light from heaven:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice
saying to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the
Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick
against the goads.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And he trembling and astonished said, Lord,
what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said to him, Arise, and go
into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And the men who journeyed with him stood
speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Saul arose from the earth; and when his
eyes were opened, he saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and
brought him into Damascus.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And he was three days without sight, and
neither ate nor drank.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And there was a certain disciple at
Damascus, named Ananias; and to him said the Lord in a vision, Ananias.
And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the Lord said to him, Arise, and go
into the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of
Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold, he prayeth,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And hath seen in a vision a man named
Ananias, coming in, and putting his hand on him, that he might receive
his sight.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard
by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at
Jerusalem:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And here he hath authority from the chief
priests, to bind all that call on thy name.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> But the Lord said to him, Go, for he is a
chosen vessel to me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For I will show him how great things he
must suffer for my name's sake.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And Ananias went, and entered into the
house; and putting his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord (even
Jesus that appeared to thee in the way as thou camest) hath sent me,
that thou mayest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And immediately there fell from his eyes
as it had been scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and
was baptized.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And when he had received food, he was
strengthened. Then was Saul certain days with the disciples who were at
Damascus.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And immediately he preached Christ in the
synagogues, that he is the Son of God.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> But all that heard him were amazed, and
said, Is not this he that destroyed them who called on this name in
Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring them
bound to the chief priests?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Saul increased the more in strength,
and confounded the Jews who dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very
Christ.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And after many days were fulfilled, the
Jews took counsel to kill him.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But their laying in wait, was known to
Saul. And they watched the gates day and night to kill him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Then the disciples took him by night, and
let him down by the wall in a basket.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And when Saul had come to Jerusalem, he
essayed to join himself to the disciples: but they were all afraid of
him, and believed not that he was a disciple.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Barnabas took him, and brought him to
the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord in the way,
and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at
Damascus in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he was with them coming in and going
out at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And he spoke boldly in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians: but they went about to
slay him.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Which when the brethren knew, they
brought him down to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Then had the churches rest throughout all
Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified: and walking in the
fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, were
multiplied.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And it came to pass, as Peter passed
throughout all quarters, he came down also to the saints who dwelt at
Lydda.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And there he found a certain man named
Eneas, who had kept his bed eight years, and was sick with the palsy.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And Peter said to him, Eneas, Jesus
Christ healeth thee: arise, and make thy bed. And he arose immediately.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw
him, and turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple
named Tabitha, who by interpretation is called Dorcas: this woman was
full of good works and alms-deeds which she did.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And it came to pass in those days, that
she was sick, and died: whom, when they had washed, they laid in an
upper chamber.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And as Lydda was nigh to Joppa, and the
disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent to him two men,
desiring him that he would not delay to come to them.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> Then Peter arose, and went with them.
When he had come, they brought him into the upper chamber: and all the
widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which
Dorcas made, while she was with them.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> But Peter put them all forth, and kneeled
down, and prayed; and turning to the body, said, Tabitha, arise. And she
opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And he gave her his hand, and lifted her
up; and when he had called the saints and widows, presented her alive.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And it was known throughout all Joppa:
and many believed in the Lord.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And it came to pass, that he tarried many
days in Joppa with one Simon a tanner.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> There was a certain man in Cesarea,
called Cornelius, a centurion of the band called the Italian band,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> A devout man, and one that feared God
with all his house, who gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God
always.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> He saw in a vision evidently, about the
ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in to him, and saying to
him, Cornelius.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And when he looked on him, he was afraid,
and said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy prayers and thy alms
are come up for a memorial before God.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And now send men to Joppa, and call for
one Simon, whose surname is Peter:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose
house is by the sea-side: he will tell thee what thou oughtest to do.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when the angel who spoke to Cornelius
had departed, he called two of his household servants, and a devout
soldier of them that waited on him continually;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And when he had declared all these things
to them, he sent them to Joppa.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> On the morrow, as they were going on
their journey, and drew nigh to the city, Peter went up upon the
house-top to pray, about the sixth hour:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And he became very hungry, and would
have eaten: but while they made ready, he fell into a trance,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And saw heaven opened, and a certain
vessel descending to him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four
corners, and let down to the earth:

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> In which were all manner of four-footed
beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and creeping animals, and fowls of
the air.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And there came a voice to him, Rise,
Peter; kill, and eat.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I
have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the voice spoke to him again the
second time, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> This was done thrice: and the vessel
was received again into heaven.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Now while Peter doubted in himself what
this vision which he had seen should mean, behold, the men who were sent
from Cornelius had made inquiry for Simon's house, and were standing
before the gate,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And called, and asked whether Simon,
who was surnamed Peter, lodged there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> While Peter thought on the vision, the
Spirit said to him, Behold, three men seek thee.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Arise therefore, and go down, and go
with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Then Peter went down to the men who
were sent to him from Cornelius; and said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek:
what is the cause for which ye have come?

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And they said, Cornelius the centurion,
a just man, and one that feareth God, and of good report among all the
nation of the Jews, was warned from God by a holy angel to send for thee
into his house, and to hear words from thee.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Then he called them in, and lodged
them. And on the morrow Peter went with them, and certain brethren from
Joppa accompanied him.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And on the morrow they entered into
Cesarea. And Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his
kinsmen and near friends.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius
met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshiped him.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But Peter took him up, saying, Stand
up: I myself also am a man.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And as he talked with him, he went in,
and found many that had come together.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And he said to them, Ye know that it is
an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company, or come to
one of another nation; but God hath shown me that I should not call any
man common or unclean.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Therefore I came to you without
gainsaying, as soon as I was sent for: I ask therefore for what intent
ye have sent for me?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was
fasting until this hour; and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and
behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing,

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is
heard, and thy alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Send therefore to Joppa, and call
hither Simon, whose surname is Peter; he lodgeth in the house of one
Simon a tanner, by the sea-side: who, when he cometh, will speak to
thee.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Immediately therefore I sent to thee;
and thou hast well done that thou hast come. Now therefore we are all
here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee from
God.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Then Peter opened his mouth, and said,
In truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons:

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> But in every nation he that feareth
him, and worketh righteousness, is accepted with him.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> The word which God sent to the children
of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord of all:)

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> That word, I say, ye know, which was
published throughout all Judea, and began from Galilee, after the
baptism which John preached;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> That God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
with the Holy Spirit and with power: who went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed by the devil; for God was with him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And we are witnesses of all things
which he did, both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they
slew and hanged on a tree.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> Him God raised the third day, and
showed him openly;

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Not to all the people, but to witnesses
chosen before by God, even to us, who ate and drank with him after he
rose from the dead.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And he commanded us to preach to the
people, and to testify that it is he who was ordained by God to be the
Judge of the living and the dead.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> To him give all the prophets testimony,
that through his name whoever believeth in him shall receive remission
of sins.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> While Peter was yet speaking these
words, the Holy Spirit fell on all them who heard the word.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> And they of the circumcision who
believed, were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on
the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> For they heard them speak in languages
and magnify God. Then answered Peter,

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we?

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of the Lord. Then they requested him to tarry certain days.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the apostles and brethren that were
in Judea, heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And when Peter had come to Jerusalem,
they that were of the circumcision contended with him,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Saying, Thou wentest in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But Peter rehearsed the matter from the
beginning, and expounded it by order to them, saying,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> I was in the city of Joppa praying: and
in a trance I saw a vision, A certain vessel descend, as it had been a
great sheet, let down from heaven by four corners; and it came even to
me:

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Upon which when I had fastened my eyes, I
considered, and saw four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild beasts,
and creeping animals, and fowls of the air.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And I heard a voice saying to me, Arise,
Peter; slay and eat.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing
common or unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But the voice answered me again from
heaven, What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And this was done three times: and all
were drawn up again into heaven.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And behold, immediately there were
three men already come to the house where I was, sent from Cesarea to
me.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the Spirit bade me go with them,
nothing doubting. Moreover, these six brethren accompanied me, and we
entered into the man's house:

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And he showed us how he had seen an
angel in his house, who stood and said to him, Send men to Joppa, and
call for Simon, whose surname is Peter;

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Who shall tell thee words, by which
thou and all thy house shall be saved.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And as I began to speak, the Holy
Spirit fell on them, as on us at the beginning.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Then I remembered the word of the Lord,
how he said, John indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized
with the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Forasmuch then as God gave them the
like gift as he did to us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what
was I that I could withstand God?

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> When they heard these things, they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the
Gentiles granted repentance to life.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Now they who were dispersed upon the
persecution that arose about Stephen traveled as far as Phenice, and
Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none but to the Jews only.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And some of them were men of Cyprus and
Cyrene, who when they had come to Antioch, spoke to the Grecians,
preaching the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And the hand of the Lord was with them:
and a great number believed, and turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Then tidings of these things came to
the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth
Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Who, when he came, and had seen the
grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all that with purpose of heart
they would cleave to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For he was a good man, and full of the
Holy Spirit, and of faith: and many people were added to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then Barnabas departed to Tarsus, to
seek Saul:

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And when he had found him, he brought
him to Antioch. And it came to pass, that a whole year they assembled
themselves with the church, and taught many people. And the disciples
were first called Christians in Antioch.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And in these days came prophets from
Jerusalem to Antioch.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And there stood up one of them named
Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth
throughout all the world: which came to pass in the days of Claudius
Cesar.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Then the disciples, every man according
to his ability, determined to send relief to the brethren who dwelt in
Judea.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Which also they did, and sent it to the
elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now about that time, Herod the king
stretched forth his hands to afflict certain of the church.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And he killed James the brother of John
with the sword.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And because he saw it pleased the Jews,
he proceeded further to take Peter also. Then were the days of
unleavened bread.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And when he had apprehended him, he put
him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep
him; intending after the passover to bring him forth to the people.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Peter therefore was kept in prison: but
prayer was made without ceasing by the church to God for him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And when Herod would have brought him
forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound
with two chains; and the keepers before the door kept the prison.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And behold, the angel of the Lord came
upon him, and a light shined in the prison; and he smote Peter on the
side, and raised him up, saying, Arise quickly. And his chains fell off
from his hands.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And the angel said to him, Gird thyself,
and bind on thy sandals; and so he did. And he saith to him, Cast thy
garment about thee, and follow me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he went out, and followed him, and
knew not that it was true which was done by the angel; but thought he
saw a vision.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> When they were past the first and the
second ward, they came to the iron gate that leadeth to the city; which
opened to them of its own accord: and they went out, and passed on
through one street; and forthwith the angel departed from him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And when Peter had come to himself, he
said, Now I know with certainty, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and
hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation
of the people of the Jews.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And when he had considered the thing,
he came to the house of Mary the mother of John whose surname was Mark;
where many were assembled, praying.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And as Peter knocked at the door of the
gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And when she knew Peter's voice, she
opened not the gate for gladness, but ran in, and told that Peter stood
before the gate

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And they said to her, Thou art insane.
But she constantly affirmed that it was even so. Then they said, It is
his angel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But Peter continued knocking. And when
they had opened the door, and saw him, they were astonished.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But he beckoning to them with the hand
to hold their peace, declared to them how the Lord had brought him out
of the prison. And he said, Go, show these things to James, and to the
brethren. And he departed, and went into another place.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Now as soon as it was day, there was no
small stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And when Herod had sought for him, and
found him not, he examined the keepers, and commanded that they should
be put to death. And he went down from Judea to Cesarea, and there
abode.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And Herod was highly displeased with
them of Tyre and Sidon. But they came with one accord to him, and having
made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend, desired peace, because
their country was nourished by the king's country.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And upon a set day, Herod arrayed in
royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration to them.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the people gave a shout, saying, It
is the voice of a god, and not of a man.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And immediately the angel of the Lord
smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten by worms,
and died.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the word of God grew and
multiplied.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Barnabas and Saul returned from
Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their ministry, and took with them
John, whose surname was Mark.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now there were in the church that was at
Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was
called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, who had been brought up
with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> As they ministered to the Lord, and
fasted, the Holy Spirit said, Separate for me Barnabas and Saul, for the
work to which I have called them.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And when they had fasted and prayed, and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> So they being sent forth by the Holy
Spirit, departed to Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And when they were at Salamis, they
preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And they had
also John for their minister.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when they had gone through the isle
to Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose
name was Barjesus:

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Who was with the deputy of the country,
Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for Barnabas and Saul, and
desired to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his
name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy
from the faith.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Then Saul (who also is called Paul)
filled with the Holy Spirit, set his eyes on him,

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And said, O full of all subtilty, and
all mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness,
wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And now behold, the hand of the Lord is
upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season. And
immediately there fell on him a mist and a darkness; and he went about
seeking some to lead him by the hand.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then the deputy, when he saw what was
done, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Now when Paul and his company loosed
from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia. And John departing from
them, returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But when they departed from Perga, they
came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the sabbath,
and sat down.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And after the reading of the law and
the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, Men,
brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, speak.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Then Paul stood up, and beckoning with
his hand, said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The God of this people Israel chose our
fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land
of Egypt, and with a high arm he brought them out of it.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And about the time of forty years he
suffered their manners in the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And when he had destroyed seven nations
in the land of Canaan, he divided their land to them by lot.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And after that he gave to them judges,
about the space of four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the
prophet.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And afterward they desired a king: and
God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin,
by the space of forty years.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And when he had removed him, he raised
up to them David to be their king: to whom also he gave testimony, and
said, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my own heart, who
shall fulfill all my will.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Of this man's offspring hath God,
according to his promise, raised up to Israel a Savior, Jesus:

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> John having first preached, before his
coming, the baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And as John fulfilled his course, he
said, Whom think ye that I am? I am not he. But behold, there cometh one
after me, whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to loose.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Men, brethren, children of the stock of
Abraham, and whoever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this
salvation sent.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and
their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the words of the
prophets which are read every sabbath, they have fulfilled them in
condemning him.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And though they found no cause of death
in him, yet they desired Pilate that he should be put to death.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And when they had fulfilled all that
was written concerning him, they took him down from the tree, and laid
him in a sepulcher.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> But God raised him from the dead:

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And he was seen many days by them who
came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the
people.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And we declare to you the glad tidings,
that the promise which was made to the fathers,

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> God hath fulfilled the same to us their
children, in that he hath raised up Jesus again; as it is also written
in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And as concerning that he raised him
from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this
wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Wherefore he saith also in another
psalm, Thou wilt not suffer thy Holy One to see corruption.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> For David, after he had served his own
generation by the will of God, fell asleep, and was laid to his fathers,
and saw corruption:

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But he whom God raised again, saw no
corruption.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Be it known to you therefore, men,
brethren, that through this man is preached to you the forgiveness of
sins;

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> And by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the
law of Moses.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> Beware therefore, lest that come upon
you which is spoken in the prophets;

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which ye will in no wise
believe, though a man declare it to you.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And when the Jews had gone out of the
synagogue, the Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to
them the next sabbath.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Now when the congregation was broken
up, many of the Jews and religious proselytes followed Paul and
Barnabas; who speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the grace
of God.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> And the next sabbath came almost the
whole city together to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> But when the Jews saw the multitudes,
they were filled with envy, and spoke against those things which were
uttered by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> Then Paul and Barnabas became bold, and
said, It was necessary that the word of God should first be spoken to
you: but seeing ye reject it, and judge yourselves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> For so hath the Lord commanded us,
saying, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou
shouldst be for salvation to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> And when the Gentiles heard this, they
were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> And the word of the Lord was published
throughout all the region.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> But the Jews stirred up the devout and
honorable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution
against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them from their borders.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> But they shook off the dust of their
feet against them, and came to Iconium.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And the disciples were filled with joy
and with the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And it came to pass in Iconium, that they
went both together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke, that a
great multitude both of the Jews, and also of the Greeks, believed.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the
Gentiles, and made their minds evil-affected against the brethren.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> A long time therefore they abode speaking
boldly in the Lord, who gave testimony to the word of his grace, and
granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> But the multitude of the city was
divided: and part held with the Jews, and part with the apostles.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And when there was an assault made both
of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews, with their rulers, to use them
despitefully, and to stone them,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Being apprised of it, they fled to Lystra
and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and to the region in that vicinity.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And there they preached the gospel.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And there sat a certain man at Lystra,
impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's womb, who had
never walked.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The same heard Paul speak: who
steadfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be
healed,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Said with a loud voice, Stand upright
on thy feet. And he leaped and walked.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And when the people saw what Paul had
done, they lifted up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The
gods have come down to us in the likeness of men.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And they called Barnabas, Jupiter, and
Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Then the priest of Jupiter, who was
before their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and would
have done sacrifice with the people.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Which, when the apostles Barnabas and
Paul heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people,
crying out,

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And saying, Sirs, why do ye these
things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach to you,
that ye should turn from these vanities to the living God, who made
heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Who in times past suffered all nations
to walk in their own ways.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Nevertheless he left not himself
without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And with these sayings they scarce
restrained the people from doing sacrifice to them.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And there came thither certain Jews
from Antioch, and Iconium, who persuaded the people, and having stoned
Paul, drew him out of the city, supposing him to be dead.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But as the disciples stood around him,
he rose, and came into the city: and the next day he departed with
Barnabas to Derbe.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And when they had preached the gospel
to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to
Iconium, and to Antioch,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Confirming the souls of the disciples,
exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much
tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And when they had ordained for them
elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them
to the Lord, on whom they believed.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And after they had passed throughout
Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And when they had preached the word in
Perga, they went down into Attalia:

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And thence sailed to Antioch, from
whence they had been commended to the grace of God, for the work which
they fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And when they had come, and had
assembled the church, they rehearsed all that God had done with them,
and that he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And there they abode a long time with
the disciples.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And certain men who came down from Judea,
taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner
of Moses, ye cannot be saved.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no
small dissension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul
and Barnabas, and certain others of them, should go to Jerusalem to the
apostles and elders about this question.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And being brought on their way by the
church, they passed through Phenice, and Samaria, declaring the
conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy to all the
brethren.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And when they had come to Jerusalem, they
were received by the church, and by the apostles and elders, and they
declared all things that God had done with them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But there rose certain of the sect of the
Pharisees, who believed, saying, That it was needful to circumcise them,
and to command them to keep the law of Moses.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the apostles and elders came together
to consider of this matter.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And when there had been much disputing,
Peter rose and said to them, Men, brethren, ye know that a good while
ago, God made choice among us, that the Gentiles, by my mouth should
hear the word of the gospel, and believe.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And God, who knoweth the hearts, bore
them witness, giving to them the Holy Spirit, even as he did to us:

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And put no difference between us and
them, purifying their hearts by faith.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put
a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we
were able to bear?

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But we believe, that through the grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then all the multitude kept silence,
and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and
wonders God had wrought by them among the Gentiles.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And after they held their peace, James
answered, saying, Men, brethren, hearken to me.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Simeon hath declared how God at the
first visited the Gentiles to take from among them a people for his
name.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And to this agree the words of the
prophets; as it is written,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> After this I will return, and will
build again the tabernacle of David which is fallen down; and I will
build again the ruins of it; and I will set it up:

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> That the residue of men may seek after
the Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom my name is called, saith the
Lord, who doeth all these things.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Known to God are all his works from the
beginning of the world.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Wherefore my sentence is, that we
trouble not them, who from among the Gentiles are turned to God:

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> But that we write to them that they
abstain from pollutions of idols, and from lewdness, and from things
strangled, and from blood.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For Moses of old time hath in every
city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then it pleased the apostles and
elders, with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company
to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas; namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas, and
Silas, chief men among the brethren:

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And they wrote letters by them after
this manner; The apostles, and elders, and brethren, send greeting to
the brethren who are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Forasmuch as we have heard, that
certain who went out from us, have troubled you with words, subverting
your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised, and keep the law; to whom we
gave no such commandment:

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> It seemed good to us, being assembled
with one accord, to send chosen men to you, with our beloved Barnabas
and Paul:

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Men that have hazarded their lives for
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> We have sent therefore Judas and Silas,
who will also tell you the same things by mouth.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit,
and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary
things;

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> That ye abstain from things offered to
idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from lewdness:
from which if ye keep yourselves, ye will do well. Fare ye well.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> So when they were dismissed, they came
to Antioch: and when they had convened the multitude, they delivered the
epistle.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Which when they had read, they rejoiced
for the consolation.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Judas and Silas, being prophets
also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed
them.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And after they had tarried there a
time, they were dismissed in peace from the brethren to the apostles.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> Notwithstanding, it pleased Silas to
abide there still.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Paul also and Barnabas continued in
Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others
also.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And some days after, Paul said to
Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren, in every city where we
have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Barnabas determined to take with
them John, whose surname was Mark.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> But Paul thought not good to take him
with them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them
to the work.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And the contention was so sharp between
them, that they departed, separating one from the other: and so Barnabas
took Mark, and sailed to Cyprus.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> And Paul chose Silas, and departed,
being commended by the brethren to the grace of God.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And he went through Syria and Cilicia,
confirming the churches.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Then he came to Derbe and Lystra: and
behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a
certain woman who was a Jewess, and believed, but his father was a
Greek.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Who was well reported of by the brethren
that were at Lystra and Iconium.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Him would Paul have to go forth with him;
and took and circumcised him, because of the Jews who were in those
quarters: for they all knew that his father was a Greek.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And as they went through the cities, they
delivered to them the decrees to keep that were ordained by the apostles
and elders who were at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And so were the churches established in
the faith, and increased in number daily.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Now when they had gone throughout
Phrygia, and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden by the Holy
Spirit to preach the word in Asia;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> After they had come to Mysia, they
essayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them not.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And they, passing by Mysia, came down to
Troas.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And a vision appeared to Paul in the
night: There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over
into Macedonia, and help us.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And after he had seen the vision,
immediately we endeavored to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering,
that the Lord had called us to preach the gospel to them.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Therefore loosing from Troas, we came
with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And from thence to Philippi, which is
the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in
that city abiding certain days.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And on the sabbath we went out of the
city by a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down,
and spoke to the women who resorted thither.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And a certain woman named Lydia, a
seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, who worshiped God, heard us:
whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended to the things which were
spoken by Paul.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when she was baptized, and her
household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful
to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there: And she constrained
us.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And it came to pass as we went to
prayer, a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination, met us,
who brought her masters much gain by sooth-saying:

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The same followed Paul and us, and
cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, who show
to us the way of salvation.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And this she did many days. But Paul
being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I command thee in the name
of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same hour.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And when her masters saw that the hope
of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into
the market-place to the rulers,

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And brought them to the magistrates,
saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And teach customs which are not lawful
for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And the multitude rose together against
them: and the magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat
them.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And when they had laid many stripes
upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them
safely.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Who, having received such a charge,
thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the
stocks.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed,
and sang praises to God: and the prisoners heard them.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken: and
immediately all the doors were opened, and every one's bands were
loosed.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the keeper of the prison awaking
out of his sleep, and seeing the prison doors open, he drew out his
sword, and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had
fled.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> But Paul cried with a loud voice,
saying, Do thyself no harm: for we are all here.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> Then he called for a light, and sprang
in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas;

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And brought them out, and said, Sirs,
what must I do to be saved?

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And they said, Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And they spoke to him the word of the
Lord, and to all that were in his house.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And he took them the same hour of the
night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all his,
without delay.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And when he had brought them into his
house, he set food before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with all
his house.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And when it was day, the magistrates
sent the sergeants, saying, Let those men go.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> And the keeper of the prison told this
saying to Paul, The magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore
depart, and go in peace.

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> But Paul said to them, They have beaten
us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast us into prison; and
now do they thrust us out privately? no verily; but let them come
themselves and bring us out.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And the sergeants told these words to
the magistrates: and they feared when they heard that they were Romans.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> And they came and besought them, and
brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the city.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> And they went out of the prison, and
entered into the house of Lydia: and when they had seen the brethren,
they comforted them, and departed.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Now when they had passed through
Amphipolis, and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a
synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And Paul, as his manner was, went in to
them, and on three sabbaths reasoned with them out of the scriptures,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Opening and alledging, that it was
needful that Christ should suffer, and rise again from the dead; and
that this Jesus, whom I preach to you, is Christ.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And some of them believed, and consorted
with Paul and Silas: and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of
the chief women not a few.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> But the Jews who believed not, moved with
envy, took to them certain vile fellows of the baser sort, and gathered
a company, and set all the city in an uproar, and assaulted the house of
Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And when they found them not, they drew
Jason and certain brethren to the rulers of the city, crying, These that
have turned the world upside down, have come hither also;

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Whom Jason hath received: and these all
do contrary to the decrees of Cesar, saying, That there is another king,
one Jesus.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And they troubled the people, and the
rulers of the city, when they heard these things.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And when they had taken security of Jason
and of the other, they let them go.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And the brethren immediately sent away
Paul and Silas by night to Berea: who coming thither, went into the
synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> These were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind,
and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Therefore many of them believed; also
of honorable women who were Greeks, and of men not a few.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But when the Jews of Thessalonica had
knowledge that the word of God was preached by Paul at Berea, they came
thither also, and stirred up the people.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And then immediately the brethren sent
away Paul, to go as it were to the sea: but Silas and Timothy abode
there still.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And they that conducted Paul brought
him to Athens: and receiving a commandment to Silas and Timothy to come
to him with all speed, they departed.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Now, while Paul waited for them at
Athens, his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the city wholly given
to idolatry.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Therefore he disputed in the synagogue
with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with
them that met with him.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Then certain philosophers of the
Epicureans, and of the Stoics, encountered him. And some said, What will
this babbler say? some others, He seemeth to be a setter-forth of
strange gods: because he preached to them Jesus, and the resurrection.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And they took him, and brought him to
Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new doctrine is, of which thou
speakest?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> For thou bringest certain strange
things to our ears; we would know therefore what these things mean.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> (For all the Athenians and strangers
who were there, spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or
to hear some new thing.)

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Then Paul stood in the midst of
Mars-hill, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye
are too superstitious.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> For as I passed by, and beheld your
devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD.
Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I to you.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> God that made the world, and all things
therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in
temples made with hands;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Neither is worshiped with men's hands,
as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath,
and all things;

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And hath made of one blood all nations
of men to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the
times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation;

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> That they should seek the Lord, if
haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he is not far from
every one of us:

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> For in him we live, and move, and have
our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, for we are also
his offspring.

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> Being then the offspring of God, we
ought not to think that the Godhead is like to gold, or silver, or stone
graven by art and man's device.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> And the times of this ignorance God
winked at; but now commandeth all men every where to repent:

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> Because he hath appointed a day, in
which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he hath
ordained: of which he hath given assurance to all men, in that he hath
raised him from the dead.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> And when they heard of the resurrection
of the dead, some mocked: and others said, We will hear thee again
concerning this matter.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> So Paul departed from among them.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> But certain men adhered to him, and
believed: among whom was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named
Damaris, and others with them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> After these things, Paul departed from
Athens, and came to Corinth;

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And found a certain Jew named Aquila,
born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla (because
that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome) and he came to
them.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And because he was of the same
occupation, he abode with them, and wrought (for by their occupation
they were tent-makers)

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And he reasoned in the synagogue every
sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And when Silas and Timothy had come from
Macedonia, Paul was pressed in spirit, and testified to the Jews, that
Jesus was Christ.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And when they opposed themselves, and
blasphemed, he shook his raiment, and said to them, Your blood be upon
your own heads: I am clean: from henceforth I will go to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And he departed thence, and entered into
the house of a certain man named Justus, one that worshiped God, whose
house joined close to the synagogue.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Crispus the chief ruler of the
synagogue believed on the Lord with all his house: and many of the
Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Then the Lord spoke to Paul in the night
by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace:

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> For I am with thee, and no man shall
lay hands on thee, to hurt thee: for I have many people in this city.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And he continued there a year and six
months, teaching the word of God among them.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And when Gallio was the deputy of
Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and
brought him to the judgment-seat,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Saying, This man persuadeth men to
worship God contrary to the law.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And when Paul was now about to open his
mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, If it were a matter of wrong, or hainous
crime, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with you:

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> But if it is a question of words and
names, and of your law, look ye to it: for I will be no judge of such
matters.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And he drove them from the
judgment-seat.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Then all the Greeks took Sosthenes, the
chief ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment-seat. And
Gallio cared for none of those things.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And Paul after this tarried there yet a
good while, and took his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into
Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila; having shorn his head in
Cenchrea: for he had a vow.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And he came to Ephesus, and left them
there: but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the
Jews.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> When they desired him to tarry longer
time with them, he consented not:

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> But bade them farewell, saying, I must
by all means keep this feast that cometh in Jerusalem: but I will return
to you, if God will. And he sailed from Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And when he had landed at Cesarea, and
gone up and saluted the church, he went down to Antioch.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And after he had spent some time there,
he departed and went over all the country of Galatia and Phrygia in
order, strengthening all the disciples.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And a certain Jew named Apollos, born
at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to
Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> This man was instructed in the way of
the Lord: and being fervent in the spirit, he spoke and taught
diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And he began to speak boldly in the
synagogue: Whom, when Aquila and Priscilla had heard, they took him to
them, and expounded to him the way of God more perfectly.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And when he was disposed to pass into
Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive him: who,
when he had come, helped them much who had believed through grace.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> For he mightily convinced the Jews, and
that publicly, showing by the scriptures, that Jesus was Christ.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And it came to pass, that while Apollos
was at Corinth, Paul having passed through the upper region, came to
Ephesus; and finding certain disciples,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> He said to them, Have ye received the
Holy Spirit since ye believed? And they said to him, We have not so much
as heard whether there is any Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he said to them, Into what then were
ye baptized? And they said, Into John's baptism.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Then said Paul, John verily baptized with
the baptism of repentance, saying to the people, That they should
believe on him who should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> When they heard this, they were baptized
into the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And when Paul had laid his hands upon
them, the Holy Spirit came on them; and they spoke in languages, and
prophesied.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And all the men were about twelve.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And he went into the synagogue, and spoke
boldly for the space of three months, disputing and persuading the
things concerning the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> But when divers were hardened, and
believed not, but spoke evil of that way before the multitude, he
departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the
school of one Tyrannus.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And this continued for the space of two
years; so that all they who dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord
Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And God wrought special miracles by the
hands of Paul:

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> So that from his body were brought to
the sick, handkerchiefs, or aprons, and the diseases departed from them,
and the evil spirits went out of them.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Then certain of the vagabond Jews,
exorcists, took upon them to call over them who had evil spirits, the
name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preacheth.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And there were seven sons of one Sceva
a Jew, and chief of the priests, who did so.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And the evil spirit answered and said,
Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye?

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And the man in whom the evil spirit
was, leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so
that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And this was known to all the Jews and
Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus: and fear fell on them all, and the name
of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And many that believed came, and
confessed, and showed their deeds.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Many also of them who used curious
arts, brought their books together, and burned them before all men; and
they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of
silver.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> So mightily grew the word of God, and
prevailed.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> After these things were ended, Paul
purposed in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia, and
Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have been there, I must also
see Rome.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> So he sent into Macedonia two of them
that ministered to him, Timothy and Erastus; but he himself stayed in
Asia for a season.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And the same time there arose no small
stir about that way.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> For a certain man named Demetrius, a
silver-smith, who made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain
to the artificers;

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Whom he called together with the
workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft
we have our wealth:

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Moreover, ye see and hear, that not
alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul hath
persuaded and turned away many people, saying, that they are no gods
which are made with hands.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> So that not only this our craft is in
danger to be set at naught; but also that the temple of the great
goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be
destroyed, whom all Asia, and the world worshipeth.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And when they heard these sayings, they
were full of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And the whole city was filled with
confusion: and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia,
Paul's companions in travel, they rushed with one accord into the
theater.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And when Paul would have entered in to
the people, the disciples suffered him not.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And certain of the chief of Asia, who
were his friends, sent to him, desiring him that he would not adventure
himself into the theater.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Some therefore cried one thing, and
some another: for the assembly was confused, and the greater part knew
not why they had come together.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And they drew Alexander out of the
multitude, the Jews putting him forward. And Alexander beckoned with the
hand, and would have made his defense to the people.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But when they knew that he was a Jew,
all with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And when the town-clerk had appeased
the people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth
not that the city of the Ephesians is a worshiper of the great goddess
Diana, and of the image which fell down from Jupiter?

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> Seeing then that these things cannot be
contradicted, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> For ye have brought hither these men,
who are neither robbers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your
goddess.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> Wherefore, if Demetrius and the
artificers who are with him, have a matter against any man, the law is
open, and there are deputies: let them implead one another.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> But if ye inquire any thing concerning
other matters, it shall be determined in a lawful assembly.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> For we are in danger to be called in
question for this day's uproar, there being no cause by which we may
give an account of this concourse.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And when he had thus spoken, he
dismissed the assembly.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And after the uproar had ceased, Paul
called to him the disciples, and embraced them, and departed to go into
Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And when he had gone over those parts,
and had given them much exhortation, he came into Greece,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And there abode three months. And when
the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into Syria, he
purposed to return through Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And there accompanied him into Asia
Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus;
and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and of Asia, Tychicus, and Trophimus.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> These going before, tarried for us at
Troas.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And we sailed away from Philippi, after
the days of unleavened bread, and came to them to Troas in five days;
where we abode seven days.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And upon the first day of the week, when
the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached to them (ready
to depart on the morrow) and continued his speech until midnight.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And there were many lights in the upper
chamber, where they were assembled.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And there sat in a window a certain young
man named Eutychus, having fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was
long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell from the third loft,
and was taken up dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And Paul went down, and fell on him,
and embracing him, said, Trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> When he had come up again, and had
broken bread, and eaten, and discoursed a long while, even till break of
day, so he departed.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And they brought the young man alive,
and were not a little comforted.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And we went before to a ship, and
sailed to Assos, there intending to take in Paul: for so he had
appointed, intending himself to go on foot.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And when he met with us at Assos, we
took him in, and came to Mitylene.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And we sailed thence, and came the next
day over against Chios; and the next day we arrived at Samos, and
tarried at Trogyllium; and the next day we came to Miletus.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> For Paul had determined to sail by
Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia: for he hasted, if
it were possible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus,
and called the elders of the church.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And when they had come to him, he said
to them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what
manner I have been with you at all seasons,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Serving the Lord with all humility of
mind, and with many tears and temptations, which befell me by the lying
in wait of the Jews:

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And how I kept back nothing that was
profitable to you, but have shown you, and have taught you publicly, and
from house to house,

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Testifying both to the Jews, and also
to the Greeks, repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And now behold, I go bound in the
spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there:

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Save that the Holy Spirit testifieth in
every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my course
with joy, and the ministry which I have received from the Lord Jesus, to
testify the gospel of the grace of God.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And now behold, I know that ye all,
among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, will see my face no
more.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Wherefore I call you to witness this
day, that I am pure from the blood of all men.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> For I have not shunned to declare to
you all the counsel of God.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Take heed therefore to yourselves, and
to all the flock over which the Holy Spirit hath made you overseers, to
feed the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> For I know this, that after my
departure grievous wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the
flock.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Also from your own selves will men
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Therefore watch, and remember, that by
the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day
with tears.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And now, brethren, I commend you to
God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to
give you an inheritance among all them who are sanctified.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> I have coveted no man's silver, or
gold, or apparel.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And ye yourselves know, that these
hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them that were with me.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> I have shown you all things, that so
laboring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember the words of the
Lord Jesus, that he said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> And when he had thus spoken, he kneeled
down, and prayed with them all.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And they all wept bitterly, and fell on
Paul's neck, and kissed him,

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Sorrowing most of all for the words
which he spoke, that they should see his face no more. And they
accompanied him to the ship.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And it came to pass, that after we were
separated from them, and had lanched, we came with a straight course to
Coos, and the day following to Rhodes, and from thence to Patara:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And finding a ship sailing over to
Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we
left it on the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre: for
there the ship was to unlade her burden.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And finding disciples, we tarried there
seven days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go
up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And when we had accomplished those days,
we departed, and proceeded on our way; and they all conducted us with
wives and children, till we were out of the city; and we kneeled down on
the shore, and prayed.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And when we had taken our leave one of
another, we took ship; and they returned home again.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And when we had finished our course from
Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with
them one day.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the next day we that were of Paul's
company departed, and came to Cesarea; and we entered into the house of
Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven; and abode with him.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And the same man had four daughters,
virgins, who prophesied.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And as we tarried there many days,
there came down from Judea a certain prophet, named Agabus.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And when he had come to us, he took
Paul's girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus saith
the Holy Spirit, So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth
this girdle, and will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And when we heard these things, both
we, and they of that place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Paul answered, What mean ye to
weep, and to break my heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but
also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And when he would not be persuaded, we
ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And after those days we took up our
furniture, and went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> There went with us also certain of the
disciples of Cesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old
disciple, with whom we should lodge.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And when we had come to Jerusalem, the
brethren received us gladly.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And the day following Paul went in with
us to James: and all the elders were present.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And when he had saluted them, he
declared particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by
his ministry.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And when they heard it, they glorified
the Lord, and said to him, Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of
Jews there are who believe; and they are all zealous of the law:

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And they are informed concerning thee,
that thou teachest all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake
Moses, saying, That they ought not to circumcise their children, neither
to walk after the customs.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> What is it therefore? the multitude
must needs come together: for they will hear that thou art come.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Do therefore this that we say to thee:
we have four men who have a vow on them;

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Take them, and purify thyself with
them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and
all may know that those things of which they were informed concerning
thee, are nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and
keepest the law.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> As concerning the Gentiles who believe,
we have written and concluded that they observe no such thing, save only
that they keep themselves from things offered to idols, and from blood,
and from strangled, and from lewdness.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Then Paul took the men, and the next
day purifying himself with them, entered into the temple, to signify the
accomplishment of the days of purification, until an offering should be
offered for every one of them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And when the seven days were almost
ended, the Jews who were from Asia, when they saw him in the temple,
stirred up all the people, and laid hands on him,

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> Crying out, Men of Israel, help. This
is the man that teacheth all men every where against the people, and the
law, and this place: and further, hath brought Greeks also into the
temple; and hath polluted this holy place.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> (For they had seen before with him in
the city, Trophimus, an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had
brought into the temple.)

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And all the city was moved, and the
people ran together: and they took Paul and drew him out of the temple.
And forthwith the doors were shut.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And as they went about to kill him,
tidings came to the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was in
an uproar.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Who immediately took soldiers and
centurions, and ran down to them. And when they saw the chief captain
and the soldiers, they left beating Paul.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Then the chief captain came near and
took him, and commanded him to be bound with two chains: and inquired
who he was, and what he had done.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And some cried one thing, some another,
among the multitude: and when he could not know the certainty for the
tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the castle.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And when he came upon the stairs, so it
was that he was borne by the soldiers, for the violence of the people.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> For the multitude of the people
followed, crying, Away with him.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> And as Paul was to be led into the
castle, he said to the chief captain, May I speak to thee? Who said,
Canst thou speak Greek?

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> Art not thou that Egyptian, who before
these days madest an uproar, and leddest out into the wilderness four
thousand men that were murderers?

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> But Paul said, I am a man who am a Jew
of Tarsus, a city of Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and I beseech
thee suffer me to speak to the people.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> And when he had given him license, Paul
stood on the stairs, and beckoned with the hand to the people. And when
there was made entire silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language,
saying,

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my
defense which I make now to you.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> (And when they heard that he spoke to
them in the Hebrew language, they kept the more silence: and he saith,)

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> I am verily a man who am a Jew, born in
Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the feet of
Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the
fathers, being zealous towards God, as ye all are this day.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And I persecuted this way even to death,
binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> As also the high priest doth bear me
testimony, and all the estate of the elders; from whom also I received
letters to the brethren, and went to Damascus, to bring them who were
there bound to Jerusalem, to be punished.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And it came to pass, that as I was
passing on my journey, and had come nigh to Damascus about noon,
suddenly there shone from heaven a great light around me.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And I fell to the ground, and heard a
voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And
he said to me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they that were with me saw indeed the
light, and were afraid; but they heard not the voice of him that spoke
to me.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And
the Lord said to me, Arise, and go into Damascus, and there it shall be
told thee concerning all things which are appointed for thee to do.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And when I could not see for the glory
of that light, being led by the hand of them that were with me, I came
into Damascus.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And one Ananias, a devout man according
to the law, having a good report of all the Jews who dwelt there,

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Came to me, and stood, and said to me,
Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And he said, The God of our fathers
hath chosen thee, that thou shouldst know his will, and see that Just
One, and shouldst hear the voice of his mouth.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> For thou shalt be his witness to all
men of what thou hast seen and heard.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And now why tarriest thou? arise, and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And it came to pass, that when I had
come again to Jerusalem, even while I prayed in the temple, I was in a
trance;

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And saw him saying to me, Make haste,
and depart quickly from Jerusalem; for they will not receive thy
testimony concerning me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I said, Lord, they know that I
imprisoned, and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee:

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And when the blood of thy martyr
Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting to his death,
and kept the raiment of them that slew him.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And he said to me, Depart: for I will
send thee far hence to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And they gave him audience to this
word, and then lifted up their voices, and said, Away with such a man
from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And as they cried out, and cast off
their clothes, and threw dust into the air,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> The chief captain commanded him to be
brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by
scourging; that he might know for what cause they cried so against him.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And as they bound him with thongs, Paul
said to the centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a
man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> When the centurion heard that, he went
and told the chief captain, saying, Take heed what thou doest; for this
man is a Roman.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Then the chief captain came, and said
to him, Tell me, art thou a Roman? He said, Yes.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And the chief captain answered, With a
great sum I obtained this freedom. And Paul said, But I was free born.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Then forthwith they departed from him
who were about to examine him: and the chief captain also was afraid,
after he knew that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> On the morrow, because he would have
known the certainty why he was accused by the Jews, he loosed him from
his bands, and commanded the chief priests and all their council to
appear, and brought Paul down, and set him before them.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And Paul, earnestly beholding the
council, said, Men, brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before
God until this day.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And the high priest Ananias commanded
them that stood by him, to strike him on the mouth.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then said Paul to him, God shall smite
thee, thou whited wall: for sittest thou to judge me according to the
law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And they that stood by, said, Revilest
thou God's high priest?

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Then said Paul, I knew not, brethren,
that he is the high priest: for it is written, Thou shalt not speak evil
of the ruler of thy people.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But when Paul perceived that the one part
were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council,
Men, brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: concerning the
hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And when he had so said, there arose a
dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees: and the multitude
was divided.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> For the Sadducees say that there is no
resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisees confess both.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And there arose a great cry: and the
scribes that were of the Pharisees' part arose, and contended, saying,
We find no evil in this man: but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to
him, let us not fight against God.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And when there arose a great
dissension, the chief captain, fearing lest Paul would have been pulled
in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him by
force from among them, and to bring him into the castle.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And the night following the Lord stood
by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul: for as thou hast testified
concerning me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear testimony also at Rome.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And when it was day, certain of the
Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying, that
they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And they were more than forty who had
made this conspiracy.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And they came to the chief priests and
elders, and said, We have bound ourselves under a great curse, that we
will eat nothing until we have slain Paul.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Now therefore ye with the council
signify to the chief captain, that he bring him down to you to-morrow,
as though ye would inquire something more perfectly concerning him: and
we, before he shall come near, are ready to kill him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And when the son of Paul's sister heard
of their lying in wait, he went and entered into the castle, and told
Paul.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Then Paul called one of the centurions
to him, and said, Bring this young man to the chief captain: for he hath
a certain thing to tell him.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So he took him, and brought him to the
chief captain, and said, Paul the prisoner called me to him, and prayed
me to bring this young man to thee, who hath something to say to thee.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Then the chief captain took him by the
hand, and went with him aside privately, and asked him, What is that
thou hast to tell me?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he said, The Jews have agreed to
desire thee, that thou wouldst bring down Paul to-morrow into the
council, as though they would inquire somewhat concerning him more
perfectly.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> But do not thou yield to them: for
there are of them who lie in wait for him more than forty men, who have
bound themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till
they have killed him: and now they are ready, looking for a promise from
thee.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> So the chief captain then let the young
man depart, and charged him, See thou tell no man that thou hast shown
these things to me.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And he called to him two centurions,
saying, Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Cesarea, and seventy
horsemen, and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night;

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And provide for them beasts, that they
may set Paul on, and bring him safe to Felix the governor.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And he wrote a letter after this
manner:

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Claudius Lysias, to the most excellent
governor Felix, sendeth greeting.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> This man was taken by the Jews, and
would have been killed by them: then I came with a body of soldiers, and
rescued him, having understood that he was a Roman.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And when I would have known the cause
for which they accused him, I brought him forth into their council:

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Whom I perceived to be accused of
questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of
death, or of bonds.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And when it was told to me that the
Jews laid wait for the man, I sent forthwith to thee, and gave
commandment to his accusers also, to say before thee what they had
against him. Farewell.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Then the soldiers, as it was commanded
them, took Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatris.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> On the morrow they left the horsemen to
go with him, and returned to the castle:

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Who, when they came to Cesarea, and
delivered the epistle to the governor, presented Paul also before him.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And when the governor had read the
letter, he asked of what province he was. And when he understood that he
was of Cilicia,

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> I will hear thee, said he, when thy
accusers also have come. And he commanded him to be kept in Herod's
judgment-hall.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And after five days, Ananias the high
priest descended with the elders, and with a certain orator named
Tertullus, who informed the governor against Paul.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And when he was called forth, Tertullus
began to accuse him, saying, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great
quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done to this nation by thy
providence,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> We accept it always, and in all places,
most noble Felix, with all thankfulness.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Notwithstanding, that I may not be
further tedious to thee, I pray thee, that thou wouldst of thy clemency
hear us a few words.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For we have found this a pestilent man,
and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a
ring-leader of the sect of the Nazarenes:

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Who also hath gone about to profane the
temple: whom we took, and would have judged according to our law.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> But the chief captain Lysias came and
with great violence took him out of our hands,

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Commanding his accusers to come to thee:
by examining whom, thou thyself mayest take knowledge of all these
things of which we accuse him.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And the Jews also assented, saying, that
these things were so.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Then Paul, after the governor had
beckoned to him to speak, answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast
been for many years a judge to this nation, I do the more cheerfully
answer for myself:

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> That thou mayest understand, that there
are yet but twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem to worship.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And they neither found me in the temple
disputing with any man, neither exciting the people to sedition, neither
in the synagogues, nor in the city:

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Neither can they prove the things of
which they now accuse me.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> But this I confess to thee, that after
the way which they call heresy, so I worship the God of my fathers,
believing all things which are written in the law and in the prophets:

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And have hope towards God, which they
themselves also allow, that there will be a resurrection of the dead,
both of the just and unjust.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And in this I exercise myself, to have
always a conscience void of offense towards God, and towards men.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Now after many years, I came to bring
alms to my nation, and offerings.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Upon which certain Jews from Asia found
me purified in the temple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Who ought to have been here before
thee, and object if they had aught against me.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Or else let these same here say, if
they have found any evil-doing in me, while I stood before the council,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Except it is for this one voice, that I
cried, standing among them, Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am
called in question by you this day.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And when Felix heard these things,
having more perfect knowledge of that way, he deferred them, and said,
When Lysias the chief captain shall come down, I will know the uttermost
of your matter.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And he commanded a centurion to keep
Paul, and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his
acquaintance to minister, or come to him.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And after certain days, when Felix came
with his wife Drusilla, who was a Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard
him concerning the faith in Christ.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And as he reasoned of righteousness,
temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, depart
for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for thee.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> He hoped also that money would have
been given him by Paul, that he might loose him: wherefore he sent for
him the oftener, and communed with him.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> But after two years Porcius Festus came
as successor to Felix: and Felix willing to show the Jews a pleasure,
left Paul bound.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Now when Festus had come into the
province, after three days he ascended from Cesarea to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Then the high priest and the chief of the
Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And desired favor against him, that he
would send for him to Jerusalem, laying wait in the way to kill him.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But Festus answered, that Paul should be
kept at Cesarea, and that he himself would depart shortly thither.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Let them therefore, said he, who among
you are able, go down with me, and accuse this man, if there is any
wickedness in him.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And when he had tarried among them more
than ten days, he went down to Cesarea; and the next day sitting on the
judgment-seat, commanded Paul to be brought.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And when he had come, the Jews who came
down from Jerusalem stood around, and laid many and grievous complaints
against Paul, which they could not prove;

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> While he answered for himself, Neither
against the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against
Cesar have I committed any offense.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But Festus, willing to do the Jews a
pleasure, answered Paul, and said, Wilt thou go to Jerusalem, and there
be judged concerning these things before me?

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Then said Paul, I stand at Cesar's
tribunal, where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong,
as thou very well knowest.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> For if I am an offender, or have
committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die: but if there
is none of these things of which these accuse me, no man may deliver me
to them. I appeal to Cesar.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Then Festus, when he had conferred with
the council, answered, Hast thou appealed to Cesar? to Cesar thou shalt
go.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And after certain days, king Agrippa
and Bernice came to Cesarea, to salute Festus.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And when they had been there many days,
Festus declared Paul's cause to the king, saying, There is a certain man
left in bonds by Felix:

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> About whom, when I was at Jerusalem,
the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, desiring to
have judgment against him.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> To whom I answered, It is not the
manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before he who is accused
hath the accusers face to face, and hath license to answer for himself
concerning the crime laid against him.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Therefore, when they had come hither,
without any delay on the morrow I sat on the judgment-seat, and
commanded the man to be brought forth;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Against whom, when the accusers stood
up, they brought no accusation of such things as I supposed:

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> But had certain questions against him
of their own superstition, and of one Jesus who was dead, whom Paul
affirmed to be alive.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And because I doubted of such manner of
questions, I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be
judged concerning these matters.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> But when Paul had appealed to be
reserved to the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept till I
might send him to Cesar.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> Then Agrippa said to Festus, I would
also hear the man myself. To-morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And on the morrow, when Agrippa had
come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and had entered into the place of
hearing, with the chief captains and principal men of the city, at the
command of Festus Paul was brought forth.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And Festus said, King Agrippa, and all
men who are here present with us, ye see this man about whom all the
multitude of the Jews have dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and also
here, crying that he ought not to live any longer.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> But when I found that he had committed
nothing worthy of death, and that he himself hath appealed to Augustus,
I have determined to send him.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Of whom I have no certain thing to
write to my lord. Wherefore I have brought him forth before you, and
specially before thee, O king Agrippa, that after examination had, I may
have somewhat to write.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> For it seemeth to me unreasonable to
send a prisoner, and not also to signify the crimes laid against him.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Then Agrippa said to Paul, Thou art
permitted to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and
answered for himself:

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> I think myself happy, king Agrippa,
because I shall answer for myself this day before thee, concerning all
the things of which I am accused by the Jews:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Especially, because I know thee to be
expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore
I beseech thee to hear me patiently.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> My manner of life from my youth, which
was at the first among my own nation at Jerusalem, know all the Jews,

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Who knew me from the beginning, (if they
would testify) that after the strictest sect of our religion, I lived a
Pharisee.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And now I stand, and am judged for the
hope of the promise made by God to our fathers:

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> To which promise our twelve tribes,
assiduously serving God day and night, hope to come. For which hope's
sake, king Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Why should it be thought a thing
incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> I verily thought with myself, that I
ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Which thing I also did in Jerusalem:
and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received
authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I
gave my voice against them.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And I punished them often in every
synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly
enraged against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Upon which as I went to Damascus, with
authority and commission from the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> At mid-day, O king, I saw in the way a
light from heaven, surpassing the brightness of the sun, shining around
me, and them who journeyed with me.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And when we had all fallen to the
earth, I heard a voice speaking to me, and saying in the Hebrew
language, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to
kick against the goads.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he
said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> But rise, and stand upon thy feet: for
I have appeared to thee for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a
witness both of the things which thou hast seen, and of the things in
which I will appear to thee;

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Delivering thee from the people, and
from the Gentiles, to whom now I send thee,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> To open their eyes, and to turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they
may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them who are
sanctified by faith that is in me.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Upon which O king Agrippa, I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> But showed first to them of Damascus,
and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the region of Judea, and then to
the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet
for repentance.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For these causes the Jews caught me in
the temple, and went about to kill me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Having therefore obtained help from
God, I continue to this day, testifying both to small and great, saying
no other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should
come:

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> That Christ should suffer, and that he
should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should show
light to the people, and to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And as he was thus speaking for
himself, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself;
much learning doth make thee insane.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> But he said, I am not insane, most
noble Festus; but speak forth the words of truth and soberness.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> For the king knoweth of these things,
before whom also I speak freely. For I am persuaded that none of these
things are hidden from him; for this thing was not done in a corner.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> King Agrippa, believest thou the
prophets? I know that thou believest.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> Then Agrippa said to Paul, Almost thou
persuadest me to be a Christian.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And Paul said, I would to God, that not
only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost, and
altogether such as I am, except these bonds.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And when he had thus spoken, the king
rose, and the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat with them:

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And when they had gone aside, they
talked between themselves, saying, This man doeth nothing worthy of
death, or of bonds.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> Then said Agrippa to Festus, This man
might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed to Cesar.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And when it was determined that we should
sail into Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to one
named Julius, a centurion of Augustus' band.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And entering into a ship of Adramyttium,
we lanched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia, one Aristarchus, a
Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And the next day we touched at Sidon. And
Julius courteously treated Paul, and gave him liberty to go to his
friends to refresh himself.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And when we had lanched from thence, we
sailed under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And when we had sailed over the sea of
Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Mira, a city of Lycia.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And there the centurion found a ship of
Alexandria sailing into Italy; and he put us therein.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And when we had sailed slowly many days,
and scarce had come over against Cnidus, the wind not suffering us, we
sailed under Crete, over against Salmone:

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And hardly passing it, came to a place
which is called, The fair havens; nigh to which was the city of Lasea.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Now when much time was spent, and when
sailing was now dangerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul
admonished them.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And said to them, Sirs, I perceive that
this voyage will be with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading
and ship, but also of our lives.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Nevertheless, the centurion believed
the master and the owner of the ship more than the things which were
spoken by Paul.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And because the haven was not
commodious to winter in, the greater part advised to depart thence also,
if by any means they might attain to Phenice, and there to winter; which
is a haven of Crete, and lieth towards the south-west and north-west.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And when the south wind blew softly,
supposing that they had obtained their purpose, loosing thence, they
sailed close by Crete.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> But not long after there arose against
it a tempestuous wind, called Euroclydon.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And when the ship was caught, and could
not bear up into the wind, we let her drive.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And running under a certain isle which
is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat:

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Which when they had taken up, they used
helps, undergirding the ship; and fearing lest they should fall into the
quicksands, struck sail, and so were driven.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And we being exceedingly tossed with a
tempest, the next day they lightened the ship;

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And the third day we cast out with our
own hands the tackling of the ship.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And when neither sun nor stars in many
days appeared, and no small tempest lay on us, all hope that we should
be saved was then taken away.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> But after long abstinence, Paul stood
forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened to
me, and not have loosed from Crete, and to have gained this harm and
loss.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And now I exhort you to be of good
cheer: for there shall be no loss of life among you, but of the ship.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> For there stood by me this night the
angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> Saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be
brought before Cesar: and lo, God hath given thee all them that sail
with thee.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for
I believe God, that it will be even as it was told to me.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> But we must be cast upon a certain
isle.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> When the fourteenth night was come, as
we were driven up and down in Adria, about midnight the shipmen
suspected that they drew near to some country:

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> And sounded, and found it twenty
fathoms: and when they had gone a little further, they sounded again,
and found it fifteen fathoms.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> Then fearing lest we should fall upon
rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And as the shipmen were about to flee
out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into the sea, under
color as though they would cast anchors out of the foreship,

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> Paul said to the centurion, and to the
soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of
the boat, and let her fall off.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And while the day was coming on, Paul
besought them all to take food, saying, This day is the fourteenth day
that ye have tarried, and continued fasting, having taken nothing.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Wherefore I pray you to take some food;
for this is for your health: for there shall not a hair fall from the
head of any of you.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And when he had thus spoken, he took
bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all; and when he had
broken it, he began to eat.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> Then they were all of good cheer, and
they also took food.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And we were in all in the ship two
hundred and seventy six souls.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And when they had eaten enough, they
lightened the ship, and cast the wheat into the sea.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And when it was day, they knew not the
land: but they discovered a certain creek with a shore, into which they
purposed, if it were possible, to thrust in the ship.

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> And when they had taken up the anchors,
they committed themselves to the sea, and loosed the rudder bands, and
hoisted the mainsail to the wind, and made towards the shore.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> And falling into a place where two seas
met, they ran the ship aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and
remained immovable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of
the waves.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> And the soldiers' counsel was to kill
the prisoners, lest any of them should swim out, and escape.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> But the centurion, willing to save
Paul, kept them from their purpose, and commanded that they who could
swim, should cast themselves first into the sea, and get to land:

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And the rest, some on boards, and some
on broken pieces of the ship: And so it came to pass, that they all
escaped safe to land.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And when they had escaped, then they knew
that the isle was called Melita.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And the barbarous people showed us no
little kindness: for they kindled a fire, and received us every one,
because of the present rain, and because of the cold.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And when Paul had gathered a bundle of
sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat,
and fastened on his hand.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And when the barbarians saw the animal
hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a
murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffereth
not to live.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And he shook off the animal into the
fire, and felt no harm.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Yet they looked when he would have
swelled, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked a great
while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said
that he was a god.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> In the same quarters were possessions of
the chief man of the isle, whose name was Publius; who received us, and
lodged us three days courteously.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And it came to pass that the father of
Publius lay sick with a fever, and a bloody-flux: to whom Paul entered
in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> So when this was done, others also who
had diseases in the isle, came, and were healed:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Who also honored us with many honors;
and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were necessary.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And after three months we departed in a
ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was
Castor and Pollux.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And landing at Syracuse, we tarried
there three days.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And from thence we made a circuit, and
came to Rhegium: and after one day the south wind blew, and we came the
next day to Puteoli:

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Where we found brethren, and were
desired to tarry with them seven days: and so we went towards Rome.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And from thence when the brethren heard
of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii-forum, and the Three
taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took courage.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And when we came to Rome, the centurion
delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard: but Paul was
suffered to dwell by himself, with a soldier that kept him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And it came to pass, that after three
days, Paul called together the chief of the Jews. And when they were
assembled, he said to them, Men, brethren, though I have committed
nothing against the people, or customs of our fathers, yet I was
delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Who when they had examined me, would
have let me go, because there was no cause of death in me.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> But when the Jews spoke against it, I
was constrained to appeal to Cesar; not that I had aught to accuse my
nation of.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For this cause therefore have I called
for you, to see you, and to speak with you: because that for the hope of
Israel I am bound with this chain.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And they said to him, We have neither
received letters from Judea concerning thee, neither have any of the
brethren that came shown or spoken any harm of thee.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> But we desire to hear from thee, what
thou thinkest: for as concerning this sect, we know that every where it
is spoken against.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And when they had appointed him a day,
there came many to him into his lodging; to whom he expounded and
testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out
of the law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from morning till evening.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And some believed the things which were
spoken, and some believed not.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And when they agreed not among
themselves, they departed, after Paul had spoken one word, Well spoke
the Holy Spirit by Isaiah the prophet to our fathers,

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Saying, Go to this people, and say,
Hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall
see, and not perceive.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For the heart of this people is become
gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they
closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should
heal them.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Be it known therefore to you, that the
salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will hear it.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And when he had said these words, the
Jews departed, and had great reasoning among themselves.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And Paul dwelt two whole years in his
own hired house, and received all that came in to him,

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all
confidence, no man forbidding him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans](rom)
