[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rom)  [Next](co2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 1 Corinthians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus
Christ through the will of God, and Sosthenes our brother,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To the church of God which is at Corinth,
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with
all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord,
both theirs and ours.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace be to you, and peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I thank my God always on your behalf, for
the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> That in every thing ye are enriched by him,
in all utterance, and in all knowledge;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Even as the testimony of Christ was
confirmed in you:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting
for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Who will also confirm you to the end, that
ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> God is faithful, by whom ye were called to
the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that
there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For it hath been declared to me
concerning you, my brethren, by them who are of the house of Chloe, that
there are contentions among you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Now this I say, that every one of you
saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for
you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I thank God that I baptized none of you,
but Crispus and Gaius;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Lest any should say that I had baptized
in my own name.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And I baptized also the household of
Stephanas; besides, I know not whether I baptized any other.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For Christ hath not sent me to baptize,
but to preach the gospel: not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of
Christ should be made of no effect.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For the preaching of the cross is to them
that perish, foolishness; but to us who are saved, it is the power of
God.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For it is written, I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Where is the wise? where is the scribe?
where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made foolish the
wisdom of this world?

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For when in the wisdom of God the world
by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching
to save them that believe.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> For the Jews require a sign, and the
Greeks seek wisdom:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But we preach Christ crucified, to the
Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness;

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> But to them who are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Because the foolishness of God is wiser
than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For ye see your calling, brethren, that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called:

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> But God hath chosen the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of
the world to confound the things which are mighty;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And base things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath God chosen, and things which are not, to bring
to naught things that are:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> That no flesh should glory in his
presence.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who
from God is made to us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption:

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> That, according as it is written, He that
glorieth, let him glory in the Lord.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And I, brethren, when I came to you, came
not with excellence of speech, or of wisdom, declaring to you the
testimony of God.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For I determined not to know any thing
among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And I was with you in weakness, and in
fear, and in much trembling.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And my speech and my preaching was not with
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and
of power:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> That your faith should not stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> However, we speak wisdom among them that
are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of
this world, that come to naught:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But we speak the wisdom of God in a
mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world to
our glory:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Which none of the princes of this world
knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But as it is written, Eye hath not seen,
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God hath prepared for them that love him.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But God hath revealed them to us by his
Spirit; for the Spirit searcheth all things, even the deep things of
God.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For what man knoweth the things of a man,
save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now we have received, not the spirit of
the world, but the spirit which is from God; that we may know the things
that are freely given to us by God.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Which things also we speak, not in the
words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Spirit teacheth;
comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness to him: neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> But he that is spiritual judgeth all
things, yet he himself is judged by no man.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For who hath known the mind of the Lord,
that he may instruct him? But we have the mind of Christ.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And I, brethren, could not speak to you as
to spiritual, but as to carnal, even as to babes in Christ.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I have fed you with milk, and not with
meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye
able.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is
among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and
walk as men?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For while one saith, I am of Paul; and
another, I am of Apollos; are ye not carnal?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> I have planted, Apollos watered: but God
hath given the increase.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> So then, neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that watereth: but God that giveth the increase.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Now he that planteth and he that watereth
are one: and every man shall receive his own reward, according to his
own labor.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For we are laborers together with God: ye
are God's husbandry, ye are God's building.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> According to the grace of God which is
given to me, as a wise master-builder, I have laid the foundation, and
another buildeth upon it. But let every man take heed how he buildeth
upon it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For other foundation can no man lay than
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Now if any man buildeth upon this
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble;

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Every man's work will be made manifest:
for the day will declare it, because it will be revealed by fire; and
the fire will try every man's work, of what sort it is.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> If any man's work abideth which he hath
built upon it, he shall receive a reward.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> If any man's work shall be burned, he
will suffer loss: but he himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Know ye not that ye are the temple of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> If any man defileth the temple of God,
him will God destroy: for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye
are.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Let no man deceive himself. If any man
among you seemeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fool, that
he may be wise.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> For the wisdom of this world is
foolishness with God. For it is written, He taketh the wise in their own
craftiness.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts
of the wise, that they are vain.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Therefore let no man glory in men: for
all things are yours:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all
are yours;

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Let a man so account of us, as of the
ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Moreover, it is required in stewards that a
man be found faithful.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But with me it is a very small thing that I
should be judged by you, or by man's judgment: yes, I judge not my own
self.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For I know nothing against myself; yet am I
not hereby justified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Therefore judge nothing before the time,
until the Lord shall come, who will both bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts:
and then shall every man have praise from God.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And these things, brethren, I have in a
figure transferred to myself, and to Apollos, for your sakes; that ye
may learn in us not to think of men above that which is written, that no
one of you on account of one, may be puffed up against another.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For who maketh thee to differ from another?
and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst
receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have
reigned as kings without us: and I wish ye did reign, that we also might
reign with you.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> For I think that God hath set forth us the
apostles last, as it were appointed to death: for we are made a
spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to men.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye
are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable,
but we are despised.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Even to this present hour we both hunger,
and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling-place;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And labor, working with our own hands.
Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Being defamed, we entreat: we are made as
the filth of the world, the offscouring of all things to this day.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I write not these things to shame you,
but as my beloved sons I warn you.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For though ye have ten thousand
instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus
I have begotten you through the gospel.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Wherefore I beseech you, be ye followers
of me.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For this cause have I sent to you
Timothy, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lord, who will bring
you into remembrance of my ways which are in Christ, as I teach every
where in every church.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Now some are puffed up, as though I would
not come to you.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But I will come to you shortly, if the
Lord will, and will know, not the speech of them who are puffed up, but
the power.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For the kingdom of God is not in word,
but in power.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> What will ye? shall I come to you with a
rod, or in love, and in the spirit of meekness?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> It is reported commonly that there is
lewdness among you, and such lewdness as is not so much as named among
the Gentiles, that one should have his father's wife.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And ye are puffed up, and have not rather
mourned, that he who hath done this deed might be taken away from among
you.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For I verily, as absent in body, but
present in spirit, have judged already as though I were present,
concerning him that hath so done this deed,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when
ye are assembled, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> To deliver such one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Your boasting is not good. Know ye not,
that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Cleanse out therefore the old leaven, that
ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our passover
is sacrificed for us:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Therefore let us keep the feast, not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with
the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> I have written to you in this epistle, not
to associate with persons guilty of lewdness:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Yet not altogether with lewd persons of
this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters:
for then ye must needs go out of the world.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But now I have written to you not to keep
company, if any man that is called a brother is a lewd person, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner:
with such person no not to eat.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For what have I to do to judge them also
that are without? do ye not judge them that are within?

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But them that are without God judgeth.
Therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked person.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Dare any of you, having a matter against
another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Do ye not know that the saints will judge
the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to
judge the smallest matters?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Know ye not that we shall judge angels? how
much more, things that pertain to this life?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> If then ye have judgments of things
pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are least esteemed in the
church.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there
is not a wise man among you? no, not one that will be able to judge
between his brethren?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But brother goeth to law with brother, and
that before unbelievers.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Now therefore there is utterly a fault
among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather
take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your
brethren.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves
with mankind,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards,
nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And such were some of you: but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> All things are lawful to me, but all
things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but I will not
be brought under the power of any.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Meats for the belly, and the belly for
meats: but God will destroy both it and them. Now the body is not for
lewdness, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And God hath both raised up the Lord, and
will also raise up us by his own power.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Know ye not, that your bodies are the
members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them the members of a harlot? By no means.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> What? know ye not that he who is joined
to a harlot is one body? for two, saith he, shall be one flesh.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But he that is joined to the Lord is one
spirit.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Flee lewdness. Every sin that a man
doeth, is without the body; but he that committeth lewdness, sinneth
against his own body.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> What, know ye not that your body is the
temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which ye have from God, and
ye are not your own?

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For ye are bought with a price: therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now concerning the things of which ye wrote
to me: It is good for a man not to touch a woman.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Nevertheless, to avoid lewdness, let every
man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Let the husband render to the wife due
benevolence: and likewise also the wife to the husband.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The wife hath not power of her own body,
but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own
body, but the wife.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Defraud ye not one the other, except with
consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer;
and come together again, that Satan may not tempt you for your
incontinence.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But I speak this by permission, and not as
a commandment.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> For I would that all men were as I myself.
But every man hath his proper gift from God, one after this manner, and
another after that.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I say therefore to the unmarried and
widows, It is good for them if they remain even as I.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> But if they cannot contain, let them marry:
for it is better to marry than to burn.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And to the married I command, yet not I,
but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her husband:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But if she shall depart, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband put
away his wife.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But to the rest I speak, not the Lord, if
any brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she is pleased to dwell
with him, let him not put her away.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And the woman who hath a husband that
believeth not, and if he is pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave
him.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For the unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else
were your children unclean; but now are they holy.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> But if the unbelieving departeth, let him
depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases; but
God hath called us to peace.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For how knowest thou, O wife, whether
thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou
shalt save thy wife?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> But as God hath distributed to every man,
as the Lord hath called every one, so let him walk. And so I ordain in
all churches.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Is any man called being circumcised? let
him not become uncircumcised. Is any called in uncircumcision? let him
not become circumcised.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Circumcision is nothing, and
uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Let every man continue in the same
calling in which he was called.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Art thou called being a servant? care not
for it; but if thou mayest be made free, use it rather.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For he that is called in the Lord, being
a servant, is the Lord's free-man: likewise also he that is called,
being free, is Christ's servant.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the
servants of men.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Brethren, let every man in the state in
which he is called, continue in it with God.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Now concerning virgins, I have no
commandment of the Lord: yet I give my judgment as one that hath
obtained mercy from the Lord to be faithful.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> I suppose therefore that this is good for
the present distress, I say, that it is good for a man so to be.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Art thou bound to a wife? seek not to be
loosed. Art thou loosed from a wife? seek not a wife.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> But if thou marry, thou hast not sinned:
and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned. Nevertheless, such will have
trouble in the flesh; but I spare you.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> But this I say, brethren, The time is
short. It remaineth, that both they that have wives, be as though they
had none;

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And they that weep, as though they wept
not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that
buy, as though they possessed not;

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And they that use this world, as not
abusing it. For the fashion of this world passeth away.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> But I would have you without anxious
care. He that is unmarried, is anxious for the things that belong to the
Lord, how he may please the Lord:

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> But he that is married, is anxious for
the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> There is a difference also between a wife
and a virgin. The unmarried woman is anxious for the things of the Lord,
that she may be holy, both in body and in spirit: but she that is
married, is anxious for the things of the world, how she may please her
husband.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And this I speak for your own profit; not
that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that
ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> But if any man thinketh that he behaveth
himself uncomely towards his virgin, if she hath passed the flower of
her age, and need so requireth, let him do what he will, he sinneth not:
let them marry.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> Nevertheless, he that standeth steadfast
in his heart, having no necessity, but hath power over his own will, and
hath so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin, doeth well.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> So then he that giveth her in marriage
doeth well; but he that giveth her not in marriage doeth better.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> The wife is bound by the law as long as
her husband liveth; but if her husband is dead, she is at liberty to be
married to whom she will; only in the Lord.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> But she is happier if she so remain,
after my judgment; and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now as concerning things offered to idols,
we know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffeth up, but charity
edifieth.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And if any man thinketh that he knoweth any
thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> But if any man loveth God, the same is
known by him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Therefore as concerning the eating of those
things that are offered in sacrifice to idols, we know that an idol is
nothing in the world, and that there is no other God but one.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For though there are that are called gods,
whether in heaven or upon earth, (as there are gods many, and lords
many)

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Yet to us there is but one God, the Father,
from whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things, and we by him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> But there is not in every man that
knowledge: for some with conscience of the idol to this hour eat it as a
thing offered to an idol; and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> But food commendeth us not to God: for
neither if we eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the
worse.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But take heed lest by any means this
liberty of yours should become a stumbling-block to them that are weak.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For if any man shall see thee, who hast
knowledge, sit eating in the idol's temple, will not the conscience of
him who is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are offered to
idols;

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And through thy knowledge shall the weak
brother perish, for whom Christ died?

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But when ye thus sin against the
brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Wherefore, if food maketh my brother to
fall into sin, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make
my brother to fall into sin.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Am I not an apostle? am I not free? have I
not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are ye not my work in the Lord?

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> If I am not an apostle to others, yet
doubtless I am to you: for ye are the seal of my apostleship in the
Lord.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> My answer to them that examine me is this,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Have we not power to eat and to drink?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Have we not power to lead about a sister, a
wife, as well as other apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and
Cephas?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Or I only and Barnabas, have we not power
to forbear working?

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Who goeth a warfare at any time at his own
charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of its fruit? or who
feedeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Do I say these things as a man? or saith
not the law the same also?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For it is written in the law of Moses, Thou
shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth
God take care for oxen?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Or saith he this altogether for our
sakes? for our sakes, no doubt, this is written: that he that ploweth
should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope should be
partaker of his hope.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> If we have sown to you spiritual things,
is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If others are partakers of this power
over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we have not used this power;
but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Do ye not know that they who minister
about holy things live from the things of the temple, and they who wait
at the altar are partakers with the altar?

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Even so hath the Lord ordained that they
who preach the gospel should live by the gospel.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> But I have used none of these things:
neither have I written these things, that it should be so done to me:
for it were better for me to die, than that any man should make my
glorying void.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For though I preach the gospel, I have
nothing to boast of: for necessity is laid upon me; and woe is to me, if
I preach not the gospel!

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For if I do this thing willingly, I have
a reward: but if against my will, a dispensation of the gospel is
committed to me.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> What is my reward then? Verily that, when
I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel of Christ without charge,
that I may not abuse my power in the gospel.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For though I am free from all men, yet I
have made myself servant to all, that I might gain the more.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And to the Jews I became as a Jew, that I
might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law,
that I might gain them that are under the law;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> To them that are without law, as without
law, (being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ,) that I
might gain them that are without law.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> To the weak I became as weak, that I
might gain the weak: I have become all things to all men, that I might
by all means save some.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And this I do for the gospel's sake, that
I may be partaker of it with you.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Know ye not, that they who run in a race,
all run, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And every man that striveth for the
mastery is temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a
corruptible crown; but we an incorruptible.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> I therefore so run, not as uncertainly;
so I fight, not as one that beateth the air:

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But I keep under my body, and bring it
into subjection: lest by any means when I have preached to others, I
myself should be a cast-away.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye
should be ignorant, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all
passed through the sea;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And were all baptized to Moses in the
cloud and in the sea;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And all ate the same spiritual food;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And all drank the same spiritual drink:
(for they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock
was Christ.)

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> But with many of them God was not well
pleased: for they were overthrown in the wilderness.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Now these things were our examples, to
the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of
them: as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose
up to play.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Neither let us commit lewdness, as some
of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of
them also tempted, and were destroyed by serpents.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Neither murmur ye, as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed by the destroyer.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Now all these things happened to them
for examples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are come.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Wherefore let him that thinketh he
standeth, take heed lest he fall.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> There hath no temptation taken you but
such as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above what ye are able; but will with the temptation also
make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from
idolatry.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I
say.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The cup of blessing which we bless, is
it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break,
is it not the communion of the body of Christ?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For we being many are one bread, and
one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Behold Israel after the flesh: are not
they who eat of the sacrifices, partakers of the altar?

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> What then do I say? that the idol is
any thing, or that which is offered in sacrifice to idols is any thing?

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But I say, that the things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons, and not to God: and I
would not that ye should have fellowship with demons.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord,
and the cup of demons: ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table, and
of the table of demons.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are
we stronger than he?

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> All things are lawful for me, but all
things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all things
edify not.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Let no man seek his own, but every man
another's wealth.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Whatever is sold in the provision
market, that eat, asking no question for conscience' sake:

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> For the earth is the Lord's, and its
fullness.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> If any of them that believe not invites
you to a feast, and ye are disposed to go; whatever is set before you,
eat, asking no question on account of conscience.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> But if any man shall say to you, This
is offered in sacrifice to idols, eat not for his sake that showed it,
and for conscience' sake: for the earth is the Lord's, and its fullness:

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Conscience, I say, not thy own, but of
the other: for why is my liberty judged by another man's conscience?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> For if I by grace am a partaker, why am
I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks?

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Give no offense, neither to the Jews,
nor to the Gentiles, nor to the church of God:

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Even as I please all men in all things,
not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Be ye followers of me, even as I also am
of Christ.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now I praise you, brethren, that ye
remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances, as I delivered them
to you.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But I would have you know, that the head
of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the
head of Christ is God.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Every man praying or prophesying, having
his head covered, dishonoreth his head.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> But every woman that prayeth or
prophesieth with her head uncovered, dishonoreth her head: for that is
even all one as if she were shaved.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> For if the woman is not covered, let her
also be shorn: but if it is a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaved,
let her be covered.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For a man indeed ought not to cover his
head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God: but the woman is
the glory of the man.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> For the man is not from the woman, but
the woman from the man.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Neither was the man created for the
woman, but the woman for the man.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For this cause ought the woman to have
power on her head, because of the angels.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Nevertheless, neither is the man
without the woman, neither the woman without the man in the Lord.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> For as the woman is from the man, even
so is the man also by the woman; but all things from God.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Judge in yourselves: Is it comely that
a woman should pray to God uncovered?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Doth not even nature itself teach you,
that if a man hath long hair, it is a shame to him?

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> But if a woman hath long hair, it is a
glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But if any man seemeth to be
contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Now in this that I declare to you, I
praise you not, that ye come together not for the better, but for the
worse.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> For first of all, when ye come together
in the church, I hear that there are divisions among you; and I partly
believe it.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> For there must be also heresies among
you, that they who are approved may be made manifest among you.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> When therefore ye come together in one
place, this is not to eat the Lord's supper.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> For in eating every one taketh before
another his own supper: and one is hungry, and another is drunken.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> What? have ye not houses to eat and to
drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and shame them that have not?
What shall I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise you not.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For I have received from the Lord, that
which also I delivered to you, That the Lord Jesus, the same night in
which he was betrayed, took bread:

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> And when he had given thanks, he broke
it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this
do in remembrance of me.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> After the same manner also he took the
cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament in my
blood: this do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> For as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he shall come.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Wherefore, whoever shall eat this
bread, and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> But let a man examine himself, and so
let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For he that eateth and drinketh
unworthily, eateth and drinketh condemnation to himself, not discerning
the Lord's body.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For this cause many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> For if we would judge ourselves, we
should not be judged.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> But when we are judged, we are
chastened by the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come
together to eat, tarry one for another.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> And if any man hungereth, let him eat
at home; that ye come not together to condemnation. And the rest will I
set in order when I come.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren,
I would not have you ignorant.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Ye know that ye were Gentiles, carried
away to these dumb idols, even as ye were led.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Wherefore I give you to understand, that
no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calleth Jesus accursed: and that
no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Now there are diversities of gifts, but
the same Spirit.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And there are differences of
administrations, but the same Lord.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And there are diversities of operations,
but it is the same God who worketh all in all.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But the manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every man for profit.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For to one is given by the Spirit the
word of wisdom; to another, the word of knowledge by the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> To another, faith by the same Spirit; to
another, the gifts of healing by the same Spirit;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> To another, the working of miracles; to
another, prophecy; to another, discerning of spirits; to another, divers
kinds of languages; to another, the interpretation of languages:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> But all these worketh that one and the
same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For as the body is one, and hath many
members, and all the members of that one body, being many, are one body:
so also is Christ.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For by one Spirit are we all baptized
into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether bond or free; and have
been all made to drink into one Spirit.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For the body is not one member, but
many.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> If the foot shall say, Because I am not
the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And if the ear shall say, Because I am
not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body?

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> If the whole body were an eye, where
were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling?

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> But now hath God set the members every
one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And if they were all one member, where
were the body?

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> But now are they many members, yet but
one body.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the eye cannot say to the hand, I
have no need of thee: nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of
you.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Nay, much more those members of the
body, which seem to be more feeble, are necessary:

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And those members of the body, which we
think to be less honorable, upon these we bestow more abundant honor;
and our uncomely parts have more abundant comeliness.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> For our comely parts have no need: but
God hath tempered the body together, having given more abundant honor to
that part which lacked:

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> That there should be no schism in the
body; but that the members should have the same care one for another.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And thus if one member suffers all the
members suffer with it; or, if one member is honored, all the members
rejoice with it.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Now ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And God hath set some in the church,
first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, next miracles, then
gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of languages.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Are all apostles? are all prophets? are
all teachers? are all workers of miracles?

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Have all the gifts of healing? do all
speak in languages? do all interpret?

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> But covet earnestly the best gifts. And
yet I show to you a more excellent way.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Though I speak with the tongues of men
and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And though I have the gift of prophecy,
and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And though I bestow all my goods to feed
the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity,
it profiteth me nothing.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Charity suffereth long, and is kind;
charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh
not its own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil;

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth
in the truth;

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Beareth all things, believeth all things,
hopeth all things, endureth all things.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Charity never faileth: but whether there
are prophecies, they shall fail; whether there are languages, they shall
cease; whether there is knowledge, it shall vanish away.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For we know in part, and we prophesy in
part.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> But when that which is perfect is come,
then that which is in part shall be done away.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> When I was a child, I spoke as a child,
I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man,
I put away childish things.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For now we see through a glass darkly;
but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as
also I am known.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And now abideth faith, hope, charity,
these three; but the greatest of these is charity.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Follow after charity, and desire
spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For he that speaketh in an unknown
language, speaketh not to men, but to God: for no man understandeth him;
yet in the spirit he speaketh mysteries.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> But he that prophesieth, speaketh to men
to edification, and exhortation, and comfort.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> He that speaketh in an unknown language
edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I would that ye all spoke in languages,
but rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than
he that speaketh in languages, except he interpret, that the church may
receive edifying.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Now, brethren, if I come to you speaking
in languages, what shall I profit you, except I shall speak to you
either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by
doctrine?

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And even things without life giving
sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the
sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped?

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> For if the trumpet shall give an
uncertain sound, who will prepare himself for battle?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> So likewise ye, except ye utter by the
tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is
spoken? for ye will speak into the air.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> There are, it may be, so many kinds of
voices in the world, and none of them is without signification.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Therefore, if I know not the meaning of
the voice, I shall be to him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that
speaketh will be a barbarian to me.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous
of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the
church.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Wherefore, let him that speaketh in an
unknown language, pray that he may interpret.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> For if I pray in an unknown language,
my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> What is it then? I will pray with the
spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with
the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Else, when thou shalt bless with the
spirit, how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say Amen
at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> For thou verily givest thanks well, but
the other is not edified.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I thank my God, I speak in languages
more than ye all:

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Yet in the church I had rather speak
five words with my understanding, that by my voice I may teach others
also, than ten thousand words in an unknown language.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Brethren, be not children in
understanding: yet in malice be ye children, but in understanding be
men.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> In the law it is written, With men of
other tongues and other lips will I speak to this people; and yet for
all that will they not hear me, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Wherefore languages are for a sign, not
to them that believe, but to them that believe not: but prophesying
serveth not for them that believe not, but for them who believe.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> If therefore the whole church is
assembled in one place, and all speak in languages, and there come in
those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are
insane?

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But if all prophesy, and there come in
one that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced by all, he is
judged by all:

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And thus are the secrets of his heart
made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and
report that God is in you in truth.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> How is it then, brethren? when ye are
assembled, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a
language, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be
done to edification.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> If any man speaketh in an unknown
language, let it be by two, or at the most by three, and that by course;
and let one interpret.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> But if there is no interpreter, let him
keep silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, and to God.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Let the prophets speak two or three,
and let the others judge.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> If any thing is revealed to another
that sitteth by, let the first hold his peace.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> For ye may all prophesy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may be comforted.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And the spirits of the prophets are
subject to the prophets.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> For God is not the author of confusion,
but of peace, as in all churches of the saints.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Let your women keep silence in the
churches; for it is not permitted to them to speak: but they are
commanded to be under obedience, as also saith the law.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And if they will learn any thing, let
them ask their husbands at home; for it is a shame for women to speak in
the church.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> What? came the word of God out from
you? or came it to you only?

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> If any man thinketh himself to be a
prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write
to you are the commandments of the Lord.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> But if any man is ignorant, let him be
ignorant.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy,
and forbid not to speak in languages.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> Let all things be done decently, and in
order.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Moreover, brethren, I declare to you the
gospel which I preached to you, which also ye have received, and in
which ye stand;

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> By which also ye are saved, if ye keep in
memory what I preached to you, unless ye have believed in vain.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For I delivered to you first of all, that
which I also received, that Christ died for our sins, according to the
scriptures;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And that he was buried, and that he rose
again the third day according to the scriptures:

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And that he was seen by Cephas, then by
the twelve:

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> After that he was seen by above five
hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain to this
present, but some have fallen asleep.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> After that he was seen by James; then by
all the apostles.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And last of all he was seen by me also,
as by one born out of due time.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> For I am the least of the apostles, who
am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church
of God.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> But by the grace of God I am what I am:
and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain; but I labored
more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was
with me.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Therefore whether it was I or they, so
we preach, and so ye believed.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Now if Christ is preached that he rose
from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of
the dead?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But if there is no resurrection of the
dead, then is Christ not raised.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And if Christ is not raised, then is
our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And indeed we are found false witnesses
of God; because we have testified concerning God that he raised up
Christ: whom he raised not, if in truth the dead rise not.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> For if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ raised:

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And if Christ is not raised, your faith
is vain; ye are yet in your sins.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Then they also who have fallen asleep
in Christ have perished.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> If in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men most miserable.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> But now is Christ raised from the dead,
and become the first-fruits of them that slept.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For since by man came death, by man
came also the resurrection of the dead.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> For as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But every man in his own order: Christ
the first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Then cometh the end, when he shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put
down all rule, and all authority, and power.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> For he must reign, till he hath put all
enemies under his feet.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> The last enemy that shall be destroyed
is death.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> For he hath put all things under his
feet. But when he saith, all things are put under him, it is manifest
that he is excepted who did put all things under him.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And when all things shall be subdued to
him, then shall the Son also himself be subject to him that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Else what will they do, who are
baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then
baptized for the dead?

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And why stand we in jeopardy every
hour?

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> I protest by your rejoicing which I
have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> If after the manner of men I have
fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantage is it to me, if the dead
rise not? let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Be not deceived: Evil communications
corrupt good manners.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> Awake to righteousness, and sin not;
for some have not the knowledge of God. I speak this to your shame.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> But some man will say, How are the dead
raised? and with what body do they come?

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> Thou fool, that which thou sowest is
not vivified except it die:

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that body that shall be, but bare grain; it may be of wheat, or of
some other grain:

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> But God giveth it a body as it hath
pleased him, and to every seed its own body.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> All flesh is not the same flesh; but
there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of
fishes, and another of fowls.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> There are also celestial bodies, and
bodies terrestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory
of the terrestrial is another.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> There is one glory of the sun, and
another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star
differeth from another star in glory.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> So also is the resurrection of the
dead. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption:

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in
glory: it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power:

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> It is sown a natural body, it is raised
a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual
body.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> And so it is written, The first man
Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a vivifying spirit.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> However, that was not first which is
spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is
spiritual.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> The first man is from the earth,
earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven.

<span id="an_15:48">15:48</span> As is the earthy, such are they also
that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are
heavenly.

<span id="an_15:49">15:49</span> And as we have borne the image of the
earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly.

<span id="an_15:50">15:50</span> Now this I say, brethren, that flesh
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth corruption
inherit incorruption.

<span id="an_15:51">15:51</span> Behold, I show you a mystery; We shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed,

<span id="an_15:52">15:52</span> In a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the last trumpet; for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead
shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.

<span id="an_15:53">15:53</span> For this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.

<span id="an_15:54">15:54</span> So when this corruptible shall have put
on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then
shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed
up in victory.

<span id="an_15:55">15:55</span> O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
where is thy victory?

<span id="an_15:56">15:56</span> The sting of death is sin; and the
strength of sin is the law.

<span id="an_15:57">15:57</span> But thanks be to God, who giveth us the
victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:58">15:58</span> Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now concerning the collection for the
saints, as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Upon the first day of the week, let every
one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that there be
no collections when I come.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And when I come, whomsoever ye shall
approve by your letters, them will I send to bring your liberality to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And if it be proper that I should go
also, they shall go with me.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Now I will come to you, when I shall pass
through Macedonia: for I am to pass through Macedonia.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And it may be that I shall abide, and
even winter with you, that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I
go.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> For I will not see you now by the way;
but I trust to tarry a while with you, if the Lord permit.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> But I shall tarry at Ephesus until
Pentecost.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For a great door and effectual is opened
to me, and there are many adversaries.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Now if Timothy come, see that he may be
with you without fear: for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also
do.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Let no man therefore despise him: but
conduct him forth in peace, that he may come to me: for I look for him
with the brethren.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> As concerning our brother Apollos, I
greatly desired him to come to you with the brethren: but his will was
not at all to come at this time; but he will come when he shall have
convenient time.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Watch ye, stand fast in the faith,
acquit yourselves like men, be strong.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Let all your things be done with
charity.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> I beseech you, brethren, (ye know the
house of Stephanas, that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they
have addicted themselves to the ministry of the saints,)

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> That ye submit yourselves to such, and
to every one that helpeth with us, and laboreth.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> I am glad of the coming of Stephanas,
and Fortunatus, and Achaicus: for that which was lacking on your part,
they have supplied.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For they have refreshed my spirit and
yours: therefore acknowledge ye them that are such.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila
and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the church that is in
their house.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> All the brethren greet you. Greet ye
one another with a holy kiss.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The salutation of me Paul with my own
hand.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> If any man loveth not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema, Maran-atha.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> My love be with you all in Christ
Jesus. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians](co2)
