[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eze)  [Next](hos) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Daniel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim
king of Judah came Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Jerusalem, and
besieged it.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah
into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God: which he
carried into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought
the vessels into the treasure-house of his god.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And the king spoke to Ashpenaz the master
of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel,
and of the king's seed, and of the princes;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Children in whom was no blemish, but of
good appearance, and skillful in all wisdom, and intelligent in
knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to
stand in the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning and
the language of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And the king appointed them a daily
provision of the king's food, and of the wine which he drank: so
nourishing them three years, that at the end of them they might stand
before the king.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Now among these were of the children of
Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> To whom the prince of the eunuchs gave
names: for he gave to Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah,
of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abed-nego.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But Daniel purposed in his heart that he
would not defile himself with the portion of the king's food, nor with
the wine which he drank: therefore he requested of the prince of the
eunuchs that he might not defile himself.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Now God had brought Daniel into favor and
tender love with the prince of the eunuchs.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the prince of the eunuchs said to
Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath appointed your provision and
your drink: for why should he see your faces more meager than the
children who are of your sort? then will ye make me endanger my head to
the king.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the
prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Prove thy servants, I beseech thee, ten
days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Then let our countenances be looked upon
before thee, and the countenances of the children that eat of the
portion of the king's provision: and as thou seest, deal with thy
servants.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> So he consented to them in this matter,
and proved them ten days.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And at the end of ten days their
countenances appeared fairer and fatter in flesh than all the children
who ate the portion of the king's provision.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Thus Melzar took away the portion of
their food, and the wine that they should drink, and gave them pulse.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> As for these four children, God gave them
knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had
understanding in all visions and dreams.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now at the end of the days that the king
had said he should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought
them in before Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the king communed with them; and
among them all was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah: therefore they stood before the king.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And in all matters of wisdom and
understanding, that the king inquired of them, he found them ten times
superior to all the magicians and astrologers that were in all his
realm.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And Daniel continued even to the first
year of king Cyrus.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And in the second year of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams, with which his spirit was
troubled, and his sleep broke from him.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Then the king commanded to call the
magicians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, to
show the king his dream. So they came and stood before the king.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the king said to them, I have dreamed a
dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the dream.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Then the Chaldeans spoke to the king in
Syriac, O king, live for ever: tell thy servants the dream, and we will
show the interpretation.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The king answered and said to the
Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if ye will not make known to me
the dream, with the interpretation of it, ye shall be cut in pieces, and
your houses shall be made a dunghill.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But if ye shall show the dream, and the
interpretation of it, ye shall receive of me gifts and rewards and great
honor: therefore show me the dream, and the interpretation of it.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> They answered again and said, Let the king
tell his servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation of it.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The king answered and said, I know of
certainty that ye would gain the time, because ye see the thing is gone
from me.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But if ye will not make known to me the
dream, there is but one decree for you: for ye have prepared lying and
corrupt words to speak before me, till the time be changed: therefore
tell me the dream, and I shall know that ye can show me the
interpretation of it.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The Chaldeans answered before the king,
and said, There is not a man upon the earth that can show the king's
matter: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that hath asked
such things of any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And it is a rare thing that the king
requireth, and there is no other that can show it before the king,
except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For this cause the king was angry and
very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the decree went forth that the wise
men should be slain; and they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then Daniel answered with counsel and
wisdom to Arioch the captain of the king's guard, who had gone forth to
slay the wise men of Babylon:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> He answered and said to Arioch the king's
captain, Why is the decree so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the
thing known to Daniel.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then Daniel went in, and desired of the
king that he would give him time, and that he would show the king the
interpretation.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then Daniel went to his house, and made
the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> That they would desire mercies of the God
of heaven concerning this secret; that Daniel and his companions should
not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Then was the secret revealed to Daniel in
a night vision. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the
name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And he changeth the times and the
seasons; he removeth kings, and setteth up kings; he giveth wisdom to
the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> He revealeth the deep and secret things:
he knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God
of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known
to me now what we desired of thee: for thou hast now made known to us
the king's matter.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Therefore Daniel went into Arioch, whom
the king had ordained to destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and
said thus to him; Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in
before the king, and I will show to the king the interpretation.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the
king in haste, and said thus to him, I have found a man of the captives
of Judah, that will make known to the king the interpretation.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The king answered and said to Daniel,
whose name was Belteshazzar, Art thou able to make known to me the dream
which I have seen, and the interpretation of it?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Daniel answered in the presence of the
king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded, the wise men,
the astrologers, the magicians, the sooth-sayers, cannot show to the
king;

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> But there is a God in heaven that
revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadnezzar what
shall be in the latter days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon
thy bed, are these;

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came
into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter: and he
that revealeth secrets maketh known to thee what shall come to pass.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> But as for me, this secret is not
revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but for
their sakes that shall make known the interpretation to the king, and
that thou mayest know the thoughts of thy heart.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great
image. This great image, whose brightness was excellent, stood before
thee; and its form was terrible.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> The head of this image was of fine gold,
his breast and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass,

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> His legs of iron, his feet part of iron
and part of clay.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Thou sawest till a stone was cut out
without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were of iron and
clay, and broke them to pieces.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Then was the iron, the clay, the brass,
the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the
chaff of the summer threshing-floors; and the wind carried them away,
that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image
became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> This is the dream; and we will tell the
interpretation of it before the king.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for
the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and strength, and
glory.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> And wherever the children of men dwell,
the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into
thy hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head of
gold.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> And after thee shall arise another
kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which
shall bear rule over all the earth.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as
iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and
as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> And whereas thou sawest the feet and
toes, part of potter's clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be
divided; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch
as thou sawest the iron mixed with the miry clay.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And as the toes of the feet were part of
iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and
partly broken.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with
miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they
shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And in the days of these kings shall the
God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the
kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces
and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone
was cut out of the mountain, without hands, and that it broke in pieces
the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God
hath made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: and the
dream is certain, and the interpretation of it sure.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon
his face, and worshiped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an
oblation and sweet odors to him.

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> The king answered to Daniel, and said, Of
a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and
a revealer of secrets, seeing thou couldst reveal this secret.

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> Then the king made Daniel a great man,
and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole
province of Babylon, and chief of the governors over all the wise men of
Babylon.

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> Then Daniel requested of the king, and he
set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, over the affairs of the province
of Babylon: but Daniel sat in the gate of the king.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of
gold, whose hight was sixty cubits, and the breadth of it six cubits: he
set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to
convene the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the
treasurers, the counselors, the sherifs, and all the rulers of the
provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar
the king had set up.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Then the princes, the governors, and
captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the sherifs, and
all the rulers of the provinces, were assembled to the dedication of the
image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the
image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then a herald cried aloud, To you it is
commanded, O people, nations, and languages,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> That at what time ye hear the sound of the
cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of
music, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the
king hath set up.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And whoever shall not fall down and worship
shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Therefore at that time, when all the people
heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all
kinds of music, all the people, the nations, and the languages, fell
down and worshiped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set
up.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans
came near, and accused the Jews.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> They spoke and said to the king
Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for ever.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that
every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut,
psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, shall fall down and
worship the golden image:

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And whoever shall not fall down and
worship, that he shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery
furnace.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> There are certain Jews whom thou hast set
over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego; these men, O king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy
gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury
commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. Then they brought
these men before the king.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said to them, Is
it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, do ye not serve my gods,
nor worship the golden image which I have set up?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Now if ye be ready that at what time ye
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the image
which I have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God
that shall deliver you out of my hands?

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego,
answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to
answer thee in this matter.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> If it is so, our God whom we serve is
able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver
us out of thy hand, O king.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But if not, be it known to thee, O king,
that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou
hast set up.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and
the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego: therefore he spoke, and commanded that they should heat the
furnace seven times more than it was wont to be heated.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And he commanded the most mighty men that
were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, and to cast
them into the burning fiery furnace.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Then these men were bound in their coats,
their hose, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into
the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Therefore because the king's commandment
was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire killed
those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abed-nego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery
furnace.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was
astonished, and rose up in haste, and spoke, and said to his counselors,
Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They
answered and said to the king, True, O king.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> He answered and said, Lo, I see four men
loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt: and the
form of the fourth is like the son of God.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the
mouth of the burning fiery furnace, and spoke, and said, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth,
and come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, came forth from
the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And the princes, governors, and captains,
and the king's counselors, being assembled, saw these men, upon whose
bodies the fire had no power, nor was a hair of their head singed,
neither were their coats changed, nor had the smell of fire passed upon
them.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke, and said,
Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, who hath sent
his angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have
changed the king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not
serve nor worship any god, except their own God.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Therefore I make a decree, that every
people, nation, and language, which speak any thing amiss against the
God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, shall be cut in pieces, and
their houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other god
that can deliver after this sort.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abed-nego, in the province of Babylon.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king, to all people,
nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied
to you.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> I thought it good to show the signs and
wonders that the high God hath wrought towards me.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> How great are his signs! and how mighty are
his wonders! his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is
from generation to generation.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in my house,
and flourishing in my palace:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the
thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Therefore I made a decree to bring in all
the wise men of Babylon before me, that they might make known to me the
interpretation of the dream.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then came in the magicians, the
astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the sooth-sayers: and I told the dream
before them; but they did not make known to me the interpretation of it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> But at the last Daniel came in before me,
whose name is Belteshazzar, according to the name of my God, and in whom
is the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, saying,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians,
because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no
secret troubleth thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen,
and the interpretation of it.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Thus were the visions of my head in my
bed; I saw, and behold a tree in the midst of the earth, and its hight
was great.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The tree grew, and was strong, and its
hight reached to heaven, and the sight of it to the end of all the
earth:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Its leaves were fair, and its fruit
abundant, and in it was food for all: the beasts of the field had shade
under it, and the fowls of heaven dwelt among its boughs, and all flesh
was fed from it.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> I saw in the visions of my head upon my
bed, and behold, a watcher and a holy one came down from heaven;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down
the tree, and cut off its branches, shake off its leaves, and scatter
its fruit: let the beasts escape from under it, and the fowls from its
branches.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Nevertheless leave the stump of its roots
in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of
the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let its portion
be with the beasts in the grass of the earth.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Let his heart be changed from man's, and
let a beast's heart be given to him; and let seven times pass over him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> This matter is by the decree of the
watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent
that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of
men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the
basest of men.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar have
seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation of it,
forasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known
to me the interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy
gods is in thee.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar,
was astonished for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king
spoke, and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation
of it, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered, and said, My lord, the dream
be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation of it to thy enemies.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> The tree that thou sawest, which grew,
and was strong, whose hight reached to the heaven, and the sight of it
to all the earth;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit of
it abundant, and in it was food for all; under which the beasts of the
field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of heaven had their
habitation:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> It is thou, O king, that art grown and
become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth to heaven, and
thy dominion to the end of the earth.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And whereas the king saw a watcher and a
holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down, and
destroy it; yet leave the stump of its roots in the earth, even with a
band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field; and let it be
wet with the dew of heaven, and let its portion be with the beasts of
the field, till seven times shall pass over him;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> This is the interpretation, O king, and
this is the decree of the most High, which is come upon my lord the
king:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> That they shall drive thee from men, and
thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall make
thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of
heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou shalt know that
the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever
he will.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And whereas they commanded to leave the
stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure to thee, after that
thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be
acceptable to thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thy
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of
thy tranquillity.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> All this came upon the king
Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> At the end of twelve months he walked in
the palace of the kingdom of Babylon.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> The king spoke, and said, Is not this
great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> While the word was in the king's mouth,
there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadnezzar, to thee
it is spoken; The kingdom hath departed from thee.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And they shall drive thee from men, and
thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field: they shall make thee
to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou
shalt know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth
it to whomsoever he will.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> The same hour was the thing fulfilled
upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from men, and ate grass as oxen,
and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown
like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And at the end of the days I
Nebuchadnezzar lifted up my eyes to heaven, and my understanding
returned to me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and honored
him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and
his kingdom is from generation to generation:

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And all the inhabitants of the earth are
reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of
heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his
hand, or say to him, What doest thou?

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> At the same time my reason returned to
me; and for the glory of my kingdom, my honor and brightness returned to
me; and my counselors and my lords sought to me; and I was established
in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added to me.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and extol and
honor the King of heaven, all whose works are truth, and his ways
judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Belshazzar the king made a great feast to a
thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine,
commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which his father
Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that
the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink in
them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then they brought the golden vessels that
were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem;
and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in
them.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> They drank wine, and praised the gods of
gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In the same hour came forth fingers of a
man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaster of
the wall of the king's palace: and the king saw the part of the hand
that wrote.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Then the king's countenance was changed,
and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against another.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The king cried aloud to bring in the
astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the sooth-sayers. And the king spoke and
said to the wise men of Babylon, Whoever shall read this writing, and
show me the interpretation of it, shall be clothed with scarlet, and
have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the
kingdom.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Then came in all the king's wise men: but
they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the
interpretation of it.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then was the king Belshazzar greatly
troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were
astonished.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Now the queen by reason of the words of
the king and his lords came into the banquet house: and the queen spoke
and said, O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor
let thy countenance be changed:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is
the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and
understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him;
whom the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father,
made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and sooth-sayers;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Forasmuch as an excellent spirit, and
knowledge, and understanding, the interpreting of dreams, and showing of
hard sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel,
whom the king named Belteshazzar: now let Daniel be called, and he will
show the interpretation.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Then was Daniel brought in before the
king. And the king spoke and said to Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, who
art of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father
brought out of Judea?

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I have even heard of thee, that the
spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light and understanding and
excellent wisdom is found in thee.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And now the wise men, the astrologers,
have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing, and
make known to me the interpretation of it, but they could not show the
interpretation of the thing:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And I have heard of thee, that thou canst
make interpretations, and dissolve doubts: now if thou canst read the
writing, and make known to me the interpretation of it, thou shalt be
clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt
be the third ruler in the kingdom.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Then Daniel answered and said before the
king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet
I will read the writing to the king, and make known to him the
interpretation.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> O thou king, the most high God gave
Nebuchadnezzar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honor:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And for the majesty that he gave him, all
people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he
would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would he set
up; and whom he would he put down.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> But when his heart was lifted up, and his
mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they
took his glory from him:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And he was driven from the sons of men;
and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the
wild asses: they fed him with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with
the dew of heaven; till he knew that the most high God ruleth in the
kingdom of men, and that he appointeth over it whomsoever he will.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And thou his son, O Belshazzar, hast not
humbled thy heart, though thou knewest all this;

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> But hast lifted up thyself against the
Lord of heaven; and they have brought the vessels of his house before
thee, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drank
wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of
brass, iron, wood, and stone, which see not, nor hear, nor know: and the
God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, thou hast
not glorified.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Then was the part of the hand sent from
him; and this writing was written.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And this is the writing that was written,
MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> This is the interpretation of the thing:
MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances,
and art found wanting.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given
to the Medes and Persians.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Then commanded Belshazzar, and they
clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and
made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in
the kingdom.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> In that night was Belshazzar the king of
the Chaldeans slain.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And Darius the Median took the kingdom,
being about sixty and two years old.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom a
hundred and twenty princes, who should be over the whole kingdom;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And over these three presidents; of whom
Daniel was first: that the princes might give accounts to them, and the
king should have no damage.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Then this Daniel was preferred above the
presidents and princes, because an excellent spirit was in him; and the
king thought to set him over the whole realm.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Then the presidents and princes sought to
find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find
no occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there
any error or fault found in him.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then said these men, We shall not find any
occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning
the law of his God.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then these presidents and princes assembled
to the king, and said thus to him, King Darius, live for ever.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> All the presidents of the kingdom, the
governors, and the princes, the counselors, and the captains, have
consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm
decree, that whoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty
days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign
the writing, that it may not be changed, according to the law of the
Medes and Persians, which altereth not.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Wherefore king Darius signed the writing
and the decree.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Now when Daniel knew that the writing was
signed, he went into his house; and his windows being open in his
chamber towards Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a day,
and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did before.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then these men assembled, and found
Daniel praying and making supplication before his God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Then they came near, and spoke before the
king concerning the king's decree; Hast thou not signed a decree, that
every man that shall ask a petition of any God or man within thirty
days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The
king answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the
Medes and Persians, which altereth not.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then they answered and said before the
king, That Daniel, who is of the children of the captivity of Judah,
regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed, but
maketh his petition three times a day.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Then the king, when he heard these words,
was much displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver
him: and he labored till the setting of the sun to deliver him.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Then these men assembled to the king, and
said to the king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians
is, That no decree nor statute which the king establisheth may be
changed.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Then the king commanded, and they brought
Daniel, and cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spoke and said
to Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And a stone was brought, and laid upon
the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and
with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed
concerning Daniel.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Then the king went to his palace, and
passed the night fasting: neither were instruments of music brought
before him: and his sleep went from him.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Then the king arose very early in the
morning, and went in haste to the den of lions.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And when he came to the den, he cried
with a lamentable voice to Daniel: and the king spoke and said to
Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou
servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Then said Daniel to the king, O king,
live for ever.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut
the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him
innocence was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no
hurt.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Then was the king exceeding glad for him,
and commanded that they should take Daniel out of the den. So Daniel was
taken out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found upon him, because
he believed in his God.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the king commanded, and they brought
those men who had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of
lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the
mastery of them, and broke all their bones in pieces before they came to
the bottom of the den.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Then king Darius wrote to all people,
nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be multiplied
to you.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> I make a decree, That in every dominion
of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is
the living God, and steadfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall
not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even to the end.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> He delivereth and rescueth, and he
worketh signs and wonders in heaven and on earth, who hath delivered
Daniel from the power of the lions.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> So this Daniel prospered in the reign of
Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> In the first year of Belshazzar king of
Babylon, Daniel had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed: then
he wrote the dream, and told the sum of the matters.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Daniel spoke and said, I saw in my vision
by night, and behold, the four winds of heaven strove upon the great
sea.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And four great beasts came up from the sea,
diverse one from another.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The first was like a lion, and had eagles'
wings: I beheld till its wings were plucked, and it was lifted up from
the earth, and made to stand upon the feet as a man, and a man's heart
was given to it.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And behold another beast, a second, like a
bear, and it raised itself on one side, and it had three ribs in the
mouth of it between the teeth of it: and they said thus to it, Arise,
devour much flesh.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> After this I beheld, and lo another, like a
leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast
had also four heads; and dominion was given to it.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> After this I saw in the night visions, and
behold a fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly;
and it had great iron teeth: it devoured and broke in pieces, and
stamped the residue with its feet: and it was diverse from all the
beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I considered the horns, and behold, there
came up among them another little horn, before whom there were three of
the first horns plucked up by the roots: and behold, in this horn were
eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I beheld till the thrones were cast down,
and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and
the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery
flame, and his wheels as burning fire.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> A fiery stream issued and came forth from
before him: thousand thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand times
ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set and the books were
opened.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> I beheld then because of the voice of the
great words which the horn spoke: I beheld even till the beast was
slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> As concerning the rest of the beasts,
they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a
season and time.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> I saw in the night visions, and behold,
one like the son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the
Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And there was given him dominion, and
glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should
serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the
midst of my body, and the visions of my head troubled me.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I came near to one of them that stood by,
and asked him the truth of all this. So he told me, and made me know the
interpretation of the things.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> These great beasts, which are four, are
four kings, which shall arise out of the earth.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> But the saints of the most High shall
take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and
ever.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Then I would know the truth of the fourth
beast, which was diverse from all the others, exceeding dreadful, whose
teeth were of iron, and his nails of brass; which devoured, broke in
pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And of the ten horns that were in his
head, and of the other which came up, and before whom three fell; even
of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spoke very great things,
whose look was more stout than his fellows.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I beheld, and the same horn made war with
the saints, and prevailed against them;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Until the Ancient of days came, and
judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came
that the saints possessed the kingdom.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be
the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms,
and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it
in pieces.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And the ten horns out of this kingdom are
ten kings that shall arise: and another shall rise after them; and he
shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And he shall speak great words against
the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think
to change times and laws: and they shall be given into his hand until a
time and times and the dividing of time.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> But the judgment shall sit, and they
shall take away his dominion to consume and to destroy it to the end.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the
people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Hitherto is the end of the matter. As for
me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed
in me: but I kept the matter in my heart.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> In the third year of the reign of king
Belshazzar a vision appeared to me, even to me, Daniel, after that which
appeared to me at the first.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass,
when I saw, that I was at Shushan in the palace, which is in the
province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river Ulai.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Then I lifted up my eyes, and saw, and
behold, there stood before the river a ram which had two horns: and the
two horns were high; but one was higher than the other, and the higher
came up last.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I saw the ram pushing westward, and
northward, and southward; so that no beasts might stand before him,
neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; but he did
according to his will, and became great.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And as I was considering, behold, a he-goat
came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched not the
ground: and the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he came to the ram that had two horns,
which I had seen standing before the river, and ran to him in the fury
of his power.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And I saw him come close to the ram, and he
was moved with anger against him, and smote the ram, and broke his two
horns: and there was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he
cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him: and there was none
that could deliver the ram out of his hand.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Therefore the he-goat became very great:
and when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and in its stead came
up four notable ones towards the four winds of heaven.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And out of one of them came forth a little
horn, which became exceeding great, towards the south, and towards the
east, and towards the pleasant land.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And it grew great, even to the host of
heaven; and it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the
ground, and stamped upon them.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Yes, he magnified himself even to the
prince of the host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and
the place of his sanctuary was cast down.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And a host was given him against the
daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down the truth
to the ground; and it practiced, and prospered.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then I heard one saint speaking, and
another saint said to that certain saint who spoke, How long shall be
the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of
desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under
foot?

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he said to me, Until two thousand and
three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary be cleansed.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And it came to pass, when I, even I
Daniel, had seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, then behold,
there stood before me as the appearance of a man.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And I heard a man's voice between the
banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to
understand the vision.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> So he came near where I stood: and when
he came, I was afraid, and fell upon my face: but he said to me,
Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end shall be the
vision.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now as he was speaking with me, I was in
a deep sleep on my face towards the ground: but he touched me, and set
me upright.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And he said, Behold, I will make thee
know what shall be in the last end of the indignation: for at the time
appointed the end shall be.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> The ram which thou sawest having two
horns are the kings of Media and Persia.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the rough goat is the king of Grecia:
and the great horn that is between his eyes is the first king.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Now that being broken, whereas four stood
up in its place, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not
in his power.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And in the latter time of their kingdom,
when the transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce
countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And his power shall be mighty, but not by
his own power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and
practice, and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And through his policy also he shall
cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself in his
heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he shall also stand up against
the Prince of princes; but he shall be broken without hand.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And the vision of the evening and the
morning which was told is true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for
it shall be for many days.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And I Daniel fainted, and was sick
certain days; afterward I rose, and did the king's business; and I was
astonished at the vision, but none understood it.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> In the first year of Darius the son of
Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who was made king over the realm of
the Chaldeans;

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> In the first year of his reign, I Daniel
understood by books the number of the years, concerning which the word
of the LORD came to Jeremiah the prophet, that he would accomplish
seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And I set my face to the Lord God, to seek
by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And I prayed to the LORD my God, and made
my confession, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, keeping the
covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his
commandments;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> We have sinned, and have committed
iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing
from thy precepts and from thy judgments:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Neither have we hearkened to thy servants
the prophets, who spoke in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our
fathers, and to all the people of the land.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> O Lord, righteousness belongeth to thee,
but to us confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel, that are near, and
that are far off, through all the countries whither thou hast driven
them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face,
to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned
against thee.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> To the Lord our God belong mercies and
forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him;

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Neither have we obeyed the voice of the
LORD our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his
servants the prophets.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And all Israel have transgressed thy law,
even by departing, that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the
curse is poured upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of
Moses the servant of God, because we have sinned against him.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he hath confirmed his words, which he
spoke against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing
upon us a great evil: for under the whole heaven it hath not been done
as it hath been done upon Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> As it is written in the law of Moses, all
this evil is come upon us: yet we have not made our prayer before the
LORD our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy
truth.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Therefore hath the LORD watched upon the
evil, and brought it upon us: for the LORD our God is righteous in all
his works which he doeth: for we have not obeyed his voice.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And now, O Lord our God, that hast
brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast
obtained thee renown, as at this day; we have sinned, we have done
wickedly.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> O Lord, according to all thy
righteousness, I beseech thee, let thy anger and thy fury be turned away
from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins and for
the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people have become a
reproach to all that are about us.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer
of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon
thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> O my God, incline thy ear, and hear; open
thy eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by
thy name: for we do not present our supplications before thee for our
righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord,
hearken and do; defer not, for thy own sake, O my God: for thy city and
thy people are called by thy name.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And while I was speaking, and praying,
and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting
my supplication before the LORD my God for the holy mountain of my God;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Yes, while I was speaking in prayer, even
the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being
caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening
oblation.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And he informed me, and talked with me,
and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and
understanding.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> At the beginning of thy supplications the
commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee; for thou art greatly
beloved: therefore understand the matter, and consider the vision.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people and upon thy holy city to finish the transgression, and to make
an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and
to anoint the most Holy.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Know therefore and understand, that from
the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem to
the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks, and sixty and two weeks:
the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And after sixty and two weeks shall
Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the prince
that shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and its end
shall be with a flood, and to the end of the war desolations are
determined.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And he shall confirm the covenant with
many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the
sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of
abominations, he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation,
and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> In the third year of Cyrus king of
Persia, a thing was revealed to Daniel, whose name was called
Belteshazzar; and the thing was true, but the time appointed was long:
and he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> In those days I Daniel was mourning three
full weeks.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> I ate no pleasant bread, neither came
flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at all, till
three whole weeks were fulfilled.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And in the four and twentieth day of the
first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel;

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Then I lifted up my eyes, and looked, and
behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine
gold of Uphaz:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> His body also was like the beryl, and his
face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and
his arms and his feet like in color to polished brass, and the voice of
his words like the voice of a multitude.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for
the men that were with me saw not the vision: but a great quaking fell
upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Therefore I was left alone, and saw this
great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my comeliness
was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Yet I heard the voice of his words: and
when I heard the voice of his words, then I was in a deep sleep on my
face, and my face toward the ground.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And behold, a hand touched me, which
set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he said to me, O Daniel, a man
greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak to thee, and stand
upright: for to thee I am now sent. And when he had spoken this word to
me, I stood trembling.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Then said he to me, Fear not, Daniel:
for from the first day that thou didst set thy heart to understand, and
to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come
for thy words.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But the prince of the kingdom of Persia
withstood me one and twenty days: but lo, Michael, one of the chief
princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Now I have come to make thee understand
what shall befall thy people in the latter days: for yet the vision is
for many days.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And when he had spoken such words to
me, I set my face towards the ground, and I became dumb.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And behold, one like the similitude of
the sons of men touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spoke, and
said to him that stood before me, O my lord, by the vision my sorrows
are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> For how can the servant of this my lord
talk with this my lord? for as for me, immediately there remained no
strength in me, neither is there breath left in me.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then there came again and touched me
one like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me,

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And said, O man greatly beloved, fear
not: peace be to thee, be strong, yes, be strong. And when he had spoken
to me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast
strengthened me.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Then said he, Knowest thou for what
cause I come to thee? and now will I return to fight with the prince of
Persia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shall come.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But I will show thee that which is
noted in the scripture of truth: and there is none that holdeth with me
in these things, but Michael your prince.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Also I, in the first year of Darius the
Mede, even I, stood to confirm and to strengthen him.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And now will I show thee the truth.
Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia; and the fourth
shall be far richer than they all: and by his strength through his
riches he shall stir up all against the realm of Grecia.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And a mighty king shall stand up, that
shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And when he shall stand up, his kingdom
shall be broken, and shall be divided towards the four winds of heaven;
and not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion which he ruled:
for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others beside those.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And the king of the south shall be
strong, and one of his princes; and he shall be strong above him, and
have dominion; his dominion shall be a great dominion.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And in the end of years they shall join
themselves together; for the king's daughter of the south shall come to
the king of the north to make an agreement: but she shall not retain the
power of the arm; neither shall he stand, nor his arm: but she shall be
given up, and they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that
strengthened her in these times.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But out of a branch of her roots shall
one stand up in his estate, who shall come with an army, and shall enter
into the fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them,
and shall prevail:

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And shall also carry captives into Egypt
their gods, with their princes, and with their precious vessels of
silver and of gold; and he shall continue more years than the king of
the north.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> So the king of the south shall come into
his kingdom, and shall return into his own land.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> But his sons shall be stirred up, and
shall assemble a multitude of great forces: and one shall certainly
come, and overflow, and pass through: then shall he return, and be
stirred up, even to his fortress.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And the king of the south shall be
moved with wrath, and shall come forth and fight with him, even with the
king of the north: and he shall set forth a great multitude; but the
multitude shall be given into his hand.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And when he hath taken away the
multitude, his heart shall be lifted up; and he shall cast down many ten
thousands: but he shall not be strengthened by it.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For the king of the north shall return,
and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former, and shall
certainly come after certain years with a great army and with much
riches.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And in those times there shall many
stand up against the king of the south: also the robbers of thy people
shall exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shall fall.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> So the king of the north shall come,
and cast up a mount, and take the most fortified cities: and the arms of
the south shall not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shall
there be any strength to withstand.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But he that cometh against him shall do
according to his own will, and none shall stand before him: and he shall
stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shall be consumed.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> He shall also set his face to enter
with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus
shall he do: and he shall give him the daughter of women, corrupting
her: but she shall not stand on his side, neither be for him.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> After this shall he turn his face to
the isles, and shall take many: but a prince for his own behalf shall
cause the reproach offered by him to cease; without his own reproach he
shall cause it to turn upon him.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Then he shall turn his face towards the
fort of his own land: but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then shall stand up in his estate a
raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he
shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And in his estate shall stand up a vile
person, to whom they shall not give the honor of the kingdom: but he
shall come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flatteries.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And with the arms of a flood shall they
be overflowed from before him, and shall be broken; yes, also the prince
of the covenant.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And after the league made with him he
shall work deceitfully: for he shall come up, and shall become strong
with a small people.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> He shall enter peaceably even upon the
fattest places of the province; and he shall do that which his fathers
have not done, nor his fathers' fathers; he shall scatter among them the
prey, and spoil, and riches: yes, and he shall forecast his devices
against the strong holds, even for a time.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And he shall stir up his power and his
courage against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of
the south shall be stirred up to battle with a very great and mighty
army; but he shall not stand: for they shall forecast devices against
him.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Yes, they that feed of the portion of
his provisions shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow: and many
shall fall down slain.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And both these kings hearts shall be to
do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table; but it shall not
prosper: for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Then shall he return into his land with
great riches; and his heart shall be against the holy covenant; and he
shall do exploits, and return to his own land.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> At the time appointed he shall return,
and come towards the south; but it shall not be as the former, or as the
latter.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For the ships of Chittim shall come
against him: therefore he shall be grieved, and return, and have
indignation against the holy covenant: so shall he do; he shall even
return, and have intelligence with them that forsake the holy covenant.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And arms shall stand on his part, and
they shall pollute the sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the
daily sacrifice, and they shall place the abomination that maketh
desolate.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And such as do wickedly against the
covenant shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the people that know their
God shall be strong, and do exploits.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And they that understand among the
people shall instruct many: yet they shall fall by the sword, and by
flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Now when they shall fall, they shall be
assisted with a little help: but many shall cleave to them with
flatteries.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And some of them of understanding shall
fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the
time of the end: because it is yet for a time appointed.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And the king shall do according to his
will; and he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god,
and shall speak marvelous things against the God of gods, and shall
prosper till the indignation be accomplished: for that which is
determined shall be done.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> Neither shall he regard the God of his
fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shall
magnify himself above all.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> But in his estate shall he honor the
God of forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shall he honor with
gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> Thus shall he do in the most strong
holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and increase with
glory: and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the
land for gain.

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> And at the time of the end shall the
king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shall come
against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with
many ships; and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow
and pass over.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> He shall enter also into the glorious
land, and many countries shall be overthrown: but these shall escape out
of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of
Ammon.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> He shall stretch forth his hand also
upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not escape.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> But he shall have power over the
treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of
Egypt: and the Libyans and the Cushites shall be at his steps.

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> But tidings out of the east and out of
the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with great fury
to destroy, and utterly to make away many.

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> And he shall plant the tabernacles of
his palace between the seas in the glorious holy mountain: yet he shall
come to his end, and none shall help him.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And at that time shall Michael stand up,
the great prince who standeth for the children of thy people: and there
shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation
even to that same time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered,
every one that shall be found written in the book.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And many of them that sleep in the dust
of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and everlasting contempt.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And they that are wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as
the stars for ever and ever.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words,
and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to and
fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Then I Daniel looked, and behold, there
stood other two, the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the
other on that side of the bank of the river.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And one said to the man clothed in linen,
who was upon the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the end of
these wonders?

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And I heard the man clothed in linen, who
was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his
left hand to heaven, and swore by him that liveth for ever, that it
shall be for a time, times, and a half; and when he shall have
accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things
shall be finished.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And I heard, but I understood not: then
said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things?

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he said, Go thy way Daniel: for the
words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Many shall be purified, and made white,
and tried; but the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the wicked
shall understand; but the wise shall understand.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And from the time that the daily
sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate
set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh
to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> But go thou thy way till the end: for
thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea](hos)
