[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pro)  [Next](sol) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Ecclesiastes

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of the preacher, the son of
David, king of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher,
vanity of vanities; all is vanity.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> What profit hath a man of all his labor,
which he taketh under the sun?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> One generation passeth away, and another
generation cometh: but the earth abideth for ever.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The sun also riseth, and the sun goeth
down, and hasteth to his place where he arose.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> The wind goeth towards the south, and
turneth about to the north; it whirleth about continually, and the wind
returneth again according to its circuits.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All the rivers run into the sea; yet the
sea is not full; to the place from whence the rivers come, thither they
return again.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> All things are full of labor; man cannot
utter it: the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> The thing that hath been, it is that which
shall be; and that which is done is that which shall be done: and there
is no new thing under the sun.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Is there any thing of which it may be
said, See, this is new? it hath been already of old time, which was
before us.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> There is no remembrance of former things;
neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come with
those that shall come after.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I the preacher was king over Israel in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I gave my heart to seek and search
out by wisdom concerning all things that are done under heaven: this
grievous labor hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised with
it.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I have seen all the works that are done
under the sun; and behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> That which is crooked cannot be made
straight: and that which is wanting cannot be numbered.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I communed with my own heart, saying, Lo,
I have come to great estate, and have gained more wisdom than all they
that have been before me in Jerusalem: and my heart had great experience
of wisdom and knowledge.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and
to know madness and folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of
spirit.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For in much wisdom is much grief: and he
that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I said in my heart, Come now, I will prove
thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and behold, this also is
vanity.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I said of laughter, It is mad: and of
mirth, What doeth it?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> I sought in my heart, to give myself to
wine, yet acquainting my heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly,
till I might see what was that good for the sons of men, which they
should do under the heaven all the days of their life.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> I made me great works; I built me houses; I
planted me vineyards:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> I made me gardens and orchards, and I
planted trees in them of all kind of fruits:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> I made me pools of water, to water with
them the wood that bringeth forth trees:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I procured me servants and maidens, and had
servants born in my house; also I had great possessions of great and
small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem before me:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I gathered me also silver and gold, and the
peculiar treasure of kings, and of the provinces: I procured me
men-singers and women-singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as
musical instruments, and of all sorts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> So I was great, and increased more than all
that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And whatever my eyes desired I kept not
from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced
in all my labor: and this was my portion of all my labor.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Then I looked on all the works that my
hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do: and
behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit
under the sun.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and
madness, and folly: for what can the man do that cometh after the king?
even that which hath been already done.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly,
as far as light excelleth darkness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The wise man's eyes are in his head; but
the fool walketh in darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event
happeneth to them all.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth
to the fool, so it happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise?
Then I said in my heart, that this also is vanity.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For there is no remembrance of the wise
more than of the fool for ever; seeing that which now is in the days to
come shall all be forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as the fool.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Therefore I hated life; because the work
that is wrought under the sun is grievous to me: for all is vanity and
vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Yes, I hated all my labor which I had
taken under the sun: because I should leave it to the man that shall be
after me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And who knoweth whether he shall be a
wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labor in which I
have labored, and in which I have showed myself wise under the sun. This
is also vanity.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Therefore I went about to cause my heart
to despair of all the labor which I took under the sun.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For there is a man whose labor is in
wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not
labored in it, shall he leave it for his portion. This also is vanity
and a great evil.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For what hath man of all his labor, and
of the vexation of his heart, in which he hath labored under the sun?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> For all his days are sorrows, and his
labor grief; yes, his heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also
vanity.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> There is nothing better for a man than
that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy
good in his labor. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For who can eat, or who else can hasten
to it more than I?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For God giveth to a man who is good in
his sight, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth
toil, to gather, and to amass, that he may give to him that is good
before God. This also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> To every thing there is a season, and a
time to every purpose under the heaven:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> A time to be born, and a time to die; a
time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time
to break down, and a time to build up;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time
to mourn, and a time to dance;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> A time to cast away stones, and a time to
gather stones; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> A time to get, and a time to lose; a time
to keep, and a time to cast away;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time
to keep silence, and a time to speak;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> A time to love, and a time to hate; a time
of war, and a time of peace.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What profit hath he that worketh in that in
which he laboreth?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> I have seen the labor, which God hath
given to the sons of men to be exercised in it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> He hath made every thing beautiful in its
time: also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can find
out the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> I know that there is no good in them, but
for a man to rejoice, and to do good in his life.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And also that every man should eat and
drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor, it is the gift of God.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I know that, whatever God doeth, it shall
be for ever: nothing can be added to it, nor any thing taken from it:
and God doeth it, that men should fear before him.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> That which hath been is now; and that
which is to be hath already been; and God requireth that which is past.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And moreover I saw under the sun the
place of judgment, that wickedness was there; and the place of
righteousness, that iniquity was there.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> I said in my heart, God will judge the
righteous and the wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose
and for every work.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I said in my heart concerning the state
of the sons of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might
see that they themselves are beasts.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> For that which befalleth the sons of men
befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so
dieth the other; yes, they have all one breath; so that a man hath no
pre-eminence above a beast: for all is vanity.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> All go to one place; all are of the dust,
and all turn to dust again.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth
upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Wherefore I perceive that there is
nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his own works; for
that is his portion: for who shall bring him to see what shall be after
him?

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> So I returned, and considered all the
oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of such as
were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their
oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Wherefore I praised the dead who are
already dead more than the living who are yet alive.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Yes, better is he than both they, who hath
not yet been, who hath not seen the evil work that is done under the
sun.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Again, I considered all labor, and every
right work, that for this a man is envied by his neighbor. This is also
vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> The fool foldeth his hands together, and
eateth his own flesh.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Better is a handful with quietness, than
both the hands full with toil and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the
sun.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> There is one alone, and there is not a
second; yes, he hath neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of
all his labor; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith
he, For whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of good? This is also
vanity, yes, it is a grievous labor.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Two are better than one; because they have
a good reward for their labor.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For if they fall, the one will lift up
his fellow: but woe to him that is alone when he falleth; for he hath
not another to help him to rise.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Again, if two lie together, then they
have heat: but how can one be warm alone?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And if one prevaileth against him, two
shall withstand him; and a three-fold cord is not quickly broken.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Better is a poor and a wise child, than
an old and foolish king, who will no more be admonished.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For out of prison he cometh to reign;
whereas also he that is born in his kingdom becometh poor.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> I considered all the living who walk
under the sun, with the second child that shall stand up in his stead.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> There is no end of all the people, even
of all that have been before them: they also that come after shall not
rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house
of God, and be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools:
for they consider not that they do evil.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy
heart be hasty to utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and
thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For a dream cometh through the multitude of
business; and a fool's voice is known by a multitude of words.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not to
pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast
vowed.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Better is it that thou shouldst not vow,
than that thou shouldst vow and not pay.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin; neither say thou before the angel, that it was an error: why should
God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For in the multitude of dreams and many
words there are also divers vanities: but fear thou God.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> If thou seest the oppression of the poor,
and violent perversion of judgment and justice in a province, wonder not
at the matter: for he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and
there are higher than they.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Moreover, the profit of the earth is for
all: the king himself is served by the field.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He that loveth silver shall not be
satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase: this
is also vanity.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> When goods increase, they are increased
that eat them: and what good is there to the owners of them, saving the
beholding of them with their eyes?

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> The sleep of a laboring man is sweet,
whether he eateth little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not
suffer him to sleep.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> There is a grievous evil which I have
seen under the sun, namely, riches kept for the owners of them to their
hurt.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But those riches perish by evil labor:
and he begetteth a son, and there is nothing in his hand.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> As he came into the world, naked shall he
return to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labor, which he
may carry away in his hand.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And this also is a grievous evil, that in
all points as he came, so shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath
labored for the wind?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> All his days also he eateth in darkness,
and he hath much sorrow and wrath with his sickness.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Behold that which I have seen: it is good
and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his
labor that he taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which God
giveth him: for it is his portion.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Every man also to whom God hath given
riches and wealth, and hath given him power to eat of it, and to take
his portion, and to rejoice in his labor; this is the gift of God.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For he shall not much remember the days
of his life; because God answereth him in the joy of his heart.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> There is an evil which I have seen under
the sun, and it is common among men:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> A man to whom God hath given riches,
wealth, and honor, so that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that
he desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat of it, but a stranger
eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If a man begetteth a hundred children, and
liveth many years, so that the days of his years are many, and his soul
is not filled with good, and also that he hath no burial; I say, that an
untimely birth is better than he.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For he cometh with vanity, and departeth in
darkness, and his name shall be covered with darkness.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor
known any thing: this hath more rest than the other.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Yes, though he liveth a thousand years
twice told, yet hath he seen no good: do not all go to one place?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> All the labor of man is for his mouth, and
yet the appetite is not filled.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For what hath the wise more than the fool?
what hath the poor, that knoweth to walk before the living?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Better is the sight of the eyes than the
wandering of the desire: this is also vanity and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> That which hath been is named already,
and it is known that it is man: neither may he contend with him that is
mightier than he.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Seeing there are many things that
increase vanity, what is man the better?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For who knoweth what is good for man in
this life, all the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow?
for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> A good name is better than precious
ointment; and the day of death than the day of one's birth.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> It is better to go to the house of
mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of
all men; and the living will lay it to his heart.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the
sadness of the countenance the heart is made better.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The heart of the wise is in the house of
mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> It is better to hear the rebuke of the
wise, than for a man to hear the song of fools.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For as the crackling of thorns under a pot,
so is the laughter of the fool: this also is vanity.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad;
and a gift destroyeth the heart.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Better is the end of a thing than its
beginning: and the patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for
anger resteth in the bosom of fools.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Say not thou, What is the cause that the
former days were better than these? for thou dost not inquire wisely
concerning this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and
by it there is profit to them that see the sun.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For wisdom is a defense, and money is a
defense: but the excellence of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to
them that have it.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Consider the work of God: for who can
make that straight, which he hath made crooked?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> In the day of prosperity be joyful, but
in the day of adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against
the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> All things have I seen in the days of my
vanity: there is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness, and
there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Be not righteous over much; neither make
thyself over wise: why shouldst thou destroy thyself?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Be not over much wicked, neither be thou
foolish: why shouldst thou die before thy time?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> It is good that thou shouldst take hold
of this; yes, also from this withdraw not thy hand: for he that feareth
God shall escape from them all.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than
ten mighty men who are in the city.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> For there is not a just man upon earth,
that doeth good, and sinneth not.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Also take no heed to all words that are
spoken; lest thou hear thy servant curse thee:

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For often also thy own heart knoweth that
thou thyself likewise hast cursed others.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> All this have I proved by wisdom: I said,
I will be wise; but it was far from me.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> That which is far off, and exceedingly
deep, who can find it out?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I applied my heart to know, and to
search, and to seek out wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know
the wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness:

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And I find more bitter than death the
woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands: whoever
pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall be taken by
her.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Behold, this have I found, saith the
preacher, counting one by one, to find out the account:

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Which yet my soul seeketh, but I find
not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all those
have I not found.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Lo, this only have I found, that God hath
made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the
interpretation of a thing? a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and
the boldness of his face shall be changed.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I counsel thee to keep the king's
commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand
not in an evil thing; for he doeth whatever pleaseth him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Where the word of a king is, there is
power: and who may say to him, what doest thou?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> He who keepeth the commandment shall feel
no evil thing: and a wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Because to every purpose there is time and
judgment, therefore the misery of man is great upon him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For he knoweth not that which shall be: for
who can tell him when it shall be?

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> There is no man that hath power over the
spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death:
and there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver
those that are given to it.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> All this have I seen, and applied my heart
to every work that is done under the sun: there is a time in which one
man ruleth over another to his own hurt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And so I saw the wicked buried, who had
come and gone from the place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the
city where they had so done: this is also vanity.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully
set in them to do evil.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Though a sinner doeth evil a hundred
times, and his days are prolonged, yet surely I know that it will be
well with them that fear God, who fear before him:

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> But it will not be well with the wicked,
neither will he prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he
feareth not before God.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> There is a vanity which is done upon the
earth; that there are just men, to whom it happeneth according to the
work of the wicked; again, there are wicked men, to whom it happeneth
according to the work of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then I commended mirth, because a man
hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be
merry: for that shall abide with him of his labor the days of his life,
which God giveth him under the sun.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> When I applied my heart to know wisdom,
and to see the business that is done upon the earth: (for also there is
that neither day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes:)

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then I beheld all the work of God, that a
man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun: because though
a man may labor to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yes further;
though a wise man thinketh to know it, yet shall he not be able to find
it.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For all this I considered in my heart even
to declare all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works,
are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that
is before them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> All things come alike to all: there is one
event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean,
and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth
not: as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that
feareth an oath.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> This is an evil among all things that are
done under the sun, that there is one event to all: yes, also the heart
of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while
they live, and after that they go to the dead.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For to him that is joined to all the living
there is hope: for a living dog is better than a dead lion.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For the living know that they shall die:
but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward;
for the memory of them is forgotten.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Also their love, and their hatred, and
their envy, hath now perished; neither have they any more a portion for
ever in any thing that is done under the sun.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Let thy garments be always white; and let
thy head lack no ointment.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Live joyfully with the wife whom thou
lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee
under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in
this life, and in thy labor which thou takest under the sun.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do it
with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> I returned, and saw under the sun, that
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet
bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor
to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For man also knoweth not his time: as the
fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught
in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it
falleth suddenly upon them.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> This wisdom have I seen also under the
sun, and it seemed to me great:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> There was a little city, and few men
within it; and there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and
built great bulwarks against it:

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Now there was found in it a poor wise
man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that
same poor man.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Then said I, wisdom is better than
strength: nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words
are not heard.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> The words of wise men are heard in quiet
more than the cry of him that ruleth among fools.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but
one sinner destroyeth much good.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Dead flies cause the ointment of the
apothecary to send forth an offensive odor: so doth a little folly him
that is in reputation for wisdom and honor.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> A wise man's heart is at his right hand;
but a fool's heart is at his left.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Also, when he that is a fool walketh by
the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a
fool.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> If the spirit of the ruler riseth against
thee, leave not thy place; for yielding pacifieth great offenses.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> There is an evil which I have seen under
the sun, as an error which proceedeth from the ruler:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Folly is set in great dignity, and the
rich sit in low place.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> I have seen servants upon horses, and
princes walking as servants upon the earth.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it;
and whoever breaketh a hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Whoever removeth stones shall be hurt by
them; and he that cleaveth wood shall be endangered by it.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> If the iron is blunt, and he doth not
whet the edge, then must he use more strength: but wisdom is profitable
to direct.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Surely the serpent will bite without
enchantment; and a babbler is no better.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The words of a wise man's mouth are
gracious; but the lips of a fool will swallow up himself.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> The beginning of the words of his mouth
is foolishness: and the end of his talk is mischievous madness.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> A fool also is full of words: a man
cannot tell what shall be; and what shall be after him, who can tell
him?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The labor of the foolish wearieth every
one of them, because he knoweth not how to go to the city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a
child, and thy princes eat in the morning!

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king
is the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength,
and not for drunkenness!

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> By much slothfulness the building
decayeth; and through idleness of the hands the house droppeth through.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> A feast is made for laughter, and wine
maketh merry: but money answereth all things.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Curse not the king, no not in thy
thought; and curse not the rich in thy bed-chamber: for a bird of the
air will carry the voice, and that which hath wings will tell the
matter.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou
shalt find it after many days.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight; for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> If the clouds are full of rain, they
empty themselves upon the earth: and if the tree falleth towards the
south, or towards the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there
it shall be.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> He that observeth the wind shall not sow;
and he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> As thou knowest not what is the way of
the spirit, nor the structure of the parts of conception in her that is
with child: even so thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> In the morning sow thy seed, and in the
evening withhold not thy hand: for thou knowest not whether shall
prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun:

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But if a man shall live many years, and
rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they
shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and
let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways
of thy heart, and in the sight of thy eyes: but know thou, that for all
these things God will bring thee into judgment.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart,
and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when
thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them;

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> While the sun, or the light, or the moon,
or the stars, are not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> In the day when the keepers of the house
shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders
cease because they are few, and those that look out of the windows shall
be darkened,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And the doors shall be shut in the
streets, when the sound of the grinding shall be low, and he shall rise
up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music shall be
brought low.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Also when they shall be afraid of that
which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall
flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail:
because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the
streets:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Or ever the silver cord shall be loosed,
or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain,
or the wheel broken at the cistern.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Then shall the dust return to the earth
as it was: and the spirit shall return to God who gave it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Vanity of vanities saith the preacher;
all is vanity.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And moreover, because the preacher was
wise, he still taught the people knowledge: yes, he gave good heed, and
sought out, and set in order many proverbs.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The preacher sought to find out
acceptable words: and that which was written was upright, even words of
truth.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> The words of the wise are as goads, and
as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given from one
shepherd.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And further, by these, my son, be
admonished: of making many books there is no end; and much study is a
weariness of the flesh.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty
of man.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For God will bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it is good, or whether it is
evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon](sol)
