[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gal)  [Next](phi) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Ephesians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the
will of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in
Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace be to you, and peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places in Christ:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> According as he hath chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Having predestinated us to the adoption of
children to himself by Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of
his will,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> To the praise of the glory of his grace, in
which he hath made us accepted in the beloved:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> In which he hath abounded towards us in all
wisdom and prudence;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Having made known to us the mystery of his
will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> That in the dispensation of the fullness
of times he might collect in one all things in Christ, both which are in
heaven, and which are on earth; even in him:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> In whom also we have obtained an
inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who
worketh all things after the counsel of his own will:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> That we should be to the praise of his
glory, who first trusted in Christ.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> In whom ye also trusted, after ye heard
the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Which is the earnest of our inheritance
until the redemption of the purchased possession, to the praise of his
glory.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Wherefore I also, having heard of your
faith in the Lord Jesus, and love to all the saints,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Cease not to give thanks for you, making
mention of you in my prayers;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of glory, may give to you the spirit of wisdom and revelation
in the knowledge of him:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> The eyes of your understanding being
enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And what is the exceeding greatness of
his power toward us who believe, according to the working of his mighty
power,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Which he wrought in Christ, when he
raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Far above all principality, and power,
and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this
world, but also in that which is to come:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be the head over all things to the church,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Which is his body, the fullness of him
that filleth all in all.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And you hath he revived, who were dead in
trespasses and sins;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> In which in time past ye walked according
to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the
air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Among whom also we all had our manner of
life in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of
the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath,
even as others.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> But God, who is rich in mercy, for his
great love with which he loved us,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Even when we were dead in sins, hath made
us alive together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;)

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And hath raised us up together, and made us
sit together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> That in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness towards us, through Christ
Jesus.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For by grace are ye saved, through faith;
and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Not by works, lest any man should boast.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus to good works, which God hath before ordained that we
should walk in them.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Wherefore remember, that ye being in time
past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called Uncircumcision by that which
is called the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> That at that time ye were without Christ,
being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But now, in Christ Jesus, ye, who
formerly were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For he is our peace, who hath made both
one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition between us;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Having abolished in his flesh the enmity,
even the law of commandments contained in ordinances: to make in himself
of two one new man, so making peace;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And that he might reconcile both to God
in one body by the cross, having by it slain the enmity:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And came and preached peace to you who
were afar off, and to them that were nigh.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For through him we both have an access by
one Spirit to the Father.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Now therefore ye are no more strangers
and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the
household of God;

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And are built upon the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner-stone;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> In whom all the building fitly framed
together, groweth to a holy temple in the Lord:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> In whom ye also are built together, for a
habitation of God through the Spirit.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For this cause, I Paul, the prisoner of
Jesus Christ for you Gentiles,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> If ye have heard of the dispensation of the
grace of God which is given me on your account.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> That by revelation he made known to me the
mystery, as I wrote before in few words;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> By which when ye read, ye may understand my
knowledge in the mystery of Christ,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Which in other ages was not made known to
the sons of men, as it is now revealed to his holy apostles and prophets
by the Spirit;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> That the Gentiles should be joint-heirs,
and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the
Gospel:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Of which I was made a minister, according
to the gift of the grace of God given to me by the effectual working of
his power.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> To me, who am less than the least of all
saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And to make all men see what is the
fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world hath
been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> To the intent that now to the
principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the
church the manifold wisdom of God,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> According to the eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> In whom we have boldness and access with
confidence by the faith of him,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at
my tribulations for you, which is your glory.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For this cause I bow my knees to the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Of whom the whole family in heaven and
earth is named,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> That he would grant you according to the
riches of his glory to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man;

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love,

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> May be able to comprehend with all saints
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and highth.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And to know the love of Christ, which
passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled with all the fullness of God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Now to him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that
worketh in us.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> To him be glory in the church by Christ
Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord,
beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation by which ye are called,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> With all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> There is one body, and one Spirit, even as
ye are called in one hope of your calling;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> One Lord, one faith, one baptism,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> One God and Father of all, who is above
all, and through all, and in you all.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But to every one of us is given grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Wherefore he saith, When he ascended on
high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now that he ascended, what is it but that
he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> He that descended is the same also that
ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he gave some, apostles; and some,
prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> For the perfecting of the saints, for the
work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ:

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> That we henceforth be no more children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the
sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, by which they lie in wait to
deceive:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But speaking the truth in love, may grow
up into him in all things, who is the head, even Christ:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> From whom the whole body fitly joined
together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to
the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of
the body to the edifying of itself in love.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> This I say therefore, and testify in the
Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity
of their mind,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Who being past feeling have given
themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> But ye have not so learned Christ;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> If indeed ye have heard him, and have
been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> That ye put off concerning the former
manner of life the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful
lusts:

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And be renewed in the Spirit of your
mind;

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And that ye put on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Wherefore putting away lying, speak every
man truth with his neighbor: for we are members one of another.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun
go down upon your wrath:

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Neither give place to the devil.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Let him that stole steal no more: but
rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good,
that he may have to give to him that needeth.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it
may minister grace to the hearers.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice:

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And be ye kind one to another,
tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
hath forgiven you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear
children;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved
us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for
a sweet-smelling savor.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But lewdness and all uncleanness or
covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becometh saints;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking,
nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For this ye know, that no lewd, nor unclean
person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in
the kingdom of Christ and of God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Let no man deceive you with vain words: for
because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Be ye not therefore partakers with them.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For ye were sometime darkness, but now are
ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light;

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> (For the fruit of the Spirit is in all
goodness, and righteousness, and truth;)

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Proving what is acceptable to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For it is a shame even to speak of those
things which are done by them in secret.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But all things that are reproved, are
made manifest by the light: for whatever doth make manifest is light.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Wherefore he saith, Awake, thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ will give thee light.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> See then that ye walk circumspectly, not
as fools, but as wise,

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Redeeming the time, because the days are
evil.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Wherefore be ye not unwise, but
understanding what the will of the Lord is.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And be not drunk with wine, in which is
excess; but be filled with the Spirit;

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Speaking to yourselves in psalms, and
hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to
the Lord,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Giving thanks always for all things to
God and the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Submitting yourselves one to another in
the fear of God.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Wives, submit yourselves to your own
husbands, as to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For the husband is the head of the wife,
even as Christ is the head of the church: and he is the Savior of the
body.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Therefore as the church is subject to
Christ, so let wives be to their own husbands in every thing.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ
also loved the church, and gave himself for it;

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> That he might sanctify and cleanse it
with the washing of water by the word,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> That he might present it to himself a
glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that
it should be holy and without blemish.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> So ought men to love their wives, as
their own bodies. He that loveth his wife, loveth himself.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> For no man ever yet hated his own flesh;
but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church:

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> For we are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> For this cause shall a man leave his
father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they two shall
be one flesh.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> This is a great mystery: but I speak
concerning Christ and the church.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Nevertheless, let every one of you in
particular so love his wife even as himself: and the wife see that she
reverence her husband.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Children, obey your parents in the Lord:
for this is right.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Honor thy father and mother (which is the
first commandment with promise)

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> That it may be well with thee, and thou
mayest live long on the earth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And, ye fathers, provoke not your children
to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Servants, be obedient to them that are your
masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness
of your heart, as to Christ;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers; but
as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> With good will doing service, as to the
Lord, and not to men:

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Knowing that whatever good thing any man
doeth, the same will he receive from the Lord, whether he be bond or
free.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And, ye masters, do the same things to
them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also is in
heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Finally, my brethren, be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Put on the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For we wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Wherefore take to you the whole armor of
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done
all, to stand.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Stand therefore, having your loins girt
about with truth, and having on the breast-plate of righteousness;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And your feet shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Above all, taking the shield of faith,
with which ye will be able to extinguish all the fiery darts of the
wicked.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And take the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God:

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the Spirit, and watching for this purpose with all
perseverance and supplication for all saints;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And for me, that utterance may be given
to me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the
gospel,

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For which I am an embassador in bonds:
that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> But that ye also may know my affairs, and
how I do, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord,
will make known to you all things:

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Whom I have sent to you for the same
purpose, that ye may know our affairs, and that he may comfort your
hearts.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Peace be to the brethren, and love with
faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Grace be with all them that love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians](phi)
