[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gen)  [Next](lev) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Exodus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now these are the names of the children of
Israel, who came into Egypt; every man and his household came with
Jacob.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And all the souls that descended from
Jacob, were seventy souls: for Joseph was in Egypt already.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and
all that generation.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the children of Israel were fruitful,
and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and became exceeding mighty;
and the land was filled with them.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who
knew not Joseph.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he said to his people, Behold, the
people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Come, let us deal wisely with them: lest
they multiply, and it shall come to pass, that when there falleth out
any war, they will join with our enemies, and fight against us, and
depart from the land.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Therefore they set over them
task-masters, to afflict them with their burdens. And they built for
Pharaoh treasure-cities, Pithom, and Raamses.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But the more they afflicted them, the
more they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the Egyptians made the children of
Israel to serve with rigor.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And they made their lives bitter with
hard bondage, in mortar, and in brick, and in all manner of service in
the field: all their service in which they made them serve, was with
rigor.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew
midwives (of which the name of one was Shiphrah, and the name of the
other Puah:)

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And he said, When ye do the office of a
midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if it shall
be a son, then ye shall kill him; but if it shall be a daughter, then
she shall live.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But the midwives feared God, and did not
as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the male-children alive.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the king of Egypt called for the
midwives, and said to them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved
the male-children alive?

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the midwives said to Pharaoh, Because
the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women: for they are lively, and
are delivered ere the midwives come in to them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Therefore God dealt well with the
midwives: and the people multiplied, and became very mighty.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And it came to pass, because the midwives
feared God, that he made them houses.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And Pharaoh charged all his people,
saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every
daughter ye shall save alive.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And there went a man of the house of Levi,
and married a daughter of Levi.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the woman conceived, and bore a son:
and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three
months.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And when she could no longer hide him, she
took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with
pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the
river's brink.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And his sister stood afar off, to know what
would be done to him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to
wash herself at the river, and her maidens walked along by the river's
side: and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to
fetch it.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And when she had opened it, she saw the
child: and behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and
said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter,
Shall I go, and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may
nurse the child for thee?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And
the maid went and called the child's mother.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Take
this child away and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And
the woman took the child and nursed it.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And the child grew, and she brought him
to Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name
Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And it came to pass in those days, when
Moses was grown, that he went out to his brethren, and looked on their
burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brethren.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And he looked this way and that way, and
when he saw that there was no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in
the sand.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And when he went out the second day,
behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and he said to him that
did the wrong, Why smitest thou thy fellow?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And he said, Who made thee a prince and a
judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian?
And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he
sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt
in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a well.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now the priest of Midian had seven
daughters: and they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water
their father's flock.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the shepherds came and drove them
away: but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And when they came to Reuel their father,
he said, How is it that you are come so soon to day?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And they said, An Egyptian delivered us
from the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and
watered the flock.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And he said to his daughters, And where
is he? why is it that ye have left the man? call him, that he may eat
bread.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Moses was content to dwell with the
man: and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And she bore him a son, and he called his
name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger in a strange land.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it came to pass in process of time,
that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason
of the bondage, and they cried; and their cry ascended to God, by reason
of the bondage.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And God heard their groaning, and God
remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And God looked upon the children of
Israel, and God had respect to them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his
father-in-law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the
backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the angel of the LORD appeared to him
in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and
behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and
see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And when the LORD saw that he turned aside
to see, God called to him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses,
Moses. And he said, Here am I.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he said, Approach not hither: put off
thy shoes from thy feet, for the place on which thou standest is holy
ground.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Moreover he said, I am the God of thy
father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And
Moses hid his face: for he was afraid to look upon God.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the LORD said, I have surely seen the
affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by
reason of their task-masters; for I know their sorrows;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I am come down to deliver them from the
hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land, to a good
land, and a large, to a land flowing with milk and honey; to the place
of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Now therefore, behold, the cry of the
children of Israel is come to me: and I have also seen the oppression
with which the Egyptians oppress them.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Come now therefore, and I will send thee
to Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of
Israel out of Egypt.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Moses said to God, Who am I, that I
should go to Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of
Israel out of Egypt?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he said, Certainly I will be with
thee; and this shall be a token to thee, that I have sent thee: When
thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon
this mountain.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And Moses said to God, Behold, when I
come to the children of Israel, and shall say to them, The God of your
fathers hath sent me to you; and they shall say to me, What is his name?
What shall I say to them?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And God said to Moses, I AM THAT I AM:
And he said, Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel, I AM hath
sent me to you.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And God said, moreover, to Moses, Thus
shalt thou say to the children of Israel, The LORD God of your fathers,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me
to you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial to all
generations.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Go and assemble the elders of Israel, and
say to them, The LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac,
and of Jacob, appeared to me, saying, I have surely visited you, and
seen that which is done to you in Egypt.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And I have said, I will bring you out of
the affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites,
and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, to a land flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And they shall hearken to thy voice: and
thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt,
and ye shall say to him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath met with us:
and now let us go (we beseech thee) three days journey into the
wilderness, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And I am sure that the king of Egypt will
not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And I will stretch out my hand, and smite
Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof: and
after that he will let you go.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I will give this people favor in the
sight of the Egyptians: and it shall come to pass, that when ye go, ye
shall not go empty:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> But every woman shall borrow of her
neighbor, and of her that dwelleth in her house, jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shall put them upon your sons, and
upon your daughters: and ye shall spoil the Egyptians.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And Moses answered and said, But behold,
they will not believe me, nor hearken to my voice: for they will say,
The LORD hath not appeared to thee.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And the LORD said to him, What is that in
thy hand? And he said, A rod.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he
cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent: and Moses fled from
before it.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Put forth thy
hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it,
and it became a rod in his hand:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> That they may believe that the LORD God of
their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, hath appeared to thee.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the LORD said furthermore to him, Put
now thy hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and
when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And he said, Put thy hand into thy bosom
again. And he put his hand into his bosom again, and drew it out of his
bosom, and behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will not
believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they
will believe the voice of the latter sign.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And it shall come to pass, if they will not
believe also these two signs, neither hearken to thy voice, that thou
shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and
the water which thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the
dry land.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And Moses said to the LORD, O my Lord, I
am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoke to thy
servant: but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And the LORD said to him, Who hath made
man's mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the
blind? have not I the LORD.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now therefore go, and I will be with thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he said, O my Lord, send, I pray
thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the anger of the LORD was kindled
against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know
that he can speak well. And also behold, he cometh forth to meet thee:
and when he seeth thee, he will be glad in his heart.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And thou shalt speak to him, and put
words in his mouth: and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth,
and will teach you what ye shall do.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And he shall speak for thee to the
people: and he shall be, even he shall be to thee instead of a mouth,
and thou shalt be to him instead of God.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And thou shalt take this rod in thy hand,
with which thou shalt perform signs.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Moses went and returned to Jethro his
father-in-law, and said to him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return to my
brethren who are in Egypt, and see whether they are yet alive. And
Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And the LORD said to Moses in Midian, Go,
return into Egypt; for all the men are dead who sought thy life.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Moses took his wife, and his sons,
and set them upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt. And
Moses took the rod of God in his hand.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And the LORD said to Moses, When thou
goest to return into Egypt, see that thou perform all those wonders
before Pharaoh which I have put in thy hand: but I will harden his
heart, that he shall not let the people go.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And thou shalt say to Pharaoh, Thus saith
the LORD, Israel is my son, even my first-born.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And I say to thee, Let my son go, that he
may serve me: and if thou shalt refuse to let him go, behold, I will
slay thy son, even thy first-born.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And it came to pass by the way in the
inn, that the LORD met him, and sought to kill him.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut
off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, Surely a
bloody husband art thou to me.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> So he let him go: then she said, A bloody
husband thou art, because of the circumcision.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And the LORD said to Aaron, Go into the
wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God,
and kissed him.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And Moses told Aaron all the words of the
LORD who had sent him, and all the signs which he had commanded him.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And Moses and Aaron went, and assembled
all the elders of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And Aaron spoke all the words which the
LORD had spoken to Moses, and performed the signs in the sight of the
people.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And the people believed: and when they
heard that the LORD had visited the children of Israel, and that he had
looked upon their affliction, then they bowed their heads, and
worshiped.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and
told Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Let my people go, that
they may hold a feast to me in the wilderness.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD, that I
should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the LORD, neither
will I let Israel go.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath
met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the
desert, and sacrifice to the LORD our God; lest he fall upon us with
pestilence, or with the sword.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And the king of Egypt said to them, Why do
ye, Moses and Aaron, hinder the people from their works; go you to your
burdens.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the
land now are many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And Pharaoh commanded the same day the
task-masters of the people, and their officers, saying,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Ye shall no more give the people straw to
make brick, as heretofore; let them go and gather straw for themselves.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And the number of the bricks which they
made heretofore, ye shall lay upon them; ye shall not diminish aught
thereof; for they are idle: therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and
sacrifice to our God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let more work be laid upon the men, that
they may labor therein: and let them not regard vain words.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the task-masters of the people went
out, and their officers, and they spoke to the people, saying, Thus
saith Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Go ye, get you straw where ye can find
it: yet not aught of your work shall be diminished.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> So the people were scattered abroad
throughout all the land of Egypt, to gather stubble instead of straw.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the task-masters hastened them,
saying, Fulfill your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the officers of the children of
Israel, which Pharaoh's task-masters had set over them, were beaten, and
demanded, Why have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick, both
yesterday and to-day, as heretofore?

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Then the officers of the children of
Israel came and cried to Pharaoh, saying, Why dealest thou thus with thy
servants?

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> There is no straw given to thy servants,
and they say to us, Make brick: and behold, thy servants are beaten; but
the fault is in thy own people.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle:
therefore ye say, Let us go, and do sacrifice to the LORD.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Go therefore now, and work; for there
shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the number of bricks.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And the officers of the children of
Israel saw that they were in evil case, after it was said, Ye shall not
diminish aught from your bricks of your daily task.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood
in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And they said to them, The LORD look upon
you, and judge; because ye have made our savor to be abhorred in the
eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in
their hands to slay us.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And Moses returned to the LORD, and said,
Lord, why hast thou so ill treated this people? why is it that thou hast
sent me?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in
thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered
thy people at all.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Then the LORD said to Moses, Now shalt thou
see what I will do to Pharaoh; for with a strong hand shall he let them
go, and with a strong hand shall he drive them from his land.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And God spoke to Moses, and said to him, I
am the LORD:

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not
known to them.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And I have also established my covenant
with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their
pilgrimage, in which they were strangers.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And I have also heard the groaning of the
children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage: and I have
remembered my covenant.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Wherefore say to the children of Israel, I
am the LORD, and I will bring you from under the burdens of the
Egyptians, and I will deliver you from their bondage, and I will redeem
you with out-stretched arm, and with great judgments:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And I will take you to me for a people, and
I will be to you a God: and ye shall know that I am the LORD your God,
who bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And I will bring you into the land,
concerning which I swore to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob;
and I will give it to you for a heritage: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And Moses spoke so to the children of
Israel: but they hearkened not to Moses, by reason of anguish of spirit,
and cruel bondage.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Go in, speak to Pharaoh, king of Egypt,
that he let the children of Israel depart from his land.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And Moses spoke before the LORD, saying,
Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened to me; how then shall
Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, and to
Aaron, and gave them a charge to the children of Israel, and to Pharaoh,
king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> These are the heads of their father's
houses: The sons of Reuben the first-born of Israel; Hanoch, and Pallu,
Hezron, and Carmi: these are the families of Reuben.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and
Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a
Canaanitish woman: these are the families of Simeon.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Levi, according to their generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.
And the years of the life of Levi were a hundred and thirty-seven years.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi,
according to their families.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar,
and Hebron, and Uzziel: and the years of the life of Kohath were a
hundred and thirty-three years.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi:
these are the families of Levi, according to their generations.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And Amram took him Jochebed, his father's
sister, for a wife; and she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of
the life of Amram were a hundred and thirty-seven years.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg,
and Zichri.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And the sons of Uzziel; Mishael, and
Elzaphan, and Zithri.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And Aaron took him Elisheba daughter of
Amminadab, sister of Naashon, for a wife; and she bore him Nadab and
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And the sons of Korah; Assir, and
Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korhites.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And Eleazar, Aaron's son, took him one of
the daughters of Putiel for a wife; and she bore to him Phinehas: these
are the heads of the fathers of the Levites, according to their
families.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom
the LORD said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt
according to their armies.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> These are they who spoke to Pharaoh, king
of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that
Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And it came to pass, on the day when the
LORD spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> That the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, I
am the LORD: speak thou to Pharaoh, king of Egypt, all that I say to
thee.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And Moses said before the LORD, Behold, I
am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken to me?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the LORD said to Moses, See, I have
made thee a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Thou shalt speak all that I command thee:
and Aaron thy brother shall speak to Pharaoh, that he send the children
of Israel out of his land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and
multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> But Pharaoh shall not hearken to you, that
I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth my armies, my people the
children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt, by great judgments.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I am the
LORD, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt, and bring out the
children of Israel from among them.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Moses and Aaron did as the LORD
commanded them, so did they.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron
eighty and three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> When Pharaoh shall speak to you, saying,
Show a miracle for you: then thou shalt say to Aaron, Take thy rod, and
cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh,
and they did so as the LORD had commanded: And Aaron cast down his rod
before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Then Pharaoh also called the wise-men,
and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like
manner with their enchantments.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For they cast down every man his rod, and
they became serpents: but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And he hardened Pharaoh's heart that he
hearkened not to them; as the LORD had said.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Pharaoh's
heart is hardened; he refuseth to let the people go.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Go to Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he
goeth out to the water, and thou shalt stand by the river's brink
against he cometh; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou
take in thy hand.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou shalt say to him, The LORD God
of the Hebrews hath sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they
may serve me in the wilderness: and behold, hitherto thou wouldest not
hear.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Thus saith the LORD, In this thou shalt
know that I am the LORD: behold, I will smite with the rod that is in my
hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to
blood.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And the fish that is in the river shall
die, and the river shall be offensive in smell; and the Egyptians shall
lothe to drink of the water of the river.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, Say to
Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thy hand upon the waters of Egypt,
upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon
all their pools of water, that they may become blood: and that there may
be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood, and
in vessels of stone.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD
commanded; and he lifted up the rod and smote the waters that were in
the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants;
and all the waters that were in the river were turned into blood.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And the fish that was in the river died;
and the river was offensive in smell, and the Egyptians could not drink
of the water of the river; and there was blood throughout all the land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the magicians of Egypt did so with
their enchantments: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he
hearken to them; as the LORD had said.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And Pharaoh turned and went into his
house, neither did he regard this also.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And all the Egyptians digged round about
the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of
the river.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And seven days were fulfilled after that
the LORD had smitten the river.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, Go to Pharaoh,
and say to him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go that they may
serve me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And if thou shalt refuse to let them go,
behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And the river shall bring forth frogs
abundantly, which shall go up and come into thy house, and into thy
bed-chamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thy ovens, and into thy kneading troughs:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the frogs shall come up both on thee,
and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, Say to Aaron,
Stretch forth thy hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers,
and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up on the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And Aaron stretched his hand over the
waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And the magicians did so with their
enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron,
and said, Entreat the LORD that he may take away the frogs from me, and
from my people: and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifice
to the LORD.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Moses said to Pharaoh, Glory over me:
when shall I entreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people,
to destroy the frogs from thee, and thy houses, that they may remain in
the river only?

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And he said, To-morrow. And he said, Be
it according to thy word; that thou mayest know that there is none like
the LORD our God.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the frogs shall depart from thee, and
from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shall
remain in the river only.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Moses and Aaron went out from
Pharaoh: and Moses cried to the LORD, because of the frogs which he had
brought against Pharaoh.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And the LORD did according to the word of
Moses: and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the villages, and
out of the fields.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they gathered them into heaps: and
the land was offensive in smell.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> But when Pharaoh saw that there was
respit, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not to them, as the LORD
had said.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Say to Aaron,
Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become
lice throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And they did so: for Aaron stretched out
his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became
lice in man and in beast; all the dust of the land became lice
throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the magicians did so with their
inchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice
upon man and upon beast.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, This
is the finger of God: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened
not to them; as the LORD had said.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Rise early in
the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; (lo, he cometh forth to the
water) and say to him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they
may serve me.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Else, if thou wilt not let my people go,
behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon thy servants,
and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the
Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground on which
they are.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And I will sever in that day the land of
Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be
there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the LORD in the midst of
the earth.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And I will put a division between my
people and thy people: to-morrow shall this sign be.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And the LORD did so: and there came a
grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his
servants' houses, and into all the land of Egypt: the land was corrupted
by reason of the swarm of flies.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And Pharaoh called for Moses, and for
Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And Moses said, It is not meet so to do;
for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our
God: Lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before
their eyes, and will they not stone us?

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> We will go three days' journey into the
wilderness, and sacrifice to the LORD our God as he shall command us.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that
ye may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderness; only ye shall
not go very far away: entreat for me.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And Moses said, Behold, I go out from
thee, and I will entreat the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart
from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to-morrow: but let
not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more, in not letting the people go to
sacrifice to the LORD.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and
entreated the LORD:

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And the LORD did according to the word of
Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his
servants, and from his people; there remained not one.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this
time also, neither would he let the people go.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then the LORD said to Moses, Go in to
Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my
people go, that they may serve me.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For if thou shalt refuse to let them go,
and wilt hold them still,

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy
cattle which are in the field, upon the horses, upon the asses, upon the
camels, upon the oxen, and upon the sheep: there shall be a very
grievous murrain.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the LORD shall sever between the cattle
of Israel, and the cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all
that belongs to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And the LORD appointed a set time, saying,
To-morrow the LORD will do this thing in the land.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And the LORD did that thing on the morrow,
and all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of
Israel died not one.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And Pharaoh sent, and behold, there was not
one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was
hardened, and he did not let the people go.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the LORD said to Moses and to Aaron,
Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it
towards heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And it shall become small dust in all the
land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man,
and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they took ashes of the furnace, and
stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it towards heaven; and it
became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the magicians could not stand before
Moses, because of the boil: for the boil was upon the magicians, and
upon all the Egyptians.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And the LORD hardened the heart of
Pharaoh, and he hearkened not to them; as the LORD had spoke to Moses.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Rise early in
the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say to him, Thus saith the
LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For I will at this time send all my
plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people: that
thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For now I will stretch out my hand, that
I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut
off from the earth.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And in very deed for this cause have I
raised thee up, to show in thee my power; and that my name may be
declared throughout all the earth.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> As yet dost thou exalt thyself against my
people, that thou wilt not let them go?

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Behold, to-morrow about this time I will
cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt
since its foundation even until now.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Send therefore now, and gather thy
cattle, and all that thou hast in the field: for upon every man and
beast which shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home,
the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> He that feared the word of the LORD,
among the servants of Pharaoh, made his servants and his cattle flee
into the houses:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he that regarded not the word of the
LORD, left his servants and his cattle in the field.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Stretch forth
thy hand towards heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of
Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field,
throughout the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod towards
heaven, and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon
the ground: and the LORD rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> So there was hail, and fire mingled with
the hail, very grievous, such as there had been none like it in all the
land of Egypt, since it became a nation.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And the hail smote, throughout all the
land of Egypt, all that was in the field, both man and beast, and the
hail smote every herb of the field and broke every tree of the field.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Only in the land of Goshen, where the
children of Israel were, there was no hail.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses
and Aaron, and said to them, I have sinned this time: the LORD is
righteous, and I and my people are wicked.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Entreat the LORD (for it is enough) that
there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and I will let you go, and
ye shall stay no longer.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And Moses said to him, As soon as I am
gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands to the LORD; and the
thunder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail; that thou
mayest know how that the earth is the LORD'S.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> But as for thee and thy servants, I know
that ye will not yet fear the LORD God.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And the flax and the barley were smitten:
for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But the wheat and the rye were not
smitten; for they were not grown up.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And Moses went out of the city from
Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands to the LORD: and the thunders and
hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and
the hail and the thunders had ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened
his heart, he and his servants.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened,
neither would he let the children of Israel go; as the LORD had spoken
by Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Go in to
Pharaoh: for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants;
that I might show these my signs before him:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And that thou mayest tell in the ears of
thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and
my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I am
the LORD.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And Moses and Aaron came in to Pharaoh,
and said to him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, How long wilt
thou refuse to humble thyself before me? Let my people go, that they may
serve me.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Else, if thou shalt refuse to let my
people go, behold, to-morrow will I bring the locusts into thy border:

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And they shall cover the face of the
earth, that one cannot be able to see the earth: and they shall eat the
residue of that which hath escaped, which remaineth to you from the
hail, and shall eat every tree which groweth for you out of the field:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And they shall fill thy houses, and the
houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which
neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day
that they were upon the earth to this day. And he turned himself, and
went out from Pharaoh.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Pharaoh's servants said to him, How
long shall this man be a snare to us? Let the men go, that they may
serve the LORD their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed?

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And Moses and Aaron were brought again to
Pharaoh: and he said to them, Go, serve the LORD your God: but who are
they that shall go?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And Moses said, We will go with our young
and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks
and with our herds will we go; for we must hold a feast to the LORD.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And he said to them, Let the LORD be so
with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones: look to it; for
evil is before you.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Not so: go now ye that are men, and
serve the LORD; for that you desired. And they were driven out from
Pharaoh's presence.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Stretch out
thy hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come upon
the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the
hail hath left.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod over
the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land all
that day, and all that night: and when it was morning, the east wind
brought the locusts.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And the locusts went up over all the
land of Egypt, and rested in all the borders of Egypt: very grievous
were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after
them will be such.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> For they covered the face of the whole
earth, so that the land was darkened; and they ate every herb of the
land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left: and there
remained not any green thing on the trees, or in the herbs of the field,
through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron
in haste; and he said, I have sinned against the LORD your God, and
against you.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my
sin only this once, and entreat the LORD your God that he may take away
from me this death only.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And he went out from Pharaoh, and
entreated the LORD.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the LORD turned a mighty strong
west wind which took away the locusts, and cast them into the Red sea:
there remained not one locust in all the borders of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart,
so that he would not let the children of Israel go.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Stretch out
thy hand towards heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of
Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And Moses stretched forth his hand
towards heaven: and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt
three days:

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> They saw not one another, neither rose
any from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel had
light in their dwellings.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And Pharaoh called to Moses, and said,
Go ye, serve the LORD; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed:
let your little ones also go with you.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And Moses said, Thou must give us also
sacrifices, and burnt-offerings, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our
God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Our cattle also shall go with us; there
shall not a hoof be left behind; for of them must we take to serve the
LORD our God; and we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we
come thither.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart,
and he would not let them go.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Pharaoh said to him, Depart from
me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more: for in that day thou
seest my face, thou shalt die.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And Moses said, Thou hast spoken well,
I will see thy face again no more.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Yet will I
bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will
let you go hence: when he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you
out hence altogether.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Speak now in the ears of the people, and
let every man borrow of his neighbor, and every woman of her neighbor,
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And the LORD gave the people favor in the
sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the
land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of
the people.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And Moses said, Thus saith the LORD,
About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And all the first-born in the land of
Egypt shall die, from the first-born of Pharaoh that sitteth upon his
throne, even to the first-born of the maid-servant that is behind the
mill; and all the first-born of beasts.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And there shall be a great cry throughout
all the land of Egypt, such as there hath been none like it, nor shall
be like it any more.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But against any of the children of Israel
shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know
how the LORD doth put a difference between the Egyptians and Israel.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And all these thy servants shall come
down to me, and bow down themselves to me, saying, Depart thou, and all
the people that follow thee; and after that I will depart: and he went
out from Pharaoh in a great anger.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Pharaoh will
not hearken to you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And Moses and Aaron did all these
wonders before Pharaoh; and the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that
he would not let the children of Israel depart from his land.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses and Aaron in
the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> This month shall be to you the beginning
of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Speak ye to all the congregation of
Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them
every man a lamb, according to the house of their fathers, a lamb for a
house:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And if the household shall be too small
for the lamb, let him and his neighbor next to his house take it
according to the number of the souls; every man according to his eating
shall make your count for the lamb.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Your lamb shall be without blemish, a
male of the first year: ye shall take it from the sheep or from the
goats:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And ye shall keep it until the fourteenth
day of the same month: and the whole assembly of the congregation of
Israel shall kill it in the evening.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And they shall take of the blood, and
strike it on the two side-posts, and on the upper door-post of the
houses, in which they shall eat it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And they shall eat the flesh in that
night, roasted with fire; and unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs
they shall eat it.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Eat not of it raw, nor boiled at all with
water, but roasted with fire; its head with its legs, and with its
entrails.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And ye shall let nothing of it remain
till the morning: and that which remaineth of it till the morning ye
shall burn with fire.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And thus shall ye eat it; with your
loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand: and
ye shall eat it in haste; it is the LORD'S passover.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For I will pass through the land of
Egypt this night, and will smite all the first-born in the land of
Egypt, both man and beast: and against all the gods of Egypt I will
execute judgment: I am the LORD.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And the blood shall be to you for a
token upon the houses where ye are: and when I see the blood, I will
pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy you, when
I smite the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And this day shall be to you for a
memorial; and ye shall keep it a feast to the LORD throughout your
generations: ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance for ever.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Seven days shall ye eat unleavened
bread; even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses:
for whoever eateth leavened bread, from the first day till the seventh
day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And in the first day there shall be a
holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shall be a holy
convocation to you: no manner of work shall be done in them, save that
which every man must eat, that only may be done by you.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And ye shall observe the feast of
unleavened bread; for in this same day have I brought your armies out of
the land of Egypt: therefore shall ye observe this day in your
generations by an ordinance for ever.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> In the first month, on the fourteenth
day of the month at evening, ye shall eat unleavened bread, till the one
and twentieth day of the month at evening.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Seven days shall there be no leaven
found in your houses: for whoever eateth that which is leavened, even
that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he
shall be a stranger, or born in the land.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Ye shall eat nothing leavened: in all
your habitations shall ye eat unleavened bread.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Then Moses called for all the elders of
Israel, and said to them, Draw out, and take you a lamb, according to
your families, and kill the passover.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop,
and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the lintel and
the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin: and none of you
shall go out at the door of his house till the morning.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> For the LORD will pass through to smite
the Egyptians; and when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the
two side-posts, the LORD will pass over the door, and will not suffer
the destroyer to come in to your houses to smite you.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And ye shall observe this thing for an
ordinance to thee and to thy sons for ever.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And it shall come to pass, when ye
shall have come to the land which the LORD will give you, according as
he hath promised, that ye shall keep this service.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And it shall come to pass, when your
children shall say to you, What mean you by this service?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> That ye shall say, It is the sacrifice
of the LORD'S passover, who passed over the houses of the children of
Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses.
And the people bowed the head and worshiped.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the children of Israel went away,
and did as the LORD had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And it came to pass, that at midnight
the LORD smote all the first-born in the land of Egypt, from the
first-born of Pharaoh that sat on his throne, to the first-born of the
captive that was in the dungeon; and all the first-born of cattle.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And Pharaoh rose in the night, he, and
all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in
Egypt: for there was not a house where there was not one dead.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And he called for Moses and Aaron by
night, and said, Arise, and depart from among my people, both ye and the
children of Israel: and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Also take your flocks and your herds,
as ye have said, and be gone: and bless me also.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And the Egyptians were urgent upon the
people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they
said, We are all dead men.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And the people took their dough before
it was leavened, their kneading troughs being bound up in their clothes
upon their shoulders.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And the children of Israel did
according to the word of Moses: and they borrowed of the Egyptians
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> And the LORD gave the people favor in
the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent to them such things as
they requested: and they spoiled the Egyptians.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> And the children of Israel journeyed
from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot that were
men, besides children.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And a mixed multitude went up also with
them; and flocks, and herds, even very many cattle.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And they baked unleavened cakes of the
dough which they brought from Egypt, for it was not leavened: because
they were driven from Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they
prepared for themselves any victuals.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Now the sojourning of the children of
Israel who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And it came to pass, at the end of the
four hundred and thirty years, even the same day it came to pass, that
all the hosts of the LORD departed from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> It is a night to be much observed to
the LORD, for bringing them out from the land of Egypt: this is that
night of the LORD to be observed by all the children of Israel in their
generations.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And the LORD said to Moses and Aaron,
This is the ordinance of the passover: there shall no stranger eat of
it.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> But every man's servant that is bought
for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall he eat of it.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> A foreigner, and a hired servant shall
not eat of it.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> In one house shall it be eaten; thou
shalt not carry aught of the flesh abroad out of the house: neither
shall ye break a bone of it.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> All the congregation of Israel shall
keep it.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> And when a stranger shall sojourn with
thee, and will keep the passover to the LORD, let all his males be
circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he shall be as
one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat of
it.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> One law shall be to him that is
home-born, and to the stranger that sojourneth among you.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> Thus did all the children of Israel; as
the LORD commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> And it came to pass the same day, that
the LORD brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by
their armies.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Sanctify to me all the first-born,
whatever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and
of beast: it is mine.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Moses said to the people, Remember
this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage;
for by strength of hand the LORD brought you out from this place: there
shall no leavened bread be eaten.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> This day ye came out in the month Abib.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And it shall be when the LORD shall bring
thee into the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the
Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he swore to thy
fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey; that thou
shalt keep this service in this month.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened
bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to the LORD.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Unleavened bread shall be eaten seven
days: and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall
there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And thou shalt show thy son in that day,
saying, This is done because of that which the LORD did to me when I
came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And it shall be for a sign to thee upon
thy hand, and for a memorial between thy eyes; that the LORD'S law may
be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thee out
of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Thou shalt therefore keep this
ordinance in its season from year to year.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And it shall be when the LORD shall
bring thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he swore to thee and to
thy fathers, and shall give it to thee,

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> That thou shall set apart to the LORD
all that openeth the matrix; and every firstling that cometh of a beast
which thou hast, the males shall be the LORD'S.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And every firstling of an ass thou
shalt redeem with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redeem it, then thou
shalt break his neck: and all the first-born of man among thy children
shalt thou redeem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And it shall be when thy son asketh
thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say to him,
By strength of hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house
of bondage:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would
hardly let us go, that the LORD slew all the first-born in the land of
Egypt, both the first-born of man, and the first-born of beasts:
therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all that openeth the matrix, being
males; but all the first-born of my children I redeem.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And it shall be for a token upon thy
hand, and for frontlets between thy eyes: for by strength of hand the
LORD brought us forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had
let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land of
the Philistines, although that was near, for God said, Lest peradventure
the people repent when they see war, and they return to Egypt.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> But God led the people about, through
the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea: and the children of Israel
went up harnassed from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Moses took the bones of Joseph with
him: for he had strictly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will
surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones hence with you.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And they took their journey from
Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And the LORD went before them by day in
a pillar of a cloud, to lead them in the way; and by night in a pillar
of fire, to give them light: to go by day and night.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> He took not away the pillar of the
cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, from before the people.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, that
they turn and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea,
over against Baal-zephon: before it shall ye encamp by the sea.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Pharaoh will say of the children of
Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness hath shut them
in.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that
he shall follow them; and I will be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon all
his host; that the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD. And they did
so.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And it was told to the king of Egypt that
the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned
against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have
let Israel go from serving us?

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And he made ready his chariot, and took
his people with him:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And he took six hundred chosen chariots,
and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the LORD hardened the heart of
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued the children of Israel: and the
children of Israel went out with a high hand.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> But the Egyptians pursued them (all the
horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army) and
overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, before
Baal-zephon.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the
children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold, the Egyptians
marched after them; and they were greatly afraid; and the children of
Israel cried to the LORD.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they said to Moses, Because there
were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the
wilderness? Why hast thou dealt thus with us, to conduct us out of
Egypt?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Is not this the word that we told thee
in Egypt, Saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it
had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die
in the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Moses said to the people, Fear ye
not, stand still, and see the salvation of the LORD, which he will show
to you to-day: for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to-day, ye shall see
them again no more for ever.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The LORD will fight for you, and ye
shall hold your peace.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Why criest
thou to me? Speak to the children of Israel, that they go forward:

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But lift thou thy rod, and stretch out
thy hand over the sea, and divide it; and the children of Israel shall
go on dry ground through the midst of the sea.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And I, behold I, will harden the hearts
of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and I will get me honor
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots and upon his
horsemen.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I am
the LORD, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots,
and upon his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the angel of God, who went before
the camp of Israel, removed, and went behind them; and the pillar of the
cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And it came between the camp of the
Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkness to
them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near
the other all the night.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And Moses stretched out his hand over
the sea, and the LORD caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind
all that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And the children of Israel went into
the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a wall to
them on their right hand, and on their left.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And the Egyptians pursued, and went in
after them to the midst of the sea, even all Pharaoh's horses, his
chariots, and his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And it came to pass, that, in the
morning-watch, the LORD looked to the host of the Egyptians through the
pillar of fire, and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the
Egyptians,

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And took off their chariot-wheels, and
made them to move heavily, so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from
the face of Israel; for the LORD fighteth for them against the
Egyptians.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Stretch out
thy hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the
Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Moses stretched forth his hand over
the sea, and the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared;
and the Egyptians fled against it; and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians
in the midst of the sea.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And the waters returned, and covered
the chariots, and the horsemen, and all the host of Pharaoh that came
into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But the children of Israel walked upon
dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall to them on
their right hand, and on their left.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> Thus the LORD saved Israel that day
from the hand of the Egyptians: and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon
the sea-shore.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And Israel saw that great work which
the LORD did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the LORD, and
believed the LORD, and his servant Moses.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then sang Moses and the children of
Israel this song to the LORD, and spoke, saying, I will sing to the
LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he
thrown into the sea.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The LORD is my strength and song, and he
is become my salvation: he is my God, and I will prepare him a
habitation; my father's God, and I will exalt him.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his
name.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he
cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> The depths have covered them: they sunk
to the bottom as a stone.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thy right hand, O LORD, is become
glorious in power: thy right hand, O LORD, hath dashed in pieces the
enemy.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And in the greatness of thy excellence
thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thee: thou sentest forth
thy wrath, which consumed them as stubble.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And with the blast of thy nostrils the
waters were collected, the floods stood upright as a heap, and the
depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The enemy said, I will pursue, I will
overtake, I will divide the spoil; my lust shall be satisfied upon them;
I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea
covered them: they sunk as lead in the mighty waters.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Who is like to thee, O LORD, among the
gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders!

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Thou stretchedst out thy right hand,
the earth swallowed them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the
people which thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided them in thy strength
to thy holy habitation.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The people shall hear, and be afraid:
sorrow shall take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed;
the mighty men of Moab, trembling shall take hold upon them; all the
inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Fear and dread shall fall upon them; by
the greatness of thy arm they shall be as still as a stone; till thy
people pass over, O LORD, till the people pass over, which thou hast
purchased.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Thou shalt bring them in, and plant
them in the mountain of thy inheritance, in the place, O LORD, which
thou hast made for thee to dwell in; in the sanctuary, O Lord. which thy
hands have established.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> The LORD shall reign for ever and ever.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For the horse of Pharaoh went in with
his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought
again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel went
on dry land in the midst of the sea.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And Miriam the prophetess, the sister
of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and all the women went out after
her, with timbrels, and with dances.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to
the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath
he thrown into the sea.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> So Moses brought Israel from the Red
sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three
days in the wilderness, and found no water.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And when they came to Marah, they could
not drink of the waters of Marah; for they were bitter: therefore the
name of it was called Marah.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And the people murmured against Moses,
saying, What shall we drink?

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And he cried to the LORD; and the LORD
showed him a tree, which he cast into the waters, and the waters were
made sweet: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there
he proved them,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And said, If thou wilt diligently
hearken to the voice of the LORD thy God, and wilt do that which is
right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all
his statutes; I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have
brought upon the Egyptians; for I am the LORD that healeth thee.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And they came to Elim, where were
twelve wells of water, and seventy palm-trees: and they encamped there
by the waters.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And they took their journey from Elim,
and all the congregation of the children of Israel came to the
wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day
of the second month after their departure from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And the whole congregation of the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And the children of Israel said to them,
O that we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we
sat by the flesh-pots, and when we did eat bread to the full: for ye
have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly
with hunger.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Then said the LORD to Moses, Behold, I
will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and
gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they
will walk in my law, or not.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And it shall come to pass, that on the
sixth day they shall prepare that which they bring in; and it shall be
twice as much as they gather daily.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Moses and Aaron said to all the
children of Israel, At evening, then ye shall know that the LORD hath
brought you out from the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And in the morning, then ye shall see the
glory of the LORD; for that he heareth your murmurings against the LORD:
And what are we, that ye murmur against us?

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Moses said, This shall be when the
LORD shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning
bread to the full; for that the LORD heareth your murmurings which ye
murmur against him: And what are we? your murmurings are not against us,
but against the LORD.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And Moses spoke to Aaron, Say to all the
congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before the LORD: for
he hath heard your murmurings.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And it came to pass, as Aaron spoke to
the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they looked
towards the wilderness, and behold, the glory of the LORD appeared in
the cloud.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I have heard the murmurings of the
children of Israel; Speak to them, saying, At evening ye shall eat
flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread: and ye shall
know that I am the LORD your God.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And it came to pass, that at evening
the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay
around the host.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And when the dew that lay was gone up,
behold, upon the face of the wilderness there lay a small round thing,
as small as the hoar frost on the ground:

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when the children of Israel saw it,
they said one to another, It is manna: for they knew not what it was.
And Moses said to them, This is the bread which the LORD hath given you
to eat.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> This is the thing which the LORD hath
commanded, Gather of it every man according to his eating: an omer for
every man according to the number of your persons, take ye every man for
them who are in his tents.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And the children of Israel did so, and
gathered, some more, some less.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And when they measured it with an omer,
he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had
no lack: they gathered every man according to his eating.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Moses said, Let no man leave of it
till the morning.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Notwithstanding, they hearkened not to
Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms,
and became offensive; and Moses was wroth with them.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And they gathered it every morning,
every man according to his eating: and when the sun became hot, it
melted.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And it came to pass, that on the sixth
day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and all
the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And he said to them, This is that which
the LORD hath said, To-morrow is the rest of the holy sabbath to the
LORD: bake that which ye will bake to-day, and boil that ye will boil;
and that which remaineth over, lay up for you to be kept until the
morning.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And they laid it up till the morning,
as Moses ordered: and it did not putrefy, neither was there any worm
therein.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Moses said, Eat that to-day; for
to-day is a sabbath to the LORD; to-day ye will not find it in the
field.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Six days ye shall gather it; but on the
seventh day, which is the sabbath, in it there will be none.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And it came to pass, that some of the
people went out on the seventh day to gather, and they found none.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And the LORD said to Moses, How long
refuse ye to keep my commandments and my laws?

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> See, for that the LORD hath given you
the sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two
days: abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on
the seventh day.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> So the people rested on the seventh
day.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And the house of Israel called its name
Manna: and it was like coriander-seed, white; and the taste of it was
like wafers made with honey.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And Moses said, This is the thing which
the LORD commanded, Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations;
that they may see the bread with which I fed you in the wilderness, when
I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Moses said to Aaron, Take a pot,
and put an omer full of manna therein, and lay it up before the LORD, to
be kept for your generations.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> As the LORD commanded Moses, so Aaron
laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And the children of Israel ate manna
forty years, until they came to a land inhabited: they ate manna, until
they came to the borders of the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Now an omer is the tenth part of an
ephah.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And all the congregation of the children
of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, after their journeys,
according to the commandment of the LORD, and encamped in Rephidim: and
there was no water for the people to drink.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Wherefore the people contended with
Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said to
them, Why chide you with me? why do ye tempt the LORD?

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And the people thirsted there for water;
and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Why is this that thou
hast brought us out of Egypt to kill us and our children and our cattle
with thirst?

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Moses cried to the LORD, saying, What
shall I do to this people? they are almost ready to stone me.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Go on before
the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel: and thy rod,
with which thou smotest the river, take in thy hand, and go.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Behold, I will stand before thee there on
the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and water shall come
out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of
the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And he called the name of the place
Massah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel,
and because they tempted the LORD, saying, Is the LORD among us, or not?

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel
in Rephidim.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And Moses said to Joshua, Choose us out
men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to-morrow I will stand on the top of
the hill with the rod of God in my hand.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So Joshua did as Moses had said to him,
and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur, went up to the top of
the hill.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And it came to pass, when Moses held up
his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek
prevailed.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But Moses's hands were heavy; and they
took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat upon it: and Aaron and
Hur supported his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the
other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his
people with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Write this
for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I
will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And Moses built an altar, and called
the name of it JEHOVAH-nissi:

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> For he said, Because the LORD hath
sworn that the LORD will have war with Amalek from generation to
generation.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> When Jethro the priest of Midian, Moses's
father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel
his people, and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt:

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Then Jethro, Moses's father-in-law, took
Zipporah Moses's wife, after he had sent her back,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And her two sons; of which the name of
the one was Gershom; (for he said, I have been an alien in a strange
land:)

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And the name of the other was Eliezer;
(for the God of my father, said he, was my help, and delivered me from
the sword of Pharaoh:)

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And Jethro, Moses's father-in-law, came
with his sons and his wife to Moses into the wilderness, where he
encamped at the mount of God:

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And he said to Moses, I thy father-in-law
Jethro have come to thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And Moses went out to meet his
father-in-law, and did obeisance, and kissed him: and they asked each
other of their welfare: and they came into the tent.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Moses told his father-in-law all that
the LORD had done to Pharaoh, and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake,
and all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how the LORD
delivered them.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness
which the LORD had done to Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand
of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And Jethro said, Blessed be the LORD,
who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the
hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the hand of
the Egyptians.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now I know that the LORD is greater
than all gods: for in the thing in which they dealt proudly, he was
above them.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And Jethro, Moses's father-in-law, took
a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and all the
elders of Israel to eat bread with Moses's father-in-law before God.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the
morning to the evening.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And when Moses's father-in-law saw all
that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest
to the people? Why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand
by thee from morning to evening?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Moses said to his father-in-law,
Because the people come to me to inquire of God:

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> When they have a matter, they come to
me, and I judge between one and another, and I make them know the
statutes of God, and his laws.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And Moses's father-in-law said to him,
The thing that thou doest is not good.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou,
and this people that is with thee: for this thing is too heavy for thee;
thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Hearken now to my voice, I will give
thee counsel, and God shall be with thee: Be thou for the people toward
God, that thou mayest bring the causes to God:

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And thou shalt teach them ordinances
and laws, and shalt show them the way in which they must walk, and the
work that they must do.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Moreover, thou shalt provide out of all
the people, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating
covetousness; and place such over them to be rulers of thousands, and
rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens:

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And let them judge the people at all
seasons: and it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring to
thee, but every small matter they shall judge: So shall it be easier for
thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> If thou shalt do this thing, and God
command thee so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and all this people
shall also go to their place in peace.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> So Moses hearkened to the voice of his
father-in-law, and did all that he had said.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And Moses chose able men out of all
Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers
of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And they judged the people at all
seasons: the hard causes they brought to Moses, but every small matter
they judged themselves.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Moses let his father-in-law depart;
and he went his way into his own land.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> In the third month, when the children of
Israel had gone forth from the land of Egypt, the same day they came
into the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> For they had departed from Rephidim, and
had come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderness; and
there Israel encamped before the mount.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And Moses went up to God, and the LORD
called to him from the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the
house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel;

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians,
and how I bore you on eagles' wings, and brought you to myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice
indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure to me
above all people: for all the earth is mine:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And ye shall be to me a kingdom of
priests, and a holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak
to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And Moses came and called for the elders
of the people, and laid before their faces all these words which the
LORD commanded him.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And all the people answered together, and
said, All that the LORD hath spoken we will do. And Moses returned the
words of the people to the LORD.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Lo, I come to
thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee,
and believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the people to the
LORD.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Go to the
people, and sanctify them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash their
clothes,

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And be ready against the third day: for
on the third day the LORD will come down in the sight of all the people
upon mount Sinai.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And thou shalt set bounds to the people
round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye go not up upon the
mount, or touch the border of it: whoever toucheth the mount shall be
surely put to death:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> There shall not a hand touch it, but he
shall surely be stoned or shot through: whether it be beast or man, it
shall not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to
the mount.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Moses went down from the mount to
the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And he said to the people, Be ready
against the third day: come not at your wives.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And it came to pass on the third day in
the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud
upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all
the people that were in the camp trembled.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And Moses brought forth the people out
of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the
mount.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And mount Sinai was altogether in a
smoke, because the LORD descended upon it in fire: and the smoke of it
ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount trembled
greatly.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And when the voice of the trumpet
sounded long, and grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and God answered
him by a voice.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And the LORD came down upon mount
Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the LORD called Moses to the top of
the mount; and Moses went up.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Go down,
charge the people, lest they break through to the LORD to gaze, and many
of them perish.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And let the priests also who come near
to the LORD, sanctify themselves, lest the LORD break forth upon them.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And Moses said to the LORD, The people
cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds
about the mount, and sanctify it.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And the LORD said to him, Away, go
down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee: But let not the
priests and the people break through, to come up to the LORD, lest he
break forth upon them.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> So Moses went down to the people, and
spoke to them.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And God spoke all these words, saying,

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> I am the LORD thy God, who have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Thou shalt have no other gods before me.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Thou shalt not make to thee any graven
image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is
in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth:

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them,
nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And showing mercy to thousands of them
that love me, and keep my commandments.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD
thy God in vain: for the LORD will not hold him guiltless that taketh
his name in vain.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Remember the sabbath-day to keep it holy.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Six days shalt thou labor, and do all thy
work:

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But the seventh day is the sabbath of
the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son,
nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle,
nor thy stranger that is within thy gates:

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> For in six days the LORD made heaven
and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested the seventh day:
wherefore the LORD blessed the sabbath-day, and hallowed it.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Honor thy father and thy mother; that
thy days may be long upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Thou shalt not kill.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Thou shalt not commit adultery.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Thou shalt not steal.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Thou shalt not bear false witness
against thy neighbor.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's
house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man-servant,
nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy
neighbor's.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And all the people saw the thunderings,
and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain
smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And they said to Moses, Speak thou with
us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And Moses said to the people, Fear not:
for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your
faces, that ye sin not.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the people stood afar off, and
Moses drew near to the thick darkness where God was.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Thus thou
shalt say to the children of Israel; Ye have seen that I have talked
with you from heaven.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Ye shall not make with me gods of
silver, neither shall ye make to you gods of gold.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> An altar of earth thou shalt make to
me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt-offerings, and thy
peace-offerings, thy sheep, and thy oxen: in all places where I record
my name I will come to thee, and I will bless thee.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And if thou wilt make me an altar of
stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou shalt lift up
thy tool upon it, thou hast polluted it.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Neither shalt thou go up by steps to my
altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Now these are the judgments which thou
shalt set before them.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> If thou shalt buy a Hebrew servant, six
years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall depart free for
nothing.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> If he came in by himself, he shall depart
by himself: if he was married, then his wife shall depart with him.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> If his master hath given him a wife, and
she hath borne him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be
her master's, and he shall depart by himself.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And if the servant shall plainly say, I
love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not depart free:

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Then his master shall bring him to the
judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or to the door-post: and
his master shall bore his ear through with an awl; and he shall serve
him for ever.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And if a man shall sell his daughter to
be a maid-servant, she shall not depart as the men-servants do.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> If she shall not please her master, who
hath betrothed her to himself, then shall he let her be redeemed: to
sell her to a strange nation he shall have no power, seeing he hath
dealt deceitfully with her.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And if he hath betrothed her to his son,
he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> If he shall take him another wife; her
food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage shall he not diminish.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And if he shall not perform these three
to her, then shall she depart free without money.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> He that smiteth a man, so that he
dieth, shall be surely put to death.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And if a man shall not lie in wait, but
God shall deliver him into his hand; then I will appoint thee a place
whither he shall flee.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> But if a man shall come presumptuously
upon his neighbor, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from my
altar, that he may die.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And he that smiteth his father, or his
mother, shall be surely put to death.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And he that stealeth a man, and selleth
him, or if he shall be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to
death.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And he that curseth his father, or his
mother, shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And if men contend together, and one
shall smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he shall not
die, but keep his bed:

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> If he shall rise again, and walk abroad
upon his staff, then shall he that smote him be quit: only he shall pay
for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And if a man shall smite his servant,
or his maid, with a rod, and he shall die under his hand; he shall be
surely punished.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Notwithstanding, if he shall continue a
day or two, he shall not be punished; for he is his money.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> If men shall contend, and hurt a woman
with child, so that her fruit shall depart from her, and yet no mischief
follow: he shall be surely punished, according as the woman's husband
will lay upon him; and he shall pay as the judges determine.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And if any mischief shall follow, then
thou shalt give life for life,

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, foot for foot,

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> Burning for burning, wound for wound,
stripe for stripe.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And if a man shall smite the eye of his
servant, or the eye of his maid, that it shall perish; he shall let him
go free for his eye's sake.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And if he shall smite out his
man-servant's tooth, or his maid-servant's tooth; he shall let him go
free for his tooth's sake.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> If an ox shall gore a man or a woman,
that they die: then the ox shall be surely stoned, and his flesh shall
not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be quit.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> But if the ox was accustomed to push
with his horn in time past, and it hath been testified to his owner, and
he hath not restrained him, but that he hath killed a man or a woman;
the ox shall be stoned, and his owner also shall be put to death.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> If there shall be laid on him a sum of
money, then he shall give for the ransom of his life whatever is laid
upon him.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Whether he hath gored a son, or hath
gored a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done to him.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> If the ox shall push a man-servant, or
maid-servant; he shall give to their master thirty shekels of silver,
and the ox shall be stoned.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> And if a man shall open a pit, or if a
man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an ass shall fall
into it;

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> The owner of the pit shall make
compensation, and give money to the owner of them; and the dead beast
shall be his.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And if one man's ox shall hurt
another's that he shall die, then they shall sell the live ox, and
divide the money of it, and the dead ox also they shall divide.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Or if it shall be known that the ox
hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not restrained him;
he shall surely pay ox for ox, and the dead shall be his own.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep,
and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four
sheep for a sheep.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> If a thief shall be found breaking
through, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed for
him.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> If the sun shall have risen upon him,
there shall be blood shed for him: for he should make full restitution;
if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> If the theft shall be certainly found in
his hand alive, whether an ox, or ass, or sheep; he shall restore
double.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> If a man shall cause a field or vineyard
to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's
field: of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard
shall he make restitution.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If fire shall break out, and catch in
thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field
shall be consumed; he that kindled the fire shall surely make
restitution.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> If a man shall deliver to his neighbor
money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the
thief shall be found, let him pay double.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> If the thief shall not be found, then the
master of the house shall be brought to the judges, to see whether he
hath put his hand to his neighbor's goods.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> For all manner of trespass, whether it be
for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing
which another challengeth to be his: the cause of both parties shall
come before the judges; and he whom the judges shall condemn, shall pay
double to his neighbor.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> If a man shall deliver to his neighbor
an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast to keep; and it shall die, or
be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it:

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Then shall an oath of the LORD be
between them both, that he hath not put his hand to his neighbor's
goods; and the owner of it shall accept of it, and he shall not make
restitution.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And if it shall be stolen from him, he
shall make restitution to the owner of it.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If it shall be torn in pieces; then let
him bring it for witness, and he shall not make good that which was
torn.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And if a man shall borrow aught of his
neighbor, and it shall be hurt, or die, the owner of it being not with
it, he shall surely make it good.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> But if the owner of it shall be with
it, he shall not make it good: if it be a hired thing, it came for his
hire.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And if a man shall entice a maid that
is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely endow her to be his
wife.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> If her father shall utterly refuse to
give her to him, he shall pay money according to the dower of virgins.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Whoever lieth with a beast shall surely
be put to death.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He that sacrificeth to any god, save to
the LORD only, he shall be utterly destroyed.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor
oppress him; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Ye shall not afflict any widow, or
fatherless child.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If thou shalt afflict them in any wise,
and they cry at all to me, I will surely hear their cry:

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And my wrath shall wax hot, and I will
kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> If thou shalt lend money to any of my
people that is poor by thee, thou shalt not be to him as a usurer,
neither shalt thou lay upon him usury.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> If thou shalt at all take thy
neighbor's raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it to him by the
setting of the sun.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For that is his only covering, it is
his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? and it shall come to
pass, when he crieth to me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor
curse the ruler of thy people.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Thou shalt not delay to offer the first
of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the first-born of thy sons shalt
thou give to me.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Likewise shalt thou do with thy oxen,
and with thy sheep: seven days it shall be with his dam; on the eighth
day thou shalt give it to me.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And ye shall be holy men to me: neither
shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shall
cast it to the dogs.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Thou shalt not raise a false report: put
not thy hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do
evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
judgment:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Neither shalt thou countenance a poor man
in his cause.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> If thou shalt meet thy enemy's ox or his
ass going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> If thou shalt see the ass of him that
hateth thee lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him,
thou shalt surely help with him.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy
poor in his cause.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Keep thee far from a false matter; and
the innocent and righteous slay thou not: for I will not justify the
wicked.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift
blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Also thou shalt not oppress a stranger;
for ye know the heart of a stranger, seeing ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And six years thou shalt sow thy land,
and shalt gather in the fruits thereof:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But the seventh year thou shalt let it
rest and lie still; that the poor of thy people may eat: and what they
leave, the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal
with thy vineyard, and with thy olive-yard.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on
the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thy ox and thy ass may rest, and
the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And in all things that I have said to
you be circumspect: and make no mention of the names of other gods,
neither let it be heard from thy mouth.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Three times thou shalt keep a feast to
me in the year.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened
bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I commanded thee,
in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from
Egypt: and none shall appear before me empty:)

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And the feast of harvest, the
first-fruits of thy labors, which thou hast sown in the field: and the
feast of in-gathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou hast
gathered in thy labors out of the field.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Three times in the year all thy males
shall appear before the Lord GOD.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Thou shalt not offer the blood of my
sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my sacrifice
remain until the morning.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> The first of the first-fruits of thy
land thou shalt bring into the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not
seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to
keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have
prepared.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Beware of him, and obey his voice,
provoke him not; for he will not pardon your transgressions: for my name
is in him.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if thou shalt indeed obey his
voice, and do all that I speak; then I will be an enemy to thy enemies,
and an adversary to thy adversaries.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> For my Angel shall go before thee, and
bring thee in to the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, and
the Canaanites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I will cut them
off.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Thou shalt not bow down to their gods,
nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou shalt utterly
overthrow them, and quite break down their images.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And ye shall serve the LORD your God,
and he will bless thy bread, and thy water; and I will take sickness
away from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> There shall nothing cast their young,
nor be barren, in thy land: I will complete the number of thy days.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> I will send my fear before thee, and
will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come, and I will make all
thy enemies turn their backs to thee.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And I will send hornets before thee,
which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite from
before thee.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> I will not drive them out from before
thee in one year; lest the land should become desolate, and the beast of
the field should multiply against thee.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> By little and little I will drive them
out from before thee, until thou shalt be increased and inherit the
land.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> And I will set thy bounds from the Red
sea even to the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert to the
river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand;
and thou shalt drive them out before thee.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Thou shalt make no covenant with them,
nor with their gods.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> They shall not dwell in thy land, lest
they make thee to sin against me: for if thou shalt serve their gods, it
will surely be a snare to thee.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And he said to Moses, Come up to the
LORD, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of
Israel; and worship ye afar off.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Moses alone shall come near the LORD:
but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people go up with him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And Moses came and told the people all
the words of the LORD, and all the judgments: and all the people
answered with one voice, and said, All the words which the LORD hath
said will we perform.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Moses wrote all the words of the
LORD, and rose early in the morning, and built an altar under the hill,
and twelve pillars according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And he sent young men of the children of
Israel, who offered burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace-offerings of
oxen to the LORD.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And Moses took half of the blood, and put
it in basins; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And he took the book of the covenant, and
read in the audience of the people: and they said, All that the LORD
hath said will we do, and be obedient.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled
it on the people, and said, Behold, the blood of the covenant, which the
LORD hath made with you concerning all these words.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and
Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel:

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And they saw the God of Israel: and
there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire-stone,
and as it were the body of heaven in its clearness.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And upon the nobles of the children of
Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and ate and drank.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Come up to
me on the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone, and
a law, and commandments which I have written; that thou mayst teach
them.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And Moses rose up, and his minister
Joshua: and Moses went up upon the mount of God.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And he said to the elders, Tarry ye
here for us, until we come again to you: and behold, Aaron and Hur are
with you: if any man hath any matters to do, let him come to them.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And Moses went up upon the mount, and a
cloud covered the mount.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And the glory of the LORD abode upon
mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he
called to Moses from the midst of the cloud.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the sight of the glory of the LORD
was like devouring fire on the top of the mount, in the eyes of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And Moses went into the midst of the
cloud, and ascended the mount: and Moses was on the mount forty days and
forty nights.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, that
they bring me an offering: of every man that giveth it willingly with
his heart ye shall take my offering.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And this is the offering which ye shall
take of them; gold, and silver and brass,

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats' hair.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Oil for the light, spices for anointing
oil, and for sweet incense,

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the
ephod, and in the breast-plate.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And let them make me a sanctuary; that I
may dwell among them.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> According to all that I show thee after
the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all its instruments,
even so shall ye make it.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> And they shall make an ark of shittim
wood: two cubits and a half shall be its length, and a cubit and a half
its breadth, and a cubit and a half its hight.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure
gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a
crown of gold around it.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And thou shalt cast four rings of gold
for it, and put them in its four corners; and two rings shall be in the
one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And thou shalt make staffs of shittim
wood, and overlay them with gold.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And thou shalt put the staffs into the
rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> The staffs shall be in the rings of the
ark: they shall not be taken from it.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And thou shalt put into the ark the
testimony which I shall give thee.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And thou shalt make a mercy-seat of
pure gold: two cubits and a half shall be its length, and a cubit and a
half its breadth.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> And thou shalt make two cherubim of
gold, of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the
mercy-seat.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> And make one cherub on the one end, and
the other cherub on the other end: even of the mercy-seat shall ye make
the cherubim on its two ends.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And the cherubim shall stretch forth
their wings on high, covering the mercy-seat with their wings, and their
faces shall look one to another; towards the mercy-seat shall the faces
of the cherubim be.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> And thou shalt put the mercy-seat above
upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall
give thee.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And there I will meet with thee, and I
will commune with thee from above the mercy-seat, from between the two
cherubim which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I
will give thee in commandment to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> Thou shalt also make a table of shittim
wood: its length shall be two cubits, and its breadth a cubit, and its
hight a cubit and a half.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure
gold, and make to it a crown of gold around it.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And thou shalt make to it a border of
an hand-breadth around it, and thou shalt make a golden crown to its
border around it.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And thou shalt make for it four rings
of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on its four
feet.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Over against the border shall the rings
be for places of the staffs to bear the table.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> And thou shalt make the staffs of
shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne
with them.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> And thou shalt make its dishes, and its
spoons, and its covers, and its bowls, to cover it with: of pure gold
shalt thou make them.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And thou shalt set upon the table
show-bread before me always.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> And thou shalt make a candlestick of
pure gold: of beaten work shall the candlestick be made: its shaft, and
its branches, its bowls, its knobs, and its flowers, shall be of the
same.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And six branches shall extend from the
sides of it; three branches of the candlestick from the one side, and
three branches of the candlestick from the other side:

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> Three bowls made like to almonds, with
a knob and a flower in one branch; and three bowls made like almonds in
the other branch, with a knob and a flower: so in the six branches that
project from the candlestick.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> And in the candlesticks shall be four
bowls made like to almonds, with their knobs and their flowers.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> And there shall be a knob under two
branches of the same, and a knob under two branches of the same, and a
knob under two branches of the same, according to the six branches that
project from the candlestick.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> Their knobs and their branches shall be
of the same: all of it shall be one beaten work of pure gold.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> And thou shalt make its seven lamps:
and they shall light its lamps, that they may give light over against
it.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> And its tongs, and its snuff-dishes,
shall be of pure gold.

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> Of a talent of pure gold shall he make
it, with all these vessels.

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And look that thou make them after
their pattern, which was shown thee on the mount.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Moreover, thou shalt make the tabernacle
with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and
scarlet: with cherubim of curious work shalt thou make them.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> The length of one curtain shall be eight
and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every
one of the curtains shall have one measure.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> The five curtains shall be coupled
together one to another; and other five curtains shall be coupled one to
another.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And thou shalt make loops of blue upon
the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and
likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in
the coupling of the second.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one
curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that
is in the coupling of the second; that the loops may take hold one of
another.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And thou shalt make fifty buttons of
gold, and couple the curtains together with the buttons: and it shall be
one tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> And thou shalt make curtains of goats'
hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou
make.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> The length of one curtain shall be thirty
cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven
curtains shall be all of one measure.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And thou shalt couple five curtains by
themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth
curtain in the front of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And thou shalt make fifty loops on the
edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops
in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And thou shalt make fifty buttons of
brass, and put the buttons into the loops, and couple the tent together,
that it may be one.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And the remnant that remaineth of the
curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over
the backside of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And a cubit on the one side, and a
cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the
curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on
this side and on that side, to cover it.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And thou shalt make a covering for the
tent, of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers' skins.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And thou shalt make boards for the
tabernacle of shittim wood standing up.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Ten cubits shall be the length of a
board, and a cubit and a half shall be the breadth of one board.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Two tenons shall there be in one board,
set in order one against another: thus shalt thou make for all the
boards of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> And thou shalt make the boards for the
tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And thou shalt make forty sockets of
silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for its two
tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> And for the second side of the
tabernacle on the north side there shall be twenty boards:

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And their forty sockets of silver; two
sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And for the sides of the tabernacle
westward thou shalt make six boards.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And two boards shalt thou make for the
corners of the tabernacle in the two sides.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And they shall be coupled together
beneath, and they shall be coupled together above the head of it to one
ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And they shall be eight boards, and
their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board,
and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And thou shalt make bars of shittim
wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And five bars for the boards of the
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side
of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And the middle bar in the midst of the
boards shall reach from end to end.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And thou shalt overlay the boards with
gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars; and thou
shalt overlay the bars with gold.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle
according to the fashion thereof which was shown thee on the mount.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of curious work: with
cherubim shall it be made.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And thou shalt hang it upon four
pillars of shittim wood overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of
gold, upon the four sockets of silver.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And thou shalt hang the vail under the
buttons, that thou mayst bring in thither within the vail the ark of the
testimony: and the vail shall divide to you between the holy place and
the most holy.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> And thou shalt put the mercy-seat upon
the ark of the testimony, in the most holy place.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> And thou shalt set the table without
the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the
tabernacle towards the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north
side.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> And thou shalt make a hanging for the
door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
linen, wrought with needle work.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And thou shalt make for the hanging
five pillars of shittim wood, and overlay them with gold, and their
hooks shall be of gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for
them.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> And thou shalt make an altar of shittim
wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shall be
foursquare: and its hight shall be three cubits.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And thou shalt make the horns of it upon
the four corners thereof: its horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt
overlay it with brass.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And thou shalt make its pans to receive
its ashes, and its shovels, and its basins, and its flesh-hooks, and its
fire-pans: all its vessels thou shalt make of brass.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And thou shalt make for it a grate of
net-work of brass; and upon the net shalt thou make four brazen rings in
its four corners.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And thou shalt put it under the compass
of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the
altar.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And thou shalt make staffs for the altar,
staffs of shittim wood, and overlay them with brass.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And the staffs shall be put into the
rings, and the staffs shall be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear
it.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as
it was shown thee on the mount, so shall they make it.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And thou shalt make the court of the
tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the
court of fine twined linen of a hundred cubits long for one side:

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And its twenty pillars and their twenty
sockets shall be of brass: the hooks of the pillars and their fillets
shall be of silver.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And likewise for the north side in
length there shall be hangings of a hundred cubits long, and its twenty
pillars and their twenty sockets of brass: the hooks of the pillars and
their fillets of silver.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And for the breadth of the court on the
west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and
their sockets ten.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And the breadth of the court on the
east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> The hangings of one side of the gate
shall be fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And on the other side shall be
hangings, fifteen cubits: their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And for the gate of the court shall be
a hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine
twined linen, wrought with needle-work: and their pillars shall be four,
and their sockets four.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> All the pillars around the court shall
be filleted with silver: their hooks shall be of silver, and their
sockets of brass.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> The length of the court shall be a
hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the hight five
cubits of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> All the vessels of the tabernacle in
all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of
the court, shall be of brass.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And thou shalt command the children of
Israel, that they bring the pure olive-oil beaten for the light, to
cause the lamp to burn always.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> In the tabernacle of the congregation
without the vail, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons
shall order it from evening to morning before the LORD: It shall be a
statute for ever to their generations on the behalf of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> And take thou to thee Aaron thy brother,
and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may
minister to me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And thou shalt make holy garments for
Aaron thy brother, for glory and for beauty.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And thou shalt speak to all that are wise
in heart, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may
make Aaron's garments to consecrate him, that he may minister to me in
the priest's office.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And these are the garments which they
shall make; a breast-plate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered
coat, a miter, and a girdle; and they shall make holy garments for Aaron
thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister to me in the priest's
office.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And they shall take gold, and blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine linen.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And they shall make the ephod of gold, of
blue, and of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with curious
work.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> It shall have the two shoulder-pieces
thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and so it shall be joined
together.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And the curious girdle of the ephod,
which is upon it, shall be of the same, according to its work; even of
gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and
engrave on them the names of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Six of their names on one stone, and
the six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> With the work of an engraver in stone,
like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with
the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in
ouches of gold.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And thou shalt put the two stones upon
the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial to the children of
Israel: and Aaron shall bear their names before the LORD upon his two
shoulders for a memorial.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And thou shalt make ouches of gold;

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And two chains of pure gold at the
ends; of wreathed work shalt thou make them, and fasten the wreathed
chains to the ouches.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And thou shalt make the breast-plate of
judgment with curious work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make
it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined
linen shalt thou make it.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Foursquare it shall be, being doubled;
a span shall be its length, and a span shall be its breadth.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And thou shalt set in it settings of
stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a
topaz, and a carbuncle: this shall be the first row.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And the second row shall be an emerald,
a sapphire, and a diamond.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> And the third row a ligure, an agate,
and an amethyst.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> And the fourth row a beryl, and an
onyx, and a jasper: they shall be set in gold in their inclosings.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And the stones shall be with the names
of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the
engravings of a signet; every one with his name shall they be according
to the twelve tribes.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And thou shalt make upon the
breast-plate chains at the ends of wreathed work of pure gold.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And thou shalt make upon the
breast-plate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two
ends of the breast-plate.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And thou shalt put the two wreathed
chains of gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the
breast-plate.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And the other two ends of the two
wreathed chains thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the
shoulder-pieces of the ephod before it.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> And thou shalt make two rings of gold,
and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breast-plate in its
border, which is in the side of the ephod inward.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> And two other rings of gold thou shalt
make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath,
towards the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof,
above the curious girdle of the ephod.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And they shall bind the breast-plate by
its rings to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be
above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breast-plate be not
loosed from the ephod.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And Aaron shall bear the names of the
children of Israel in the breast-plate of judgment upon his heart, when
he entereth into the holy place, for a memorial before the LORD
continually.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And thou shalt put in the breast-plate
of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's
heart, when he goeth in before the LORD: and Aaron shall bear the
judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD
continually.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> And thou shalt make the robe of the
ephod all of blue.

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> And there shall be a hole in the top of
it, in the midst of it: it shall have a binding of woven work round
about the hole of it, as the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> And beneath, upon the hem of it thou
shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round
about its hem; and bells of gold between them around it.

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> A golden bell and a pomegranate, a
golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe around it.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> And it shall be upon Aaron, to
minister: and his sound shall be heard when he goeth in to the holy
place before the LORD, and when he cometh out; that he may not die.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> And thou shalt make a plate of pure
gold, and engrave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO
THE LORD.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> And thou shalt put it on a blue lace,
that it may be upon the miter; upon the front of the miter it shall be.

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead,
that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children
of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always
upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the LORD.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> And thou shalt embroider the coat of
fine linen, and thou shalt make the miter of fine linen, and thou shalt
make the girdle of needle-work.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make
coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make
for them, for glory and for beauty.

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy
brother, and on his sons with him: and shalt anoint them, and consecrate
them, and sanctify them, that they may minister to me in the priest's
office.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> And thou shalt make them linen breeches
to cover their nakedness: from the loins even to the thighs they shall
reach:

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon
his sons, when they enter in to the tabernacle of the congregation, or
when they come near to the altar to minister in the holy place; that
they bear not iniquity, and die. It shall be a statute for ever to him,
and to his seed after him.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And this is the thing that thou shalt do
to them to hallow them, to minister to me in the priest's office: Take
one young bullock, and two rams without blemish,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And unleavened bread, and cakes
unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil;
of wheat flour shalt thou make them.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And thou shalt put them into one basket,
and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring
to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them
with water.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And thou shalt take the garments, and put
upon Aaron, the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the
breast-plate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod:

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And thou shalt put the miter upon his
head, and put the holy crown upon the miter.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Then shalt thou take the anointing oil,
and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and put
coats upon them.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> And thou shalt gird them with girdles
(Aaron and his sons) and put the bonnets on them; and the priest's
office shall be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt
consecrate Aaron and his sons.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> And thou shalt cause a bullock to be
brought before the tabernacle of the congregation; and Aaron and his
sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And thou shalt kill the bullock before
the LORD, by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And thou shalt take of the blood of the
bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and
pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And thou shalt take all the fat that
covereth the inwards, and the caul that is above the liver, and the two
kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> But the flesh of the bullock, and his
skin, and his dung shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a
sin-offering.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron
and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou
shalt take his blood, and sprinkle it around upon the altar.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces,
and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put them to his pieces,
and to his head.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon
the altar: it is a burnt-offering to the LORD: it is a sweet savor, an
offering made by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And thou shalt take the other ram; and
Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take
of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and
upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their
right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the
blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And thou shalt take of the blood that
is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron,
and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his
sons with him: and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons,
and his sons garments with him.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat
and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above
the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the
right shoulder; for it is a ram of consecration:

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And one loaf of bread, and one cake of
oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread,
that is before the LORD.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And thou shalt put all in the hands of
Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a
wave-offering before the LORD.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And thou shalt receive them from their
hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt-offering, for a sweet
savor before the LORD: it is an offering made by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> And thou shalt take the breast of the
ram of Aaron's consecration, and wave it for a wave-offering before the
LORD: and it shall be thy part.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And thou shalt sanctify the breast of
the wave-offering, and the shoulder of the heave-offering, which is
waved, and which is heaved up of the ram of the consecration, even of
that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons:

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> And it shall be Aaron's and his sons'
by a statute for ever, from the children of Israel: for it is a
heave-offering: and it shall be a heave-offering from the children of
Israel of the sacrifice of their peace-offerings, even their
heave-offering to the LORD.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And the holy garments of Aaron shall be
his sons' after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in
them.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> And that son, that is priest in his
stead, shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle
of the congregation to minister in the holy place.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> And thou shalt take the ram of the
consecration, and seethe his flesh in the holy place.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And Aaron and his sons shall eat the
flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, by the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> And they shall eat those things with
which the atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a
stranger shall not eat of them, because they are holy.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And if aught of the flesh of the
consecration, or of the bread, shall remain till the morning, then thou
shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, because it is
holy.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> And thus shalt thou do to Aaron, and to
his sons, according to all things which I have commanded thee: seven
days shalt thou consecrate them.

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> And thou shalt offer every day a
bullock for a sin-offering for atonement; and thou shalt cleanse the
altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint
it, to sanctify it.

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> Seven days thou shalt make an atonement
for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shall be an altar most holy:
whatever toucheth the altar shall be holy.

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> Now this is that which thou shalt offer
upon the altar; two lambs of the first year, day by day continually.

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> The one lamb thou shalt offer in the
morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer at evening.

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> And with the one lamb a tenth-portion
of flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil; and the
fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink-offering.

<span id="an_29:41">29:41</span> And the other lamb thou shalt offer at
evening, and shalt do thereto according to the meat-offering of the
morning, and according to the drink-offering thereof, for a sweet savor,
an offering made by fire to the LORD.

<span id="an_29:42">29:42</span> This shall be a continual
burnt-offering throughout your generations at the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation before the LORD: where I will meet you to speak
there to thee.

<span id="an_29:43">29:43</span> And there I will meet with the children
of Israel, and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory.

<span id="an_29:44">29:44</span> And I will sanctify the tabernacle of
the congregation, and the altar: I will sanctify also both Aaron and his
sons, to minister to me in the priest's office.

<span id="an_29:45">29:45</span> And I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will be their God.

<span id="an_29:46">29:46</span> And they shall know that I am the LORD
their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may
dwell among them: I am the LORD their God.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> And thou shalt make an altar to burn
incense upon: of shittim wood shalt thou make it.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> A cubit shall be its length, and a cubit
its breadth; foursquare shall it be; and two cubits shall be its hight:
its horns shall be of the same.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold,
its top, and its sides round about, and its horns; and thou shalt make
to it a crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And two golden rings shalt thou make to
it under the crown of it, by its two corners, upon the two sides of it
shalt thou make it; and they shall be for places for the staffs to bear
it with.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And thou shalt make the staffs of shittim
wood, and overlay them with gold.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And thou shalt put it before the vail
that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy-seat that is over
the testimony, where I will meet with thee.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And Aaron shall burn upon it sweet
incense every morning: when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense
upon it.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at
evening, he shall burn incense upon it; a perpetual incense before the
LORD, throughout your generations.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Ye shall offer no strange incense upon
it, nor burnt-sacrifice, nor meat-offering; neither shall ye pour
drink-offering upon it.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And Aaron shall make an atonement upon
the horns of it once in a year, with the blood of the sin-offering of
atonements: once in a year shall he make atonement upon it throughout
your generations: it is most holy to the LORD.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> When thou takest the sum of the
children of Israel after their number, then shall they give every man a
ransom for his soul to the LORD, when thou numberest them: that there
may be no plague among them, when thou numberest them.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> This they shall give, every one that
passeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel, after the shekel of
the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) a half shekel shall be the
offering of the LORD.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> Every one that passeth among them that
are numbered from twenty years old and above, shall give an offering to
the LORD.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The rich shall not give more, and the
poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when they give an offering
to the LORD to make an atonement for your souls.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And thou shalt take the atonement-money
of the children of Israel, and shalt appoint it for the service of the
tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial to the
children of Israel before the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Thou shalt also make a laver of brass,
and its foot also of brass, to wash in: and thou shalt put it between
the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put
water therein.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> For Aaron and their sons shall wash
their hands and their feet thereat:

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> When they go into the tabernacle of the
congregation, they shall wash with water, that they die not: or when
they come near to the altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire
to the LORD.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> So they shall wash their hands and
their feet, that they die not: and it shall be a statute for ever to
them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Moreover the LORD spoke to Moses,
saying,

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Take thou also to thee principal
spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half
as much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet calamus two
hundred and fifty shekels,

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And of cassia five hundred shekels,
after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of olive-oil a hin:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And thou shalt make it an oil of holy
ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shall
be a holy anointing oil.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of
the congregation with it, and the ark of the testimony,

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> And the table and all its vessels, and
the candlestick and its vessels, and the altar of incense,

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> And the altar of burnt-offering with
all its vessels, and the laver and its foot.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> And thou shalt sanctify them, that they
may be most holy: whatever toucheth them shall be holy.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his
sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister to me in the priest's
office.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And thou shalt speak to the children of
Israel, saying, This shall be a holy anointing oil to me, throughout
your generations.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> Upon man's flesh shall it not be
poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition
of it: it is holy, and it shall be holy to you.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> Whoever compoundeth any like it, or
whoever putteth any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off from
his people.

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Take to
thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these sweet spices
with pure frankincense: of each shall there be a like weight:

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> And thou shalt make it a perfume, a
confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and
holy:

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> And thou shalt beat some of it very
small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the
congregation, where I will meet with thee: it shall be to you most holy:

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> And as for the perfume which thou shalt
make, ye shall not make to yourselves according to its composition: it
shall be to thee holy for the LORD.

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> Whoever shall make the like to that, to
smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> See, I have called by name Bezaleel the
son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> And I have filled him with the spirit of
God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all
manner of workmanship,

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> To devise curious works, to work in gold,
and in silver, and in brass,

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And in cutting of stones to set them, and
in carving of timber, to work in all manner of workmanship.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And I, behold, I have given with him
Aholiab the son of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan; and in the hearts of
all that are wise-hearted I have put wisdom; that they may make all that
I have commanded thee:

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> The tabernacle of the congregation, and
the ark of the testimony, and the mercy-seat that is upon it, and all
the furniture of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And the table and its furniture, and the
pure candlestick with all its furniture, and the altar of incense,

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And the altar of burnt-offering, with all
its furniture, and the laver and its foot,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> And the clothes of service, and the
holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to
minister in the priest's office,

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> And the anointing oil, and sweet
incense for the holy place: according to all that I have commanded thee,
shall they do.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Speak thou also to the children of
Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign
between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I
am the LORD that doth sanctify you.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore:
for it is holy to you. Every one that profaneth it shall surely be put
to death: for whoever doeth any work therein, that soul shall be cut off
from among his people.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Six days may work be done, but in the
seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy to the LORD: whoever doeth any work
in the sabbath-day, he shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Wherefore the children of Israel shall
keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations,
for a perpetual covenant.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> It is a sign between me and the
children of Israel for ever: for in six days the LORD made heaven and
earth, and on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And to Moses, when he had made an end
of communing with him upon mount Sinai, he gave two tables of testimony,
tables of stone, written with the finger of God.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And when the people saw that Moses
delayed to come down from the mount, the people assembled themselves to
Aaron, and said to him, Arise, make us gods which shall go before us:
for as for this Moses, the man that brought us out of the land of Egypt,
we know not what is become of him.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And Aaron said to them, Break off the
golden ear-rings which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and
of your daughters, and bring them to me.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And all the people broke off the golden
ear-rings which were in their ears, and brought them to Aaron.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And he received them at their hand, and
fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf:
and they said, These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar
before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To-morrow is a feast
to the LORD.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And they rose early on the morrow, and
offered burnt-offerings, and brought peace-offerings: and the people sat
down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Go, go down;
for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have
corrupted themselves:

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> They have turned aside quickly from the
way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have
worshiped it, and have sacrificed to it, and said, These are thy gods, O
Israel, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And the LORD said to Moses, I have seen
this people, and behold it is a stiff-necked people:

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Now therefore let me alone, that my
wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I will
make of thee a great nation.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> And Moses besought the LORD his God,
and said, LORD, why \[\] thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which
thou hast \[\] forth from the land of Egypt, with great power, and with
\[\] mighty hand?

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Why should the Egyptians speak and say,
For evil did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to
consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and
repent of this evil against thy people.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy
servants, to whom thou sworest by thine own self, and saidst to them, I
will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I
have spoken of will I give to your seed, and they shall inherit it for
ever.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> And the LORD repented of the evil which
he thought to do to his people.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> And Moses turned, and went down from
the mount, and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the
tables were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the
other were they written.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And the tables were the work of God,
and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And when Joshua heard the noise of the
people as they shouted, he said to Moses, There is a noise of war in the
camp.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> And he said, It is not the voice of
them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry
for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do I hear.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And it came to pass as soon as he came
nigh to the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses's
anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables from his hands, and broke them
beneath the mount.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And he took the calf which they had
made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed it
upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And Moses said to Aaron, What did this
people to thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my
lord wax hot: thou knowest the people that they are set on mischief.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> For they said to me, Make us gods which
shall go before us: for as for this Moses, the man that brought us out
of the land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> And I said to them, Whoever hath any
gold, let them break it off: So they gave it to me: then I cast it into
the fire, and there came out this calf.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And when Moses saw that the people were
naked (for Aaron had made them naked to their shame, among their
enemies:)

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Then Moses stood in the gate of the
camp, and said, Who is on the LORD'S side? let him come to me. And all
the sons of Levi assembled themselves to him.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And he said to them, Thus saith the
LORD God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and
out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> And the children of Levi did according
to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that day about three
thousand men.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> For Moses had said, Consecrate
yourselves to-day to the LORD, even every man upon his son, and upon his
brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
Moses said to the people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go
up to the LORD; it may be I shall make an atonement for your sin.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And Moses returned to the LORD, and
said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods
of gold.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Yet now, if thou wilt, forgive their
sin: and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast
written.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Whoever
hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> Therefore now go, lead the people to
the place of which I have spoken to thee: Behold, my angel shall go
before thee: Nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit their
sin upon them.

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> And the LORD afflicted the people,
because they made the calf which Aaron made.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Depart and go
up hence, thou and the people which thou hast conducted from the land of
Egypt, to the land which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob,
saying, to thy seed will I give it:

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And I will send an angel before thee; and
I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the
Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> To a land flowing with milk and honey:
for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou art a stiff-necked
people: lest I consume thee in the way.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And when the people heard these evil
tidings, they mourned: and no man put on him his ornaments.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> For the LORD had said to Moses, Say to
the children of Israel, Ye are a stiff-necked people: I will come up
into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now put
off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do to thee.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And the children of Israel stripped
themselves of their ornaments, by the mount Horeb.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> And Moses took the tabernacle, and
pitched it without the camp far from the camp, and called it the
Tabernacle of the congregation. And it came to pass, that every one who
sought the LORD, went out to the tabernacle of the congregation, which
was without the camp.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And it came to pass when Moses went out
to the tabernacle, that all the people rose, and stood every man at his
tent-door, and looked after Moses, until he had gone into the
tabernacle.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And it came to pass, as Moses entered
into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood at the door
of the tabernacle, and the LORD talked with Moses.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And all the people saw the cloudy
pillar stand at the tabernacle door: and all the people rose and
worshiped, every man in his tent-door.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses face to
face, as a man speaketh to his friend. And he turned again into the
camp; but his servant Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, departed not
out of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And Moses said to the LORD, See, thou
sayest to me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom
thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thee by name, and
thou hast also found grace in my sight.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have
found grace in thy sight, show me now thy way, that I may know thee,
that I may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy
people.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And he said, My presence shall attend
thee, and I will give thee rest.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And he said to him, If thy presence
shall not attend me, conduct us not hence.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> For wherein shall it be known here that
I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? Is it not in that thou
goest with us? So shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the
people that are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And the LORD said to Moses, I will do
this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my
sight, and I know thee by name.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And he said, I beseech thee, show me
thy glory.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> And he said, I will make all my
goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the LORD
before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will
show mercy on whom I will show mercy.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And he said, Thou canst not see my
face: for there shall no man see me, and live.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And the LORD said, Behold, there is a
place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock:

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And it shall come to pass, while my
glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock: and will
cover thee with my hand while I pass by:

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And I will take away my hand, and thou
shalt see my back parts: but my face shall not be seen.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Hew thee two
tables of stone like the first; and I will write upon these tables the
words that were in the first tables which thou didst break.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> And be ready in the morning, and come up
in the morning to mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me on the
top of the mount.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> And no man shall come up with thee,
neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount: neither let the
flocks nor herds feed before that mount.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And he hewed two tables of stone, like
the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up to mount
Sinai, as the LORD had commanded him, and took in his hand the two
tables of stone.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And the LORD descended in the cloud, and
stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And the LORD passed by before him, and
proclaimed, The LORD, The LORD God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will by no means clear the
guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon
the children's children, to the third and to the fourth generation.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And Moses made haste, and bowed his head
towards the earth, and worshiped.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And he said, If now I have found grace in
thy sight, O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us (for it is a
stiff-necked people) and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us
for thy inheritance.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> And he said, Behold, I make a covenant:
before all thy people I will do wonders, such as have not been done in
all the earth, nor in any nation: and all the people among which thou
art, shall see the work of the LORD: for it is a terrible thing that I
will do with thee.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Observe thou that which I command thee
this day: Behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the
Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the
Jebusite.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a
covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be
for a snare in the midst of thee:

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> But ye shall destroy their altars,
break their images, and cut down their groves.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> For thou shalt worship no other god:
for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God:

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> Lest thou make a covenant with the
inhabitants of the land, and they go astray after their gods, and do
sacrifice to their gods, and one call thee, and thou eat of his
sacrifice;

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> And thou take of their daughters to thy
sons, and their daughters go astray after their gods, and make thy sons
go astray after their gods.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Thou shalt make thee no molten gods.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> The feast of unleavened bread shalt
thou keep. Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I commanded
thee, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest
out of from Egypt.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> Every first-born is mine: and every
firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> But the firstling of an ass thou shalt
redeem with a lamb: and if thou shalt not redeem him, then shalt thou
break his neck. All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt redeem. And
none shall appear before me empty.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Six days thou shalt work, but on the
seventh day thou shalt rest: in time of plowing and in harvest thou
shalt rest.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> And thou shalt observe the feast of
weeks, of the first-fruits of wheat-harvest, and the feast of
in-gathering at the year's end.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Thrice in the year shall all your male
children appear before the Lord GOD, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> For I will drive out the nations before
thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land,
when thou shalt go up to appear before the LORD thy God, thrice in the
year.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Thou shalt not offer the blood of my
sacrifice with leaven, neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the
passover be left until the morning.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> The first of the first-fruits of thy
land thou shalt bring to the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not
seethe a kid in his mother's milk.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the LORD said to Moses, Write thou
these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant
with thee, and with Israel.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And he was there with the LORD forty
days and forty nights; he neither ate bread nor drank water: and he
wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And it came to pass when Moses came
down from mount Sinai (with the two tables of testimony in Moses's hand,
when he came down from the mount) that Moses knew not that the skin of
his face shone, while he talked with him.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And when Aaron and all the children of
Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone, and they were
afraid to come nigh him.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And Moses called to them; and Aaron and
all the rulers of the congregation returned to him; and Moses talked
with them.

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> And afterward all the children of
Israel came nigh: and he gave them in commandment all that the LORD had
spoken with him in mount Sinai.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> And till Moses had done speaking with
them, he put a vail on his face.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> But when Moses went in before the LORD
to speak with him, he took the vail off, until he came out. And he came
out and spoke to the children of Israel that which he was commanded.

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> And the children of Israel saw the face
of Moses, that the skin of Moses's face shone: and Moses put the vail
upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And Moses assembled all the congregation
of the children of Israel, and said to them, These are the words which
the LORD hath commanded, that ye should do them.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Six days shall work be done; but on the
seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of rest to the
LORD: whoever doth work therein shall be put to death.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your
habitations upon the sabbath-day.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And Moses spoke to all the congregation
of the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD
commanded, saying,

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Take ye from among you an offering to the
LORD: whoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it, an offering of
the LORD; gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen, and goats' hair,

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers'
skins, and shittim wood,

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And oil for the light, and spices for
anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> And onyx stones, and stones to be set for
the ephod, and for the breast-plate.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And every wise-hearted among you shall
come, and make all that the LORD hath commanded;

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> The tabernacle, its tent, and its
covering, its buttons, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its
sockets,

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> The ark, and its staffs, with the
mercy-seat, and the vail of the covering,

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> The table, and its staffs, and all its
vessels, and the show-bread,

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> The candlestick also for the light, and
its furniture, and its lamps, with the oil for the light,

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> And the incense-altar, and its staffs,
and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the
door at the entrance of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> The altar of burnt-offering, with its
brazen grate, its staffs, and all its vessels, the laver and its foot,

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> The hangings of the court, its pillars,
and their sockets, and the hanging for the door of the court,

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> The pins of the tabernacle, and the
pins of the court, and their cords,

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> The clothes of service, to do service
in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the
garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And all the congregation of the
children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> And they came, every one whose heart
excited him, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and they
brought the LORD'S offering to the work of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> And they came, both men and women, as
many as were willing-hearted, and brought bracelets, and ear-rings, and
rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold; and every man that offered,
offered an offering of gold to the LORD.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> And every man, with whom was found
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red
skins of rams, and badgers' skins, brought them.

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> Every one that offered an offering of
silver and brass brought the LORD'S offering: and every man with whom
was found shittim wood for any work of the service, brought it.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> And all the women that were
wise-hearted spun with their hands, and brought that which they had
spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> And all the women whose heart moved
them in wisdom spun goats' hair.

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> And the rulers brought onyx stones, and
stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breast-plate;

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> And spice, and oil for the light, and
for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> The children of Israel brought a
willing offering to the LORD, every man and woman, whose heart made them
willing to bring for all manner of work, which the LORD had commanded to
be made by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> And Moses said to the children of
Israel, See, the LORD hath called by name Bezaleel, the son of Uri, the
son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah;

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> And he hath filled him with the spirit
of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner
of workmanship;

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> And to devise curious works, to work in
gold, and in silver, and in brass,

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> And in the cutting of stones, to set
them, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of curious work.

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> And he hath put in his heart that he
may teach, both he and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of
Dan.

<span id="an_35:35">35:35</span> Them hath he filled with wisdom of
heart, to work all manner of work, of the engraver, and of the skillful
workmen, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and
in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of
those that devise curious work.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and
every wise-hearted man, in whom the LORD put wisdom and understanding,
to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the sanctuary,
according to all that the LORD had commanded.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab,
and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even
every one whose heart excited him to come to the work to do it:

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And they received from Moses all the
offering which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the
service of the sanctuary, to make it. And they brought yet to him
free-offerings every morning.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And all the wise men, that wrought all
the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they made.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> And they spoke to Moses, saying, The
people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which
the LORD commanded to make.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> And Moses gave commandment, and they
caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man
nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the
people were restrained from bringing.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> For the stuff they had was sufficient for
all the work to make it, and too much.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And every wise-hearted man among them
that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined
linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: he made them with cherubim of
curious work.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> The length of one curtain was twenty and
eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains
were all of one size.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And he coupled the five curtains one to
another: and the other five curtains he coupled one to another.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And he made loops of blue on the edge
of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in
the extremity of another curtain, in the coupling of the second.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Fifty loops he made in one curtain, and
fifty loops he made in the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling
of the second: the loops held one curtain to another.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> And he made fifty buttons of gold, and
coupled the curtains one to another with the buttons. So it became one
tabernacle.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> And he made curtains of goats' hair for
the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> The length of one curtain was thirty
cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain: the eleven
curtains were of one size.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> And he coupled five curtains by
themselves, and six curtains by themselves.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And he made fifty loops upon the
outermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he
upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And he made fifty buttons of brass to
couple the tent together, that it might be one.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> And he made a covering for the tent of
rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of badgers' skins above that.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> And he made boards for the tabernacle
of shittim wood, standing up.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> The length of a board was ten cubits,
and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> One board had two tenons, equally
distant one from another; thus did he make for all the boards of the
tabernacle.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> And he made boards for the tabernacle;
twenty boards for the south side southward:

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> And forty sockets of silver he made
under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for its two tenons,
and two sockets under another board for its two tenons.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> And for the other side of the
tabernacle which is towards the north corner, he made twenty boards.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> And their forty sockets of silver; two
sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> And for the sides of the tabernacle
westward he made six boards.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And two boards he made for the corners
of the tabernacle in the two sides.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> And they were coupled beneath, and
coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both
of them in both the corners.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> And there were eight boards; and their
sockets were sixteen sockets of silver, under every board two sockets.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> And he made bars of shittim wood; five
for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> And five bars for the boards of the
other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
tabernacle for the sides westward.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> And he made the middle bar to shoot
through the boards from the one end to the other.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And he overlaid the boards with gold,
and made their rings of gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the
bars with gold.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> And he made a vail of blue, and purple,
and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubim he made it of curious
work.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And he made to it four pillars of
shittim wood, and overlaid them with gold: their hooks were of gold; and
he cast for them four sockets of silver.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> And he made a hanging for the
tabernacle-door of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen,
of needle-work;

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> And the five pillars of it, with their
hooks: and he overlaid their capitals and their fillets with gold: but
their five sockets were of brass.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And Bezaleel made the ark of shittim
wood: two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half
the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the hight of it:

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold within
and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And he cast for it four rings of gold, to
be set by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of
it, and two rings upon the other side of it.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And he made staffs of shittim wood, and
overlaid them with gold.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> And he put the staffs into the rings by
the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And he made the mercy-seat of pure gold:
two cubits and a half was the length of it, and one cubit and a half the
breadth of it.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> And he made two cherubim of gold, beaten
out of one piece he made them, on the two ends of the mercy-seat;

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> One cherub on the end on this side, and
another cherub on the other end on that side: out of the mercy-seat made
he the cherubim on the two ends of it.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And the cherubim spread out their wings
on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy-seat, with their
faces one to another; even towards the mercy-seat were the faces of the
cherubim.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> And he made the table of shittim wood:
two cubits was its length, and a cubit its breadth, and a cubit and a
half its hight:

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold, and
made to it a crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Also he made to it a border of a
hand-breadth round about; and made a crown of gold for its border round
about.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And he cast for it four rings of gold,
and put the rings upon the four corners that were in its four feet.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Over against the border were the rings,
the places for the staffs, to bear the table.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And he made the staffs of shittim wood,
and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And he made the vessels which were upon
the table, its dishes, and its spoons, and its bowls, and its covers to
cover with, of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> And he made the candlestick of pure
gold; of beaten work he made the candlestick; its shaft, and its branch,
its bowls, its knobs, and its flowers were of the same:

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> And six branches proceeding from its
sides; three branches of the candlestick from the one side of it, and
three branches of the candlestick from the other side of it.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Three bowls made after the fashion of
almonds in one branch, a knob and a flower; and three bowls made like
almonds in another branch, a knob and a flower: so throughout the six
branches proceeding from the candlestick.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And in the candlestick were four bowls
made like almonds, its knobs, and its flowers:

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And a knob under two branches of the
same, and a knob under two branches of the same, and a knob under two
branches of the same, according to the six branches proceeding from it.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> Their knobs and their branches were of
the same: all of it was one beaten work of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> And he made its seven lamps, and its
snuffers, and its snuff-dishes, of pure gold.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> Of a talent of pure gold he made it,
and all its vessels.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> And he made the incense-altar of
shittim wood: the length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a
cubit; it was foursquare; and two cubits was the hight of it; the horns
of it were of the same.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And he overlaid it with pure gold, both
the top of it, and its sides round about, and its horns: also he made to
it a crown of gold round about.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> And he made two rings of gold for it
under its crown, by the two corners of it, upon its two sides, to be
places for the staffs to bear it with.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And he made the staffs of shittim wood,
and overlaid them with gold.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> And he made the holy anointing oil, and
the pure incense of sweet spices, according to the work of the
apothecary.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> And he made the altar of burnt-offering
of shittim wood: five cubits was the length of it, and five cubits the
breadth of it; it was foursquare; and its hight was three cubits.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And he made its horns on the four corners
of it; its horns were of the same: and he overlaid it with brass.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And he made all the vessels of the altar,
the pots, and the shovels, and the basins, and the flesh-hooks, and the
fire-pans: all the vessels of it he made of brass.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And he made for the altar a brazen grate
of net-work under the compass of it beneath to the midst of it.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> And he cast four rings for the four ends
of the grate of brass, to be places for the staffs.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And he made the staffs of shittim wood,
and overlaid them with brass.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And he put the staffs into the rings on
the sides of the altar, to bear it with; he made the altar hollow with
boards.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> And he made the laver of brass, and the
foot of it of brass, of the looking-glasses of the women assembling, who
assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> And he made the court: on the south side
southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, a hundred
cubits:

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Their pillars were twenty, and their
brazen sockets twenty; the hooks of the pillars, and their fillets, were
of silver.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And for the north side, the hangings
were a hundred cubits, their pillars were twenty, and their sockets of
brass twenty: the hooks of the pillars, and their filets, of silver.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> And for the west side were hangings of
fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the
pillars, and their fillets, of silver.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And for the east side eastward fifty
cubits.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> The hangings of the one side of the
gate were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And for the other side of the
court-gate, on this hand and that hand, were hangings of fifteen cubits;
their pillars three, and their sockets three.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> All the hangings of the court round
about were of fine twined linen.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> And the sockets for the pillars were of
brass; the hooks of the pillars, and their fillets, of silver; and the
overlaying of their capitals of silver; and all the pillars of the court
were filleted with silver.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And the hanging for the gate of the
court was needle-work, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined
linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the hight in the breadth
was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And their pillars were four, and their
sockets of brass four; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of
their capitals and their fillets of silver.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> And all the pins of the tabernacle, and
of the court round about, were of brass.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> This is the sum of the tabernacle, even
of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, according to the
commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of
Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of
Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> And with him was Aholiab, son of
Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a skillful workman, and
an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> All the gold that was occupied for the
work in all the work of the holy place, even the gold of the offering,
was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after
the shekel of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> And the silver of them that were
numbered of the congregation was a hundred talents, and a thousand seven
hundred and seventy five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary:

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> A bekah for every man, that is, half a
shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be
numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and
three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> And of the hundred talents of silver
were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; a
hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> And of the thousand seven hundred
seventy and five shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid
their capitals, and filleted them.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> And the brass of the offering was
seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> And with this he made the sockets to
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brazen altar,
and the brazen grate for it, and all the vessels of the altar,

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> And the sockets of the court round
about, and the sockets of the court gate, and all the pins of the
tabernacle, and all the pins of the court round about.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet,
they made clothes of service, to do service in the holy place, and made
the holy garments for Aaron; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> And they beat the gold into thin plates,
and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in
the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with curious work.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> They made shoulder-pieces for it, to
couple it together: by the two edges was it coupled together.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And the curious girdle of his ephod, that
was upon it, was of the same, according to the work thereof; of gold,
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in
ouches of gold, graven as signets are graven, with the names of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And he put them on the shoulders of the
ephod, that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of
Israel; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And he made the breast-plate of curious
work, like the work of the ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> It was foursquare; they made the
breast-plate double: a span was the length of it, and a span the breadth
of it, being doubled.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And they set in it four rows of stones:
the first row was a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the
first row.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> And the second row, an emerald, a
sapphire, and a diamond.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> And the third row, a ligure, an agate,
and an amethyst.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx,
and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And the stones were according to the
names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like
the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to the
twelve tribes.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> And they made upon the breast-plate
chains at the ends, of wreathed work of pure gold.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And they made two ouches of gold, and
two gold rings, and put the two rings in the two ends of the
breast-plate.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> And they put the two wreathed chains of
gold in the two rings on the ends of the breast-plate.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> And the two ends of the two wreathed
chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the
shoulder-pieces of the ephod, before it.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> And they made two rings of gold, and
put them on the two ends of the breast-plate, upon the border of it,
which was on the side of the ephod inward.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> And they made two other golden rings,
and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, towards the
forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof, above the
curious girdle of the ephod:

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And they bound the breast-plate by its
rings to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be
above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breast-plate might
not be loosed from the ephod; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> And he made the robe of the ephod of
woven work, all of blue.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And there was a hole in the midst of
the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, with a band around the hole, that
it should not rend.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> And they made upon the hems of the robe
pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> And they made bells of pure gold, and
put the bells between the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, around
between the pomegranates;

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a
pomegranate, around the hem of the robe to minister in; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> And they made coats of fine linen, of
woven work, for Aaron and for his sons,

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> And a miter of fine linen, and goodly
bonnets of fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen,

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> And a girdle of fine twined linen, and
blue, and purple, and scarlet, of needle-work; as the LORD commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> And they made the plate of the holy
crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings
of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD.

<span id="an_39:31">39:31</span> And they tied to it a lace of blue, to
fasten it on high upon the miter; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:32">39:32</span> Thus was all the work of the tabernacle
of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of Israel did
according to all that the LORD commanded Moses, so did they.

<span id="an_39:33">39:33</span> And they brought the tabernacle to
Moses, the tent, and all its furniture, its buttons, its boards, its
bars, and its pillars, and its sockets,

<span id="an_39:34">39:34</span> And the covering of rams' skins dyed
red, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering,

<span id="an_39:35">39:35</span> The ark of the testimony, and its
staffs, and the mercy-seat,

<span id="an_39:36">39:36</span> The table, and all its vessels, and the
show-bread,

<span id="an_39:37">39:37</span> The pure candlestick, with its lamps,
even with the lamps to be set in order, and all its vessels, and the oil
for light,

<span id="an_39:38">39:38</span> And the golden altar, and the anointing
oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle-door,

<span id="an_39:39">39:39</span> The brazen altar, and its grate of
brass, its staffs, and all its vessels, the laver and its foot,

<span id="an_39:40">39:40</span> The hangings of the court, its pillars,
and its sockets, and the hanging for the court-gate, its cords, and its
pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent
of the congregation,

<span id="an_39:41">39:41</span> The clothes of service to do service in
the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his
sons' garments, to minister in the priest's office.

<span id="an_39:42">39:42</span> According to all that the LORD
commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.

<span id="an_39:43">39:43</span> And Moses looked upon all the work, and
behold, they had done it as the LORD had commanded, even so had they
done it: and Moses blessed them.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> On the first day of the first month shalt
thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And thou shalt put in it the ark of the
testimony, and cover the ark with the vail.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And thou shalt bring in the table, and
set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou
shalt bring in the candlestick, and light its lamps.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And thou shalt set the altar of gold for
the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the
door to the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And thou shalt set the altar of the,
burnt-offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the
congregation.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> And thou shalt set the laver between the
tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water in it.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And thou shalt set up the court round
about, and hang up the hanging at the court-gate.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And thou shalt take the anointing oil,
and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is in it, and shalt hallow it,
and all its vessels: and it shall be holy.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> And thou shalt anoint the altar of the
burnt-offering and all its vessels, and sanctify the altar: and it shall
be an altar most holy.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> And thou shalt anoint the laver and its
foot, and sanctify it.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons
to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with
water.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy
garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister to me
in the priest's office.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And thou shalt bring his sons, and
clothe them with coats:

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> And thou shalt anoint them, as thou
didst anoint their father, that they may minister to me in the priest's
office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood
throughout their generations.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> Thus did Moses; according to all that
the LORD commanded him, so did he.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> And it came to pass in the first month,
in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle
was reared up.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and
fastened its sockets, and set up its boards, and put in its bars, and
reared up its pillars.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> And he spread abroad the tent over the
tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And he took and put the testimony into
the ark, and set the staffs on the ark, and put the mercy-seat above
upon the ark:

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> And he brought the ark into the
tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of
the testimony; as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> And he put the table in the tent of the
congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the
vail.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> And he set the bread in order upon it
before the LORD; as the LORD had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> And he put the candlestick in the tent
of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the
tabernacle southward.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And he lighted the lamps before the
LORD, as the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And he put the golden altar in the tent
of the congregation, before the vail:

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> And he burnt sweet incense on it; as
the LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> And he set up the hanging at the door
of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> And he put the altar of burnt-offering
by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and
offered upon it the burnt-offering, and the meat-offering; as the LORD
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> And he set the laver between the tent
of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash with.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> And Moses, and Aaron, and his sons,
washed their hands and their feet thereat:

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> When they went into the tent of the
congregation, and when they came near to the altar, they washed; as the
LORD commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> And he reared up the court round about
the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court-gate:
so Moses finished the work.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> Then a cloud covered the tent of the
congregation, and the glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> And Moses was not able to enter into
the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode upon it, and the
glory of the LORD filled the tabernacle.

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> And when the cloud was taken up from
over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in all their
journeys:

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> But if the cloud was not taken up, then
they journeyed not till the day that it was taken up.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> For the cloud of the LORD was upon the
tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the
house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus](lev)
