[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ch2)  [Next](neh) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Ezra

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now in the first year of Cyrus king of
Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that
he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in
writing, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The LORD
God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath
charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Who is there among you of all his people?
his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah,
and build the house of the LORD God of Israel, (he is the God,) who is
in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And whoever remaineth in any place where he
sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with
gold, and with goods, and with beasts, besides the free-will-offering
for the house of God that is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Then arose the chief of the fathers of
Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all them
whose spirit God had raised, to go up to build the house of the LORD
which is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And all they that were about them
strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods,
and with beasts, and with precious things, besides all that was
willingly offered.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Also Cyrus the king brought forth the
vessels of the house of the LORD, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought from
Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his gods;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring
forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them to
Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And this is the number of them: thirty
chargers of gold, a thousand chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Thirty basins of gold, silver basins of a
second sort four hundred and ten, and other vessels a thousand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> All the vessels of gold and of silver
were five thousand and four hundred. All these did Sheshbazzar bring
with them of the captivity that were brought from Babylon to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now these are the children of the province
that went up from the captivity, of those who had been carried away,
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away to Babylon, and
came again to Jerusalem and Judah, every one to his city;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Who came with Zerubbabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah,
Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mizpar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baanah. The
number of the men of the people of Israel:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The children of Parosh, two thousand a
hundred seventy and two.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The children of Shephatiah, three hundred
seventy and two.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy
and five.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The children of Pahath-moab, of the
children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The children of Elam, a thousand two
hundred fifty and four.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The children of Zattu, nine hundred forty
and five.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and
sixty.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The children of Bani, six hundred forty
and two.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty
and three.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The children of Azgad, a thousand two
hundred twenty and two.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The children of Adonikam, six hundred
sixty and six.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The children of Bigvai, two thousand
fifty and six.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> The children of Adin, four hundred fifty
and four.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety
and eight.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The children of Bezai, three hundred
twenty and three.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The children of Jorah, an hundred and
twelve.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> The children of Hashum, two hundred
twenty and three.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The children of Gibbar, ninety and five.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> The children of Beth-lehem, a hundred
twenty and three.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> The men of Netophah, fifty and six.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty and
eight.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> The children of Azmaveth, forty and two.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> The children of Kirjath-arim, Chephirah,
and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty and three.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The children of Ramah and Gaba, six
hundred twenty and one.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> The men of Michmas, a hundred twenty and
two.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> The men of Beth-el and Ai, two hundred
twenty and three.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> The children of Nebo, fifty and two.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> The children of Magbish, a hundred fifty
and six.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The children of the other Elam, a
thousand two hundred fifty and four.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> The children of Harim, three hundred and
twenty.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono,
seven hundred twenty and five.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> The children of Jericho, three hundred
forty and five.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> The children of Senaah, three thousand
and six hundred and thirty.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of
the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and three.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> The children of Immer, a thousand fifty
and two.

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> The children of Pashur, a thousand two
hundred forty and seven.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> The children of Harim, a thousand and
seventeen.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> The Levites: the children of Jeshua and
Kadmiel, of the children of Hodaviah, seventy and four.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> The singers: the children of Asaph, a
hundred twenty and eight.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> The children of the porters: the children
of Shallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children
of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, in all a
hundred thirty and nine.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the
children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> The children of Keros, the children of
Siaha, the children of Padon,

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> The children of Lebanah, the children of
Hagabah, the children of Akkub,

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> The children of Hagab, the children of
Shalmai, the children of Hanan,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> The children of Giddel, the children of
Gahar, the children of Reaiah,

<span id="an_2:48">2:48</span> The children of Rezin, the children of
Nekoda, the children of Gazzam,

<span id="an_2:49">2:49</span> The children of Uzza, the children of
Paseah, the children of Besai,

<span id="an_2:50">2:50</span> The children of Asnah, the children of
Mehunim, the children of Nephusim,

<span id="an_2:51">2:51</span> The children of Bakbuk, the children of
Hakupha, the children of Harhur,

<span id="an_2:52">2:52</span> The children of Bazluth, the children of
Mehida, the children of Harsha,

<span id="an_2:53">2:53</span> The children of Barkos, the children of
Sisera, the children of Thamah,

<span id="an_2:54">2:54</span> The children of Neziah, the children of
Hatipha.

<span id="an_2:55">2:55</span> The children of Solomon's servants: the
children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Peruda,

<span id="an_2:56">2:56</span> The children of Jaalah, the children of
Darkon, the children of Giddel,

<span id="an_2:57">2:57</span> The children of Shephatiah, the children
of Hattil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami.

<span id="an_2:58">2:58</span> All the Nethinims, and the children of
Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety and two.

<span id="an_2:59">2:59</span> And these were they who went up from
Tel-melah, Tel-harsa, Cherub, Addan, and Immer: but they could not show
their fathers' house, and their seed, whether they were of Israel:

<span id="an_2:60">2:60</span> The children of Delaiah, the children of
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two.

<span id="an_2:61">2:61</span> And of the children of the priests: the
children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai: who
took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called
after their name:

<span id="an_2:62">2:62</span> These sought their register among those
that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were
they, as polluted, put from the priesthood.

<span id="an_2:63">2:63</span> And the Tirshatha said to them, that they
should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood up a priest
with Urim and with Thummim.

<span id="an_2:64">2:64</span> The whole congregation together was forty
and two thousand three hundred and sixty,

<span id="an_2:65">2:65</span> Besides their servants and their maids,
of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and
there were among them two hundred singing-men and singing-women.

<span id="an_2:66">2:66</span> Their horses were seven hundred thirty
and six; their mules, two hundred forty and five;

<span id="an_2:67">2:67</span> Their camels, four hundred thirty and
five; their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.

<span id="an_2:68">2:68</span> And some of the chief of the fathers,
when they came to the house of the LORD which is at Jerusalem, offered
freely for the house of God to set it up in its place:

<span id="an_2:69">2:69</span> They gave after their ability to the
treasure of the work sixty and one thousand drams of gold, and five
thousand pounds of silver, and one hundred priests garments.

<span id="an_2:70">2:70</span> So the priests, and the Levites, and some
of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims,
dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And when the seventh month had come, and
the children of Israel were in the cities, the people assembled
themselves as one man at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Then stood up Jeshua the son of Jozadak,
and his brethren the priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and
his brethren, and built the altar of the God of Israel, to offer
burnt-offerings on it as it is written in the law of Moses the man of
God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And they set the altar upon its bases; for
fear was upon them because of the people of those countries: and they
offered burnt-offerings on it to the LORD, even burnt-offerings morning
and evening.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> They kept also the feast of tabernacles, as
it is written, and offered the daily burnt-offerings by number,
according to the custom, as the duty of every day required;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And afterward offered the continual
burnt-offering, both of the new moons, and of all the set feasts of the
LORD that were consecrated, and of every one that willingly offered a
free-will-offering to the LORD.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> From the first day of the seventh month
they began to offer burnt-offerings to the LORD. But the foundation of
the temple of the LORD was not yet laid.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> They gave money also to the masons, and to
the carpenters; and provisions, and drink, and oil, to them of Zidon,
and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of
Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Now in the second year of their coming to
the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the
son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of
their brethren the priests and the Levites, and all they that had come
out of the captivity to Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from
twenty years old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the
LORD.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Then stood Jeshua with his sons and his
brethren, Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, together, to set
forward the workmen in the house of God: the sons of Henadad, with their
sons and their brethren the Levites.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And when the builders laid the foundation
of the temple of the LORD, they set the priests in their apparel with
trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the
LORD, after the ordinance of David king of Israel.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And they sang together by course in
praising and giving thanks to the LORD; because he is good, for his
mercy endureth for ever towards Israel. And all the people shouted with
a great shout, when they praised the LORD, because the foundation of the
house of the LORD was laid.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But many of the priests and Levites and
chief of the fathers, old men, that had seen the first house, when the
foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud
voice; and many shouted aloud for joy:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> So that the people could not discern the
noise of the shout of the joy from the noise of the weeping of the
people: for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was
heard afar off.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now when the adversaries of Judah and
Benjamin heard that the children of the captivity were building the
temple to the LORD God of Israel;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the
chief of the fathers, and said to them, Let us build with you: for we
seek your God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice to him since the days of
Esar-haddon king of Assur, who brought us up hither.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of
the chief of the fathers of Israel, said to them, Ye have nothing to do
with us to build a house to our God; but we ourselves together will
build to the LORD God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath
commanded us.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then the people of the land weakened the
hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And hired counselors against them, to
frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even
until the reign of Darius king of Persia.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the
beginning of his reign, they wrote to him an accusation against the
inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote
Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their companions to
Artaxerxes king of Persia, and the writing of the letter was written in
the Syrian language, and interpreted in the Syrian language.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the
scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this
sort:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and
Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dianites, the
Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the
Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And the rest of the nations whom the
great and noble Asnapper brought over, and set in the cities of Samaria,
and the rest that are on this side of the river, and at such a time.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> This is the copy of the letter that they
sent to him, even to Artaxerxes the king: Thy servants the men on this
side of the river, and at such a time.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Be it known to the king, that the Jews
who came from thee to us are come to Jerusalem, building the rebellious
and the noxious city, and have set up its walls, and joined the
foundations.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Be it known now to the king, that, if
this city shall be built, and the walls set up again, then they will not
pay toll, tribute, and custom, and so thou wilt endamage the revenue of
the kings.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Now because we have maintenance from the
king's palace, and it was not meet for us to see the king's dishonor,
therefore have we sent and certified the king;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> That search may be made in the book of
the records of thy fathers: so wilt thou find in the book of the
records, and know that this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful to
kings and provinces, and that they have moved sedition within the same
of old time: for which cause was this city destroyed.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> We certify the king that, if this city
shall be built again, and its walls set up, by this means thou wilt have
no portion on this side of the river.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Then the king sent an answer to Rehum the
chancellor, and to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their
companions that dwell in Samaria, and to the rest beyond the river,
Peace, and at such a time.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The letter which ye sent to us hath been
plainly read before me.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And I commanded, and search hath been
made, and it is found that this city of old time hath made insurrection
against kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been made in it.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> There have also been mighty kings over
Jerusalem, who have ruled over all countries beyond the river; and toll,
tribute, and custom, was paid to them.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Give ye now commandment to cause these
men to cease, and that this city be not built, until another commandment
shall be given from me.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Take heed now that ye fail not to do
this: why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings?

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes'
letter was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their
companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem to the Jews, and made
them to cease by force and power.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Then ceased the work of the house of God
which is at Jerusalem. So it ceased until the second year of the reign
of Darius king of Persia.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and
Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied to the Jews that were in Judah and
Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel, even to them.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began to build the house
of God which is at Jerusalem: and with them were the prophets of God
helping them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> At the same time came to them Tatnai,
governor on this side of the river, and Shethar-boznai, and their
companions, and said thus to them, Who hath commanded you to build this
house, and to make up this wall?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Then said we to them after this manner,
What are the names of the men that make this building?

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> But the eye of their God was upon the
elders of the Jews, that they could not cause them to cease, till the
matter came to Darius: and then they returned answer by letter
concerning this matter.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The copy of the letter that Tatnai,
governor on this side of the river, and Shethar-boznai, and his
companions the Apharsachites, who were on this side of the river, sent
to Darius the king:

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> They sent a letter to him, in which was
written thus; To Darius the king, all peace.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be it known to the king, that we went into
the province of Judea, to the house of the great God, which is built
with great stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work
proceedeth rapidly, and prospereth in their hands.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then we asked those elders, and said to
them thus, Who commanded you to build this house, and to erect these
walls?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> We asked their names also, to certify
thee, that we might write the names of the men that were the chief of
them.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And thus they returned us answer, saying,
We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house
that was erected these many years ago, which a great king of Israel
built and set up.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But after that our fathers had provoked
the God of heaven to wrath, he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar
the king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried
the people away into Babylon.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But in the first year of Cyrus the king
of Babylon, the same king Cyrus made a decree to build this house of
God.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the vessels also of gold and silver
of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that
was in Jerusalem, and brought them into the temple of Babylon, those did
Cyrus the king take out of the temple of Babylon, and they were
delivered to one, whose name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor;

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And said to him, Take these vessels, go,
carry them into the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of
God be built in its place.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Then came the same Sheshbazzar, and laid
the foundation of the house of God which is in Jerusalem: and since that
time even until now hath it been in building, and yet it is not
finished.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Now therefore, if it seemeth good to the
king, let there be search made in the king's treasure-house, which is
there at Babylon, whether it is so, that a decree was made by Cyrus the
king to build this house of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send his
pleasure to us concerning this matter.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Then Darius the king made a decree, and
search was made in the house of the rolls, where the treasures were laid
up in Babylon.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And there was found at Achmetha, in the
palace that is in the province of the Medes, a roll, and in it was a
record thus written:

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> In the first year of Cyrus the king, the
same Cyrus the king made a decree concerning the house of God at
Jerusalem, Let the house be built, the place where they offered
sacrifices, and let the foundations of it be strongly laid; the hight of
it sixty cubits, and the breadth of it sixty cubits;

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> With three rows of great stones, and a row
of new timber: and let the expenses be given out of the king's house:

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And also let the golden and silver vessels
of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple which
is at Jerusalem, and brought to Babylon, be restored, and brought again
to the temple which is at Jerusalem, every one to its place, and place
them in the house of God.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Now therefore, Tatnai governor beyond the
river, Shethar-boznai, and your companions the Apharsachites, who are
beyond the river, be ye far from thence:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Let the work of this house of God alone;
let the governor of the Jews, and the elders of the Jews, build this
house of God in its place.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Moreover, I make a decree what ye shall do
to the elders of these Jews for the building of this house of God: that
of the king's goods, even of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith
expenses be given to these men, that they be not hindered.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And that which they have need of, both
young bullocks, and rams, and lambs, for the burnt-offerings of the God
of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the appointment of
the priests who are at Jerusalem, let it be given to them day by day
without fail:

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> That they may offer sacrifices of sweet
savors to the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of
his sons.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Also I have made a decree, that whoever
shall alter this word, let timber be pulled down from his house, and
being set up, let him be hanged upon it; and let his house be made a
dunghill for this.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the God that hath caused his name to
dwell there destroy all kings and people, that shall attempt to alter
and to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have
made a decree; let it be done with speed.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then Tatnai governor on this side the
river, Shethar-boznai, and their companions, according to that which
Darius the king had sent, so they did speedily.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the elders of the Jews built, and
they prospered through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and
Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they built, and finished it, according to
the commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the commandment
of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And this house was finished on the third
day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of
Darius the king.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the children of Israel, the priests,
and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the
dedication of this house of God with joy,

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And offered at the dedication of this
house of God a hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs;
and for a sin-offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, according to the
number of the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And they set the priests in their
divisions, and the Levites in their courses, for the service of God, who
is at Jerusalem; as it is written in the book of Moses.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And the children of the captivity kept
the passover upon the fourteenth day of the first month.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For the priests and the Levites were
purified together, all of them were pure, and they killed the passover
for all the children of the captivity, and for their brethren the
priests, and for themselves.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the children of Israel, who had
returned from captivity, and all such as had separated themselves to
them from the filthiness of the heathen of the land, to seek the LORD
God of Israel, did eat,

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And kept the feast of unleavened bread
seven days with joy: for the LORD had made them joyful, and turned the
heart of the king of Assyria to them, to strengthen their hands in the
work of the house of God, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now after these things, in the reign of
Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah,
the son of Hilkiah,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the
son of Ahitub,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> The son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the
son of Meraioth,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the
son of Bukki,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> The son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas,
the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest:

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> This Ezra went from Babylon; and he was a
ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the LORD God of Israel had
given: and the king granted him all his request, according to the hand
of the LORD his God upon him.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And there went some of the children of
Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the
porters, and the Nethinims, to Jerusalem, in the seventh year of
Artaxerxes the king.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth
month, which was in the seventh year of the king.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> For upon the first day of the first month
he began to go from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month he
came to Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his God upon him.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek
the law of the LORD, and to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and
judgments.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now this is the copy of the letter that
the king Artaxerxes gave to Ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe
of the words of the commandments of the LORD, and of his statutes to
Israel.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Artaxerxes, king of kings, To Ezra the
priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect peace, and at
such a time.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> I make a decree, that all they of the
people of Israel, and of his priests and Levites, in my realm, who are
disposed of their own free will to go to Jerusalem, go with thee.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Forasmuch as thou art sent by the king,
and by his seven counselors, to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem,
according to the law of thy God which is in thy hand;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And to carry the silver and gold, which
the king and his counselors have freely offered to the God of Israel,
whose habitation is in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And all the silver and gold that thou
canst find in all the province of Babylon, with the free-will-offering
of the people, and of the priests, offering willingly for the house of
their God which is in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> That thou mayest buy speedily with this
money bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat-offerings and their
drink-offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God
which is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And whatever shall seem good to thee, and
to thy brethren, to do with the rest of the silver and gold, that do
after the will of your God.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The vessels also that are given thee for
the service of the house of thy God, those deliver thou before the God
of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And whatever more shall be needful for
the house of thy God, which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow
it out of the king's treasure-house.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do
make a decree to all the treasurers who are beyond the river, that
whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven,
shall require of you, it be done speedily,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> To a hundred talents of silver, and to a
hundred measures of wheat, and to a hundred baths of wine, and to a
hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Whatever is commanded by the God of
heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven:
for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his
sons?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Also we certify you, that concerning any
of the priests and Levites, singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of
this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose toll, tribute, or
custom upon them.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy
God, that is in thy hand, set magistrates and judges, who may judge all
the people that are beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy
God; and teach ye them that know them not.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And whoever will not do the law of thy
God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed speedily upon
him, whether it be to death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of
goods, or to imprisonment.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Blessed be the LORD God of our fathers,
who hath put such a thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the
house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And hath extended mercy to me before the
king, and his counselors, and before all the king's mighty princes. And
I was strengthened as the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, and I
assembled out of Israel chief men to go up with me.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> These are now the chief of their fathers,
and this is the genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon, in
the reign of Artaxerxes the king.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the
sons of Ithamar; Daniel: of the sons of David; Hattush.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of
Pharosh; Zechariah: and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males
a hundred and fifty.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Of the sons of Pahath-moab; Elihoenai the
son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Of the sons of Shechaniah; the son of
Jahaziel, and with him three hundred males.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed the son of
Jonathan, and with him fifty males.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiah the son
of Athaliah, and with him seventy males.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And of the sons of Shephatiah; Zebadiah the
son of Michael, and with him eighty males.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Of the sons of Joab; Obadiah the son of
Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of
Josiphiah, and with him a hundred and sixty males.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And of the sons of Bebai; Zechariah the
son of Bebai, and with him twenty and eight males.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan the son
of Hakkatan, and with him a hundred and ten males.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And of the last sons of Adonikam, whose
names are these, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them sixty
males.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and
Zabbud, and with them seventy males.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And I assembled them at the river that
runneth to Ahava; and there we abode in tents three days: and I viewed
the people, and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for
Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for
Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men; also for
Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of understanding.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I sent them with commandment to Iddo
the chief at the place Casiphia, and I told them what they should say to
Iddo, and to his brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that
they should bring to us ministers for the house of our God.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And by the good hand of our God upon us
they brought us a man of understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of
Levi, the son of Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren,
eighteen;

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of
the sons of Merari, his brethren and their sons, twenty;

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the
princes had appointed for the service of the Levites, two hundred and
twenty Nethinims: all of them were expressed by name.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the
river Ahava, that we might afflict ourselves before our God, to seek of
him a right way for us, and for our little ones, and for all our
substance.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For I was ashamed to require of the king
a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way:
because we had spoken to the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon
all them for good that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against
all them that forsake him.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> So we fasted and besought our God for
this: and he was entreated by us.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Then I separated twelve of the chief of
the priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them,

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And weighed to them the silver, and the
gold, and the vessels, even the offering of the house of our God, which
the king, and his counselors, and his lords, and all Israel there
present, had offered:

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> I even weighed to their hand six hundred
and fifty talents of silver, and silver vessels a hundred talents, and
of gold a hundred talents;

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> Also twenty basins of gold, of a thousand
drams; and two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And I said to them, Ye are holy to the
LORD; the vessels are holy also; and the silver and the gold are a
free-will-offering to the LORD God of your fathers.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh
them, before the chief of the priests and the Levites, and chief of the
fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the
LORD.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> So the priests and the Levites took the
weight of the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to
Jerusalem to the house of our God.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Then we departed from the river Ahava on
the twelfth day of the first month, to go to Jerusalem: and the hand of
our God was upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and
of such as lay in wait by the way.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there
three days.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Now on the fourth day was the silver and
the gold and the vessels weighed in the house of our God by the hand of
Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the son
of Phinehas; and with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah
the son of Binnui, Levites;

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> By number and by weight of every one: and
all the weight was written at that time.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Also the children of those that had been
carried away, who had come out of the captivity, offered burnt-offerings
to the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six
rams, seventy and seven lambs, twelve he-goats for a sin-offering: all
this was a burnt-offering to the LORD.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And they delivered the king's commissions
to the king's lieutenants, and to the governors on this side of the
river: and they furthered the people, and the house of God.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now when these things were done, the
princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests, and
the Levites, have not separated themselves from the people of the lands,
doing according to their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the
Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites,
the Egyptians, and the Amorites.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For they have taken of their daughters for
themselves, and for their sons: so that the holy seed have mingled
themselves with the people of those lands: yea, the hand of the princes
and rulers hath been chief in this trespass.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And when I heard this thing, I rent my
garment and my mantle, and plucked off the hair of my head and of my
beard, and sat down confounded.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Then were assembled to me every one that
trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the transgression
of those that had been carried away; and I sat confounded until the
evening sacrifice.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And at the evening sacrifice I arose from
my heaviness; and having rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my
knees, and spread out my hands to the LORD my God,

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And said, O my God, I am ashamed and blush
to lift up my face to thee, my God: for our iniquities are increased
over our head, and our trespass is grown up to the heavens.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Since the days of our fathers have we been
in a great trespass to this day; and for our iniquities have we, our
kings, and our priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the
lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of
face, as it is this day.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And now for a little space grace hath been
shown from the LORD our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to
give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and
give us a little reviving in our bondage.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For we were bond-men; yet our God hath not
forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy to us in the sight
of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of
our God, and to repair the desolations of it, and to give us a wall in
Judah and in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And now, O our God, what shall we say
after this? for we have forsaken thy commandments,

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Which thou hast commanded by thy servants
the prophets, saying, The land, to which ye go to possess it, is an
unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands, with their
abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with their
uncleanness.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Now therefore give not your daughters to
their sons, neither take their daughters to your sons, nor seek their
peace or their wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good
of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And after all that hath come upon us for
our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God
hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us
such deliverance as this;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Should we again break thy commandments,
and join in affinity with the people of these abominations? wouldst thou
not be angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should
be no remnant nor escaping?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> O LORD God of Israel, thou art righteous:
for we having escaped, remain yet, as it is this day: behold, we are
before thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee because
of this.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had
confessed, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God,
there assembled to him out of Israel a very great congregation of men
and women and children: for the people wept very bitterly.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of
the sons of Elam, answered and said to Ezra, We have trespassed against
our God, and have taken foreign wives of the people of the land: yet now
there is hope in Israel concerning this thing.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Now therefore let us make a covenant with
our God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them,
according to the counsel of my lord, and of those that tremble at the
commandment of our God; and let it be done according to the law.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Arise; for this matter belongeth to thee:
we also will be with thee: be of good courage, and do it.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Then arose Ezra, and made the chief
priests, the Levites, and all Israel, to swear that they would do
according to this word. And they swore.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Then Ezra arose from before the house of
God, and went into the chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib: and when
he came thither, he ate no bread, nor drank water: for he mourned
because of the transgression of them that had been carried away.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And they made proclamation throughout
Judah and Jerusalem to all the children of the captivity, that they
should assemble at Jerusalem;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And that whoever would not come within
three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders, all
his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the
congregation of those that had been carried away.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin
assembled at Jerusalem within three days. It was the ninth month, and
the twentieth day of the month; and all the people sat in the street of
the house of God, trembling because of this matter, and for the great
rain.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And Ezra the priest stood up, and said
to them, Ye have transgressed, and have taken foreign wives to increase
the trespass of Israel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Now therefore make confession to the
LORD God of your fathers, and do his pleasure: and separate yourselves
from the people of the land, and from the foreign wives.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Then all the congregation answered and
said with a loud voice, As thou hast said, so must we do.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> But the people are many, and it is a
time of much rain, and we are not able to stand abroad, neither is this
a work of one day or two: for we are many that have transgressed in this
thing.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Let now our rulers of all the
congregation stand, and let all them who have taken foreign wives in our
cities come at appointed times, and with them the elders of every city,
and its judges, until the fierce wrath of our God for this matter shall
be turned from us.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and
Jahaziah the son of Tikvah were employed about this matter: and
Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And the children of the captivity did
so. And Ezra the priest, with certain chief of the fathers, after the
house of their fathers, and all of them by their names, were separated,
and sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And they made an end with all the men
that had taken foreign wives by the first day of the first month.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And among the sons of the priests there
were found that had taken foreign wives: namely, of the sons of Jeshua
the son of Jozadak, and his brethren; Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib,
and Gedaliah.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And they gave their hands that they
would put away their wives; and being guilty, they offered a ram of the
flock for their trespass.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and
Zebadiah.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And of the sons of Harim; Maaseiah, and
Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai,
Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and
Shimei, and Kelaiah (the same is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of
the porters; Shallum, and Telem, and Uri.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Moreover, of Israel: of the sons of
Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and
Malchijah, and Benaiah.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And of the sons of Elam; Mattaniah,
Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai,
Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan,
Hananiah, Zabbai, and Athlai.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam,
Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And of the sons of Pahath-moab; Adna,
and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and
Manasseh.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer,
Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai,
Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and
Uel,

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> Benaiah, Bedeiah, Chelluh,

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasau,

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei,

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah,

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah,

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> Shallum, Amariah, and Joseph.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah,
Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> All these had taken foreign wives: and
some of them had wives by whom they had children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah](neh)
