[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dan)  [Next](joe) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Hosea

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the LORD that came to Hosea,
the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah,
kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of
Israel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The beginning of the word of the LORD by
Hosea. And the LORD said to Hosea, Go take to thee a wife addicted to
lewdness and children of lewdness; for the land hath committed great
lewdness, departing from the LORD.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So he went and took Gomer the daughter of
Diblaim; who conceived, and bore him a son.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the LORD said to him, Call his name
Jezreel; for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel
upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house
of Israel.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And it shall come to pass at that day, that
I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And she conceived again, and bore a
daughter. And God said to him, Call her name Lo-ruhamah: for I will no
more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I will utterly take them
away.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But I will have mercy upon the house of
Judah, and will save them by the LORD their God, and will not save them
by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she
conceived, and bore a son.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi: for
ye are not my people, and I will not be your God.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Yet the number of the children of Israel
shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered;
and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said to them,
Ye are not my people, there it shall be said to them, Ye are the sons of
the living God.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then shall the children of Judah and the
children of Israel be assembled, and appoint themselves one head, and
they shall come up from the land: for great shall be the day of Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Say ye to your brethren, Ammi; and to your
sisters, Ruhamah.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Plead with your mother, plead: for she is
not my wife, neither am I her husband: let her therefore put away her
prostitutions out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her
breasts;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in
the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her
like a dry land, and kill her with thirst.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And I will not have mercy upon her
children; for they are the children of lewdness.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For their mother hath played the harlot:
she that conceived them hath done shamefully: for she said, I will go
after my lovers, that give me my bread and my water, my wool and my
flax, my oil and my drink.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way
with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not find her paths.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And she shall follow after her lovers, but
she shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, but shall not find
them: then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband; for
then was it better with me than now.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For she did not know that I gave her corn,
and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which they
prepared for Baal.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore will I return, and take away my
corn in its time, and my wine in its season, and I will recover my wool
and my flax given to cover her nakedness.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And now will I disclose her lewdness in
the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of my hand.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> I will also cause all her mirth to cease,
her feast days, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn
feasts.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And I will destroy her vines and her
fig-trees, of which she hath said, These are my rewards that my lovers
have given me: and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the
field shall eat them.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I will visit upon her the days of
Baalim, in which she burned incense to them, and she decked herself with
her ear-rings and her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgot
me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and
bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And I will give her her vineyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing
there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came from
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And it shall be at that day, saith the
LORD, that thou shalt call me Ishi; and shalt call me no more Baali.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For I will take away the names of Baalim
out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their name.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And in that day will I make a covenant
for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and
with the creeping animals of the ground: and I will break the bow and
the sword and the battle out of the earth, and will make them to lie
down in safety.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will betroth thee to me for ever;
yes, I will betroth thee to me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in
loving-kindness, and in mercies.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I will even betroth thee to me in
faithfulness: and thou shalt know the LORD.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day, I
will hear, saith the LORD, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear
the earth;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And the earth shall hear the corn, and
the wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I will sow her to me in the earth;
and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I will
say to them who were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall
say, Thou art my God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then said the LORD to me, Go yet, love a
woman beloved by her friend, yet an adulteress, according to the love of
the LORD towards the children of Israel, who look to other gods, and
love flagons of wine.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of
silver, and for a homer of barley, and a half homer of barley:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And I said to her, Thou shalt abide for me
many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be for
another man: so will I also be for thee.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For the children of Israel shall abide many
days without a king and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and
without an image, and without an ephod, and without teraphim:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Afterward shall the children of Israel
return, and seek the LORD their God, and David their king; and shall
fear the LORD and his goodness in the latter days.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear the word of the LORD, ye children of
Israel: for the LORD hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the
land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> By swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth
blood.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Therefore shall the land mourn, and every
one that dwelleth in it shall languish, with the beasts of the field,
and with the fowls of heaven; yes, the fishes of the sea also shall be
taken away.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Yet let no man contend, nor reprove
another: for thy people are as they that contend with the priest.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and
the prophet also shall fall with thee in the night, and I will destroy
thy mother.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the
law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> As they were increased, so they sinned
against me: therefore will I change their glory into shame.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> They eat up the sin of my people, and they
set their heart on their iniquity.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And there shall be, like people, like
priest: and I will punish them for their ways, and reward them their
doings.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For they shall eat, and not have enough:
they shall be guilty of lewdness, and shall not increase: because they
have ceased to take heed to the LORD.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Lewdness and wine and new wine take away
the heart.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> My people ask counsel at their stocks,
and their staff declareth to them: for the spirit of lewdness hath
caused them to err, and they have gone astray from under their God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> They sacrifice upon the tops of the
mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and
elms, because the shade of them is agreeable: therefore your daughters
shall be guilty of lewdness, and your spouses shall commit adultery.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I will not punish your daughters when
they are guilty of lewdness, nor your spouses when they commit adultery:
for they themselves are separated with prostitutes, and they sacrifice
with harlots: therefore the people that doth not understand shall fall.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Though thou, Israel, playest the harlot,
yet let not Judah offend; and come not ye to Gilgal, neither go ye up to
Beth-aven, nor swear, The LORD liveth.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For Israel slideth back as a backsliding
heifer: now the LORD will feed them as a lamb in a large place.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Ephraim is joined to idols: let him
alone.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Their drink is sour: they have been
guilty of lewd deeds continually: her rulers with shame do love, Give
ye.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The wind hath bound her up in her wings,
and they shall be ashamed because of their sacrifices.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Hear ye this, O priests; and hearken, ye
house of Israel; and give ye ear, O house of the king; for judgment is
towards you, because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread
upon Tabor.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And the revolters are profound to make
slaughter, though I have been a rebuker of them all.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from
me: for now, O Ephraim, thou art guilty of lewdness, and Israel is
defiled.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> They will not frame their doings to turn to
their God: for the spirit of lewdness is in the midst of them, and they
have not known the LORD.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And the pride of Israel doth testify to his
face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; Judah
also shall fall with them.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> They shall go with their flocks and with
their herds to seek the LORD; but they shall not find him; he hath
withdrawn himself from them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> They have dealt treacherously against the
LORD: for they have begotten strange children: now shall a month devour
them with their portions.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the
trumpet in Ramah: cry aloud at Beth-aven, after thee, O Benjamin.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of
rebuke: among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall
surely be.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The princes of Judah were like them that
remove the bound: therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like
water.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Ephraim is oppressed and broken in
judgment, because he willingly walked after the commandment.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Therefore will I be to Ephraim as a moth,
and to the house of Judah as rottenness.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
saw his wound, then Ephraim went to the Assyrian, and sent to king
Jareb: yet he could not heal you, nor cure you of your wound.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For I will be to Ephraim as a lion, and
as a young lion to the house of Judah: I, even I, will tear and go away;
I will take away, and none shall rescue him.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> I will go and return to my place, till
they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: in their affliction
they will seek me early.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Come, and let us return to the LORD: for he
hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> After two days will he revive us: in the
third day will he raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Then shall we know, if we follow on to know
the LORD: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he will come
to us as the rain, as the latter and former rain to the earth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> O Ephraim, what shall I do to thee? O
Judah, what shall I do to thee? for your goodness is as the morning
cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Therefore have I hewed them by the
prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and thy judgments
are as the light that goeth forth.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice: and
the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> But they like men have transgressed the
covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Gilead is a city of them that work
iniquity, and is polluted with blood.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so
the company of priests murder in the way by consent: for they commit
lewdness.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> I have seen a horrible thing in the house
of Israel: there is the prostitution of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Also, O Judah, he hath set a harvest for
thee, when I returned the captivity of my people.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When I would have healed Israel, then the
iniquity of Ephraim was disclosed, and the wickedness of Samaria: for
they commit falsehood; and the thief cometh in, and the troop of robbers
strippeth without.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And they consider not in their hearts that
I remember all their wickedness: now their own doings have beset them
around; they are before my face.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> They make the king glad with their
wickedness, and the princes with their lies.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> They are all adulterers, as an oven heated
by the baker, who ceaseth from raising after he hath kneaded the dough,
until it is leavened.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> In the day of our king the princes have
made him sick with bottles of wine; he stretched out his hand with
scorners.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For they have made ready their heart like
an oven, while they lie in wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in
the morning it burneth as a flaming fire.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> They are all hot as an oven, and have
devoured their judges; all their kings are fallen: there is none among
them that calleth to me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the
people; Ephraim is a cake not turned.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Strangers have devoured his strength, and
he knoweth it not: yes, gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he
knoweth not.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the pride of Israel testifieth to his
face: and they do not return to the LORD their God, nor seek him for all
this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Ephraim also is like a silly dove without
heart: they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> When they shall go, I will spread my net
upon them; I will bring them down as the fowls of the heaven; I will
chastise them, as their congregation hath heard.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Woe to them! for they have fled from me:
destruction to them! because they have transgressed against me: though I
have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And they have not cried to me with their
heart, when they howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for
corn and wine, and they rebel against me.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Though I have bound and strengthened
their arms, yet do they imagine mischief against me.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They return, but not to the most High:
they are like a deceitful bow: their princes shall fall by the sword for
the rage of their tongue: this shall be their derision in the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Set the trumpet to thy mouth. He shall come
as an eagle against the house of the LORD, because they have
transgressed my covenant, and trespassed against my law.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Israel shall cry to me, My God, we know
thee.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Israel hath cast off the thing that is
good: the enemy shall pursue him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They have set up kings, but not by me: they
have made princes, and I knew it not: of their silver and their gold
have they made for themselves idols, that they may be cut off.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off; my
anger is kindled against them: how long will it be ere they attain to
innocence?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For from Israel was it also: the workman
made it; therefore it is not God: but the calf of Samaria shall be
broken in pieces.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For they have sown the wind, and they shall
reap the whirlwind: it hath no stalk: the bud shall yield no meal: if it
shall yield, the strangers shall swallow it up.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Israel is swallowed up: now shall they be
among the Gentiles as a vessel in which is no pleasure.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For they have gone up to Assyria, a wild
ass alone by himself: Ephraim hath hired lovers.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Yes, though they have hired among the
nations, now will I gather them, and they shall sorrow a little for the
burden of the king of princes.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because Ephraim hath made many altars to
sin, altars shall be to him to sin.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I have written to him the great things of
my law, but they were counted as a strange thing.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices
of my offerings, and eat it; but the LORD accepteth them not; now will
he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to
Egypt.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and
buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fortified cities: but I will
send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other
people: for thou hast apostatized from thy God, thou hast loved a reward
upon every corn-floor.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The floor and the wine-press shall not feed
them, and the new wine shall fail in her.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They shall not dwell in the LORD'S land;
but Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean things in
Assyria.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> They shall not offer wine-offerings to the
LORD, neither shall they be pleasing to him: their sacrifices shall be
to them as the bread of mourners; all that eat of it shall be polluted:
for their bread for their soul shall not come into the house of the
LORD.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> What will ye do in the solemn day, and in
the day of the feast of the LORD?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For lo, they are gone because of
destruction: Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury them: the
pleasant places for their silver, nettles shall possess them: thorns
shall be in their tabernacles.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The days of visitation are come, the days
of recompense are come; Israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the
spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thy iniquity, and the great
hatred.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The watchman of Ephraim was with my God:
but the prophet is a snare of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in
the house of his God.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They have deeply corrupted themselves, as
in the days of Gibeah: therefore he will remember their iniquity, he
will visit their sins.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> I found Israel like grapes in the
wilderness; I saw your fathers as the first ripe in the fig-tree at her
first time: but they went to Baal-peor, and separated themselves to that
shame; and their abominations were according as they loved.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly
away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the
conception.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Though they bring up their children, yet
will I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left: yes, woe also
to them when I depart from them!

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Ephraim, as I saw Tyre, is planted in a
pleasant place: but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the
murderer.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Give them, O LORD: what wilt thou give?
give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for
there I hated them: for the wickedness of their doings I will drive them
out of my house, I will love them no more: all their princes are
revolters.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried
up, they shall bear no fruit: yes, though they bring forth, yet will I
slay even the beloved fruit of their womb.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> My God will cast them away, because they
did not hearken to him: and they shall be wanderers among the nations.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Israel is an empty vine, he bringeth
forth fruit to himself: according to the multitude of his fruit he hath
multiplied the altars; according to the goodness of his land they have
made goodly images.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Their heart is divided; now shall they be
found faulty: he shall break down their altars, he shall spoil their
images.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For now they shall say, We have no king,
because we feared not the LORD; what then should a king do to us?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They have spoken words, swearing falsely
in making a covenant: thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the
furrows of the field.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear
because of the calves of Beth-aven: for its people shall mourn over it,
and its priests that rejoiced on it, for its glory, because it is
departed from it.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> It shall also be carried to Assyria, for
a present to king Jareb: Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall
be ashamed of his own counsel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> As for Samaria, her king is cut off as
the foam upon the water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The high places also of Aven, the sin of
Israel, shall be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up on
their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the
hills, Fall on us.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days
of Gibeah: there they stood: the battle in Gibeah against the children
of iniquity did not overtake them.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> It is in my desire that I should
chastise them; and the people shall be gathered against them, when they
shall bind themselves in their two furrows.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And Ephraim is as a heifer that is
taught, and loveth to tread out the corn; but I passed over upon her
fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride; Judah shall plow, and Jacob
shall break his clods.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Sow to yourselves in righteousness,
reap in mercy; break up your fallow ground: for it is time to seek the
LORD, till he shall come and reign righteousness upon you.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have
reaped iniquity; ye have eaten the fruit of lies: because thou hast
trusted in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Therefore shall a tumult arise among
thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be plundered, as Shalman
plundered Beth-arbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in
pieces upon her children.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> So shall Beth-el do to you because of
your great wickedness: in a morning shall the king of Israel be utterly
cut off.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> When Israel was a child, then I loved
him, and called my son out of Egypt.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> As they called them, so they went from
them: they sacrificed to Baalim, and burned incense to graven images.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them
by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> I drew them with cords of a man, with
bands of love: and I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their
jaws, and I laid food for them.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> He shall not return into the land of
Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be his king, because they refused to
return.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the sword shall abide on his cities,
and shall consume his branches, and devour them, because of their own
counsels.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And my people are bent to backsliding
from me: though they called them to the most High, none at all would
exalt him.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how
shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall
I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my repentings are
kindled together.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I will not execute the fierceness of my
anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man;
the Holy One in the midst of thee: and I will not enter into the city.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They shall walk after the LORD: he
shall roar like a lion: when he shall roar, then the children shall
tremble from the west.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> They shall tremble as a bird out of
Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria: and I will place them
in their houses, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Ephraim encompasseth me with lies, and
the house of Israel with deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with God, and is
faithful with the saints.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth
after the east wind: he daily multiplieth lies and desolation; and they
do make a covenant with the Assyrians, and oil is carried into Egypt.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> The LORD hath also a controversy with
Judah, and will punish Jacob according to his ways; according to his
doings will he recompense him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> He took his brother by the heel in the
womb, and by his strength he had power with God:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Yes, he had power over the angel, and
prevailed: he wept, and made supplication to him: he found him in
Beth-el, and there he spoke with us;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Even the LORD God of hosts; the LORD is
his memorial.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep
mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> He is a merchant, the balances of deceit
are in his hand: he loveth to oppress.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And Ephraim said, Yet I have become rich,
I have found for myself substance: in all my labors they shall find no
iniquity in me that were sin.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And I that am the LORD thy God from the
land of Egypt will yet make thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days
of the solemn feast.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> I have also spoken by the prophets, and
I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes by the ministry of the
prophets.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely
they are vanity: they sacrifice bullocks in Gilgal; yes, their altars
are as heaps in the furrows of the fields.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And Jacob fled into the country of
Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And by a prophet the LORD brought
Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Ephraim provoked him to anger most
bitterly: therefore will he leave his blood upon him, and his reproach
will his Lord return to him.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> When Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted
himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And now they sin more and more, and have
made them molten images of their silver, and idols according to their
own understanding, all of it the work of artificers: they say of them,
Let the men that sacrifice kiss the calves.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Therefore they shall be as the morning
cloud, and as the early dew that passeth away, as the chaff that is
driven with the whirlwind from the floor, and as the smoke from the
chimney.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Yet I am the LORD thy God from the land
of Egypt, and thou shalt know no God but me: for there is no savior
besides me.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I did know thee in the wilderness, in the
land of great drouth.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> According to their pasture, so were they
filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have
they forgotten me.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Therefore I will be to them as a lion: as
a leopard by the way will I observe them.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> I will meet them as a bear that is
bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart, and there
will I devour them like a lion: the wild beast shall tear them.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself;
but in me is thy help.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> I will be thy king: where is any other
that may save thee in all thy cities? and thy judges of whom thou
saidst, Give me a king and princes?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> I gave thee a king in my anger, and
took him away in my wrath.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up;
his sin is hid.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> The sorrows of a travailing woman shall
come upon him: he is an unwise son; for he should not stay long in the
place of the breaking forth of children.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> I will ransom them from the power of
the grave; I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy
plagues, O grave, I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid
from my eyes.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Though he is fruitful among his
brethren, an east wind shall come, the wind of the LORD shall come up
from the wilderness, and his spring shall become dry, and his fountain
shall be dried up: he shall pillage the treasure of all pleasant
vessels.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Samaria shall become desolate; for she
hath rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the sword: their
infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be
ripped up.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> O Israel, return to the LORD thy God; for
thou hast fallen by thy iniquity.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Take with you words, and turn to the
LORD: say to him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so
will we render the calves of our lips.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Ashur shall not save us; we will not ride
upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye
are our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> I will heal their backsliding, I will
love them freely: for my anger is turned away from him.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I will be as the dew to Israel: he shall
grow as the lily and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> His branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the olive-tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> They that dwell under his shade shall
return; they shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent
of it shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any
more with idols? I have heard him, and observed him: I am like a green
fir-tree. From me is thy fruit found.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Who is wise, and he shall understand
these things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways of the LORD
are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall
fall in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel](joe)
