[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sol)  [Next](jer) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Isaiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which
he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for
the LORD hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they
have rebelled against me.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master's crib: but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Ah sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evil-doers, children that are corrupters: they have
forsaken the LORD, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel to anger,
they are gone away backward.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will
revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From the sole of the foot even to the head
there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying
sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified
with ointment.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Your country is desolate, your cities are
burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and
it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the daughter of Zion is left as a
cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a
besieged city.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Except the LORD of hosts had left to us a
very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom; we should have been
like Gomorrah.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of
Sodom; give ear to the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices to me? saith the LORD: I am full of the burnt-offerings of
rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of
bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> When ye come to appear before me, who
hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Bring no more vain oblations; incense is
an abomination to me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies, I cannot endure; it is iniquity, even the solemn meeting.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Your new moons and your appointed feasts
my soul hateth: they are a trouble to me; I am weary to bear them.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And when ye spread forth your hands, I
will hide my eyes from you: yes, when ye make many prayers, I will not
hear: your hands are full of blood.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Wash ye, make yourselves clean; put away
the evil of your doings from before my eyes; cease to do evil;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Come now, and let us reason together,
saith the LORD: though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be white as
snow, though they are red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> If ye are willing and obedient, ye shall
eat the good of the land:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> How is the faithful city become a harlot!
it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Thy silver is become dross, thy wine
mixed with water:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Thy princes are rebellious, and
companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followeth after
rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the
widow come to them.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Therefore saith the Lord, the LORD of
hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of my adversaries,
and avenge me of my enemies:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And I will turn my hand upon thee, and
thoroughly purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin:

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And I will restore thy judges as at the
first, and thy counselors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt be
called, The city of righteousness, the faithful city.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and
her converts with righteousness.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And the destruction of the transgressors
and of the sinners shall be together, and they that forsake the LORD
shall be consumed.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For they shall be ashamed of the oaks
which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that
ye have chosen.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf
fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And the strong shall be as tow, and the
maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none
shall quench them.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw
concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And it shall come to pass in the last days,
that the mount of the LORD'S house shall be established on the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations
shall flow to it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And many people shall go and say, Come ye,
and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of
Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths:
for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And he will judge among the nations, and
will rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift
up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk
in the light of the LORD.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the
house of Jacob, because they are replenished from the east, and are
sooth-sayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the
children of strangers.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Their land also is full of silver and gold,
neither is there any end of their treasures; their land is also full of
horses, neither is there any end of their chariots:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Their land also is full of idols; they
worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have
made:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the mean man boweth down, and the great
man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the
dust, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The lofty looks of man shall be humbled,
and the haughtiness of men shall be abased, and the LORD alone shall be
exalted in that day.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For the day of the LORD of hosts shall be
upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is
lifted up; and he shall be brought low:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that
are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And upon all the high mountains, and upon
all the hills that are lifted up,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And upon every high tower, and upon every
fortified wall,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And upon all the ships of Tarshish, and
upon all pleasant pictures.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the loftiness of man shall be abased,
and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the LORD alone shall
be exalted in that day.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the idols he will utterly abolish.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And they shall go into the holes of the
rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the LORD, and for
the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> In that day a man shall cast his idols of
silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to
worship, to the moles and to the bats;

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> To go into the clefts of the rocks, and
into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and for the
glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his
nostrils: for wherein is he to be accounted of?

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts,
doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the rod and the staff, the
whole support of bread, and the whole support of water,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The mighty man, and the man of war, the
judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The captain of fifty, and the honorable
man, and the counselor, and the skillful artificer, and the eloquent
orator.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And I will give children to be their
princes, and babes shall rule over them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the people shall be oppressed, every
one by another, and every one by his neighbor: the child shall behave
himself proudly against the elder, and the base against the honorable.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> When a man shall take hold of his brother
of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our
ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> In that day shall he swear, saying, I will
not be a healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me
not a ruler of the people.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is
fallen: because their tongue and their doings are against the LORD, to
provoke the eyes of his glory.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The show of their countenance doth witness
against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe
to their soul! for they have rewarded evil to themselves.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be
well with him: for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Woe to the wicked! it shall be ill with
him: for the reward of his hands shall be given him.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> As for my people, children are their
oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, they who lead thee
cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The LORD standeth up to plead, and
standeth to judge the people.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> The LORD will enter into judgment with
the elders of his people, and with their princes: for ye have eaten up
the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> What mean ye that ye beat my people to
pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Moreover the LORD saith, Because the
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with extended necks and wanton
eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their
feet:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Therefore the Lord will smite with a scab
the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD will
uncover their secret parts.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In that day the Lord will take away the
show of their tinkling ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and
their round tires like the moon.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The chains, and the bracelets, and the
mufflers,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> The bonnets, and the ornaments of the
legs, and the head-bands, and the tablets, and the ear-rings,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> The rings, and nose-jewels,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> The changeable suits of apparel, and the
mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping-pins,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> The glasses, and the fine linen, and the
hoods, and the vails.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And it shall come to pass, that instead
of sweet smell there shall be an offensive odor; and instead of a girdle
a rent; and instead of well set hair baldness; and instead of a
stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy
mighty in the war.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And her gates shall lament and mourn; and
she being desolate, shall sit upon the ground.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And in that day seven women shall take hold
of one man, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel:
only let us be called by thy name, to take away our reproach.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> In that day shall the branch of the LORD be
beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent
and comely for them that have escaped of Israel.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And it shall come to pass, that he that is
left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy,
even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> When the Lord shall have washed away the
filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of
Jerusalem from the midst of it by the spirit of judgment, and by the
spirit of burning.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And the LORD will create upon every
dwelling place of mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke
by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon all the
glory shall be a defense.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And there shall be a tabernacle for a shade
in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a
covert from storm and from rain.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now will I sing to my well-beloved a song
of my beloved concerning his vineyard. My well-beloved hath a vineyard
in a very fruitful hill:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And he fenced it, and gathered out the
stones of it, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower
in the midst of it, and also made a wine-press therein: and he expected
that it would bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> What more could have been done to my
vineyard, that I have not done in it? Why, when I expected that it would
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And now come; I will tell you what I will
do to my vineyard: I will take away its hedge, and it shall be eaten up;
and break down the wall of it, and it shall be trodden down:

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I will lay it waste: it shall not be
pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will
also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts is
the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he
looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but
behold a cry.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Woe to them that join house to house, that
lay field to field, till there is no place, that they may be placed
alone in the midst of the earth!

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> In my ears said the LORD of hosts, Of a
truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Yes, ten acres of vineyard shall yield
one bath, and the seed of a homer shall yield an ephah.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Woe to them that rise early in the
morning, that they may follow strong drink; that continue until night,
till wine inflameth them!

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And the harp, and the viol, the tabret,
and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of
the LORD, neither consider the operation of his hands.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Therefore my people have gone into
captivity, because they have no knowledge: and their honorable men are
famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and
opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude,
and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the mean man shall be brought down,
and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be
abased.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> But the LORD of hosts shall be exalted in
judgment, and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Then shall the lambs feed after their
manner, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Woe to them that draw iniquity with cords
of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> That say, Let him make speed, and hasten
his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of
Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Woe to them that call evil good, and good
evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Woe to them that are wise in their own
eyes, and prudent in their own sight!

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Woe to them that are mighty to drink
wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink:

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Who justify the wicked for reward, and
take away the righteousness of the righteous from him!

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Therefore as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have
cast away the law of the LORD of hosts, and despised the word of the
Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Therefore is the anger of the LORD
kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against
them, and hath smitten them: and the hills trembled, and their carcasses
were torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he will lift up an ensign to the
nations from afar, and will hiss to them from the end of the earth: and
behold, they shall come with speed swiftly:

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> None shall be weary nor stumble among
them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their
loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Whose arrows are sharp, and all their
bows bent, their horses' hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their
wheels like a whirlwind:

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Their roaring shall be like a lion, they
shall roar like young lions: yes, they shall roar, and lay hold of the
prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And in that day they shall roar against
them like the roaring of the sea: and if one looketh to the land, behold
darkness and sorrow, and the light is darkened in its heavens.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> In the year that king Uzziah died I saw
also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and elevated, and his train
filled the temple.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Above it stood seraphim: each one had six
wings; with two he covered his face, and with two he covered his feet,
and with two he flew.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And one cried to another, and said, Holy,
holy, holy is the LORD of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And the posts of the door moved at the
voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone;
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people
of unclean lips: for my eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then one of the seraphim flew to me, having
a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the
altar:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo,
this hath touched thy lips; and thy iniquity is taken away, and thy sin
purged.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying,
Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send
me.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear
ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert, and be healed.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then said I, Lord, how long? And he
answered, Until the cities shall be wasted without inhabitant, and the
houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate;

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the LORD shall have removed men far
away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it
shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil-tree, and as an oak whose
substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy seed
shall be the substance of it.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the
son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of
Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up towards
Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And it was told the house of David, saying,
Syria is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the
heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Then said the LORD to Isaiah, Go forth now
to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit
of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field;

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And say to him, Take heed, and be quiet;
fear not, neither be faint-hearted for the two tails of these smoking
fire-brands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of
Remaliah.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of
Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying,

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Let us go up against Judah, and harass it,
and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of
it, even the son of Tabeal:

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD, It shall not
stand, neither shall it come to pass.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the
head of Damascus is Rezin; and within sixty five years shall Ephraim be
broken, that it be not a people.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the
head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye
shall not be established.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Moreover, the LORD spoke again to Ahaz,
saying,

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Ask thee a sign from the LORD thy God;
ask it either in the depth, or in the hight above.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither
will I tempt the LORD.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And he said, Hear ye now, O house of
David? Is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my
God also?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Therefore the Lord himself will give you
a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call
his name Immanuel.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Butter and honey shall he eat, that he
may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For before the child shall know to refuse
the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be
forsaken by both her kings.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> The LORD will bring upon thee, and upon
thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from
the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the LORD will hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the
rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And they shall come, and shall rest all
of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon
all thorns, and upon all bushes.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> In the same day will the Lord shave with
a razor that is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of
Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume
the beard.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And it shall come to pass, for the
abundance of milk that they shall give, he shall eat butter: for butter
and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a
thousand pieces of silver, it shall even be for briers and thorns.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> With arrows and with bows shall men come
thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And on all hills that shall be digged
with the mattock, there shall not come thither the fear of briers and
thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the
treading of lesser cattle.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Moreover, the LORD said to me, Take thee a
great roll, and write in it with a man's pen concerning
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I took to me faithful witnesses to
record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And I went to the prophetess; and she
conceived, and bore a son. Then said the LORD to me, Call his name
Maher-shalal-hash-baz.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> For before the child shall have knowledge
to cry, My father, and my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil
of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> The LORD spoke also to me again, saying,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Forasmuch as this people refuseth the
waters of Shiloah that flow gently, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's
son;

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up
upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of
Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all its channels,
and go over all its banks:

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And he shall pass through Judah; he shall
overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck; and the extension
of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye
shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird
yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye
shall be broken in pieces.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Take counsel together, and it shall come
to naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For the LORD spoke thus to me with a
strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this
people, saying,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Say ye not, A confederacy, to all them to
whom this people shall say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear,
nor be afraid.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Sanctify the LORD of hosts himself; and
let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he will be for a sanctuary; but for a
stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to both the houses of
Israel, for a trap and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And many among them shall stumble, and
fall, and be broken, and be insnared, and be taken.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Bind up the testimony, seal the law among
my disciples.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I will wait upon the LORD, that
hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Behold, I and the children whom the LORD
hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the LORD of
hosts, who dwelleth in mount Zion.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And when they shall say to you, Seek to
them that have familiar spirits, and to wizards that peep, and that
mutter: should not a people seek to their God? for the living to the
dead?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> To the law and to the testimony: if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And they shall pass through it,
distressed and hungry: and it shall come to pass, that when they shall
be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their
God, and look upward.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And they shall look to the earth; and
behold trouble and darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be
driven to darkness.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such
as was in her distress, when at the first he lightly afflicted the land
of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously
afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the
nations.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The people that walked in darkness have
seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shades of death,
upon them hath the light shined.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not
increased the joy: they joy before thee according to the joy in harvest,
and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For thou hast broken the yoke of his
burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in
the day of Midian.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For every battle of the warrior is with
confused noise, and garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with
burning and fuel of fire.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For to us a child is born, to us a son is
given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall
be called Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father,
The Prince of Peace.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Of the increase of his government and peace
there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom,
to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will perform
this.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it
hath lighted upon Israel.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And all the people shall know, even Ephraim
and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of
heart,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The bricks have fallen down, but we will
build with hewn stones; the sycamores are cut down, but we will change
them into cedars.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Therefore the LORD will set up the
adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together;

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> The Syrians before, and the Philistines
behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For the people turn not to him that
smiteth them, neither do they seek the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Therefore the LORD will cut off from
Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> The ancient and honorable, he is the
head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For the leaders of this people cause them
to err; and they that are led by them are destroyed.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Therefore the Lord will have no joy in
their young men, neither will have mercy on their fatherless and widows:
for every one is a hypocrite and an evil-doer, and every mouth speaketh
folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> For wickedness burneth as the fire: it
shall devour the briers and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of
the forest, and they shall mount up like the rising of smoke.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts is
the land darkened, and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no
man shall spare his brother.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And he shall snatch on the right hand,
and be hungry; and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be
satisfied: they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh:
and they together shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Woe to them that decree unrighteous
decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> To turn aside the needy from judgment,
and to take away the right from the poor of my people, that widows may
be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless!

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And what will ye do in the day of
visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? to whom
will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Without me they shall bow down under the
prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger
is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> O Assyrian, the rod of my anger, and the
staff in their hand is my indignation.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> I will send him against a hypocritical
nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to
take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the
mire of the streets.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth
his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off
nations not a few.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For he saith, Are not my princes
altogether kings?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath
as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> As my hand hath found the kingdoms of
the idols, and whose graven images excelled them of Jerusalem and of
Samaria;

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria
and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Wherefore it shall come to pass, that
when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of
Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For he saith, By the strength of my
hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have
removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their treasures, and I
have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man:

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And my hand hath found as a nest the
riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left, have I
gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or
opened the mouth, or peeped.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Shall the ax boast itself against him
that heweth with it? or shall the saw magnify itself against him that
moveth it? as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it,
or as if the staff should lift itself, as if it were no wood.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Therefore will the Lord, the LORD of
hosts, send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory he will
kindle a burning like the burning of a fire.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And the light of Israel shall be for a
fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his
thorns and his briers in one day;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And shall consume the glory of his
forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be
as when a standard-bearer fainteth.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And the rest of the trees of his forest
shall be few, that a child may write them.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the remnant of Israel, and such as have escaped of the house of
Jacob, shall no more again lean upon him that smote them; but shall lean
upon the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The remnant shall return, even the
remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For though thy people Israel be as the
sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shall return: the consumption
decreed shall overflow with righteousness.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> For the Lord GOD of hosts will make a
consumption, even determined, in the midst of all the land.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD of
hosts, O my people that dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian:
he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against
thee, after the manner of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> For yet a very little while, and the
indignation shall cease, and my anger in their destruction.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And the LORD of hosts will raise up a
scourge for him according to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of
Oreb: and as his rod was upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the
manner of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke
from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the
anointing.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> He is come to Aiath, he is passed to
Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his furniture.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> They have gone over the passage: they
have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul
hath fled.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Lift up thy voice, O daughter of
Gallim: cause it to be heard to Laish, O poor Anathoth.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of
Gebim gather themselves to flee.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> As yet shall he remain at Nob that day:
he shall shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the
hill of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts
will lop the bough with terror: and the high ones of stature shall be
hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And he shall cut down the thickets of
the forests with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And there shall come forth a rod out of
the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots:

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And the spirit of the LORD will rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And will make him of quick understanding
in the fear of the LORD: and he will not judge after the sight of his
eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But with righteousness will he judge the
poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he will
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips will he slay the wicked.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And righteousness shall be the girdle of
his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young
lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And the cow and the bear shall feed;
their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw
like the ox.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the suckling child shall play on the
hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the den of
the basilisk.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my
holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD,
as the waters cover the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And in that day there shall be a root
of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the
Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the Lord will set his hand again the second time to recover the
remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from
Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar,
and from Hamath, and from the isles of the sea.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he shall set up an ensign for the
nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather the
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> The envy also of Ephraim shall depart,
and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy
Judah, and Judah shall not distress Ephraim.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> But they shall fly upon the shoulders
of the Philistines towards the west; they shall spoil them of the east
together: they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children
of Ammon shall obey them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And the LORD will utterly destroy the
tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind will he shake his
hand over the river, and will smite it in the seven streams, and make
men go over dry shod.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And there shall be a highway for the
remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; as it was to
Israel in the day that he came up from the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I
will praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, thy anger is turned
away, and thou hast comforted me.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Behold, God is my salvation; I will
trust, and not be afraid: for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength and my
song; he also is become my salvation.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Therefore with joy shall ye draw water
out of the wells of salvation.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And in that day shall ye say, Praise the
LORD, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make
mention that his name is exalted.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Sing to the LORD; for he hath done
excellent things: this is known in all the earth.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Cry aloud and shout, thou inhabitant of
Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the
son of Amoz saw.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Lift ye up a banner upon the high
mountain, exalt the voice to them, shake the hand, that they may go into
the gates of the nobles.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> I have commanded my sanctified ones, I
have also called my mighty ones for my anger, even them that rejoice in
my highness.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The noise of a multitude in the
mountains, as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of
nations assembled: the LORD of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> They come from a far country, from the
end of heaven, even the LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to
destroy the whole land.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Howl ye; for the day of the LORD is at
hand; it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Therefore shall all hands be faint, and
every man's heart shall melt:

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And they shall be afraid: pangs and
sorrows shall take hold of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that
travaileth: they shall be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as
flames.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, cruel
both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he will
destroy its sinners out of it.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> For the stars of heaven and its
constellations shall not give their light: the sun shall be darkened in
his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And I will punish the world for their
evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogance
of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> I will make a man more precious than
fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore I will shake the heavens, and
the earth shall remove out of her place, in the wrath of the LORD of
hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And it shall be as the chased roe, and
as a sheep that no man taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own
people, and flee every one to his own land.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Every one that is found shall be thrust
through; and every one that is joined to them shall fall by the sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Their children also shall be dashed to
pieces before their eyes; their houses shall be plundered, and their
wives ravished.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Behold, I will stir up the Medes
against them, who shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall
not delight in it.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Their bows also shall dash the young
men to pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb;
their eye shall not spare children.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the
beauty of the Chaldees' excellence, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom
and Gomorrah.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> It shall never be inhabited, neither
shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shall the
Arabian pitch tent there; neither shall the shepherds make their fold
there.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But wild beasts of the desert shall lie
there; and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls
shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And the wild beasts of the isles shall
cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and
her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> For the LORD will have mercy on Jacob,
and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the
strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house
of Jacob.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the people shall take them, and bring
them to their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the
land of the LORD for servants and handmaids: and they shall take them
captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their
oppressors.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And it shall come to pass in the day that
the LORD shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and
from the hard bondage in which thou wast made to serve,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> That thou shalt take up this proverb
against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! the
golden city ceased!

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The LORD hath broken the staff of the
wicked, and the scepter of the rulers.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He who smote the people in wrath with a
continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and
none hindereth.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet:
they break forth into singing.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Yes, the fir-trees rejoice at thee, and
the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is
come up against us.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Hell from beneath is moved for thee to
meet thee at thy coming: it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the
chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the
kings of the nations.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> All they shall speak and say to thee,
Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like us?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Thy pomp is brought down to the grave,
and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and the worms
cover thee.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> How art thou fallen from heaven, O
Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which
didst weaken the nations!

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> For thou hast said in thy heart, I will
ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I
will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the
north:

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I will ascend above the hights of the
clouds; I will be like the Most High.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell,
to the sides of the pit.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> They that see thee shall narrowly look
upon thee, and consider thee, saying, Is this the man that made the
earth to tremble, that shook kingdoms:

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> That made the world as a wilderness,
and destroyed its cities; that opened not the house of his prisoners?

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> All the kings of the nations, even all
of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But thou art cast out of thy grave like
an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust
through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a
carcass trodden under feet.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Thou shalt not be joined with them in
burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the
seed of evil-doers shall never be renowned.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Prepare slaughter for his children for
the iniquity of their fathers; that they may not rise, nor possess the
land, nor fill the face of the world with cities.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> For I will arise against them, saith
the LORD of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and
son, and nephew, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> I will also make it a possession for
the bittern, and pools of water: and I will sweep it with the besom of
destruction, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The LORD of hosts hath sworn, saying,
Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have
purposed, so shall it stand.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> That I will break the Assyrian in my
land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot: then shall his yoke
depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> This is the purpose that is purposed
upon the whole earth: and this is the hand that is stretched over all
the nations.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> For the LORD of hosts hath purposed,
and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall
turn it back?

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the year that king Ahaz died was
this burden.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Rejoice not thou, all Palestina,
because the rod of him that smote thee is broken: for out of the
serpent's root shall come forth a basilisk, and his fruit shall be a
fiery flying serpent.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And the first-born of the poor shall
feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root
with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, all
Palestina, art dissolved: for there shall come from the north a smoke,
and none shall be alone in his appointed times.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> What shall one then answer the
messengers of the nation? That the LORD hath founded Zion, and the poor
of his people shall trust in it.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> The burden of Moab. Because in the night
Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; because in the night
Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence;

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon,
the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on
all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard shorn.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> In their streets they shall gird
themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their
streets, every one shall howl, weeping abundantly.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their
voice shall be heard even to Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab
shall cry out; his life shall be grievous to him.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> My heart shall cry out for Moab; his
fugitives shall flee to Zoar, a heifer of three years old: for they
shall go up the ascent of Luhith with weeping; for in the way of
Horonaim they shall raise a cry of destruction.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For the waters of Nimrim shall be
desolate: for the herb is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no
green thing.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Therefore the abundance they have gained,
and that which they have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of
the willows.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For the cry hath gone round the borders
of Moab, her howling to Eglaim, and her howling to Beer-elim.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> For the waters of Dimon shall be full of
blood: for I will bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of
Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land
from Sela to the wilderness, to the mount of the daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> For it shall be, that, as a wandering
bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shall be at the
fords of Arnon.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy
shadow as the night in the midst of the noon-day; hide the outcasts;
discover not him that wandereth.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Let my outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be
thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner
is at an end, the spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of
the land.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And in mercy shall the throne be
established: and he shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle of
David, judging, and seeking judgment, and hasting righteousness.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is
very proud: even of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: but
his lies shall not be so.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every
one shall howl: for the foundations of Kir-hareseth shall ye mourn;
surely they are stricken.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> For the fields of Heshbon languish, and
the vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen have broken down her
principal plants, they have come even to Jazer, they wandered through
the wilderness: her branches are extended, they have gone over the sea.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Therefore I will bewail with the weeping
of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon,
and Elealeh: for the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest
is fallen.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And gladness is taken away, and joy
from the plentiful field; and in the vineyards there shall be no
singing, neither shall there be shouting: the treaders shall tread out
no wine in their presses; I have made their vintage-shouting to cease.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Wherefore my bowels shall sound like a
harp for Moab, and my inward parts for Kir-haresh.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And it shall come to pass, when it is
seen that Moab is weary on the high place, that he shall come to his
sanctuary to pray; but he shall not prevail.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> This is the word that the LORD hath
spoken concerning Moab since that time.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> But now the LORD hath spoken, saying,
Within three years, as the years of a hireling, and the glory of Moab
shall be contemned, with all that great multitude; and the remnant shall
be very small and feeble.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus
is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they
shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make them
afraid.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The fortress also shall cease from
Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they
shall be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the LORD of
hosts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And in that day it shall come to pass,
that the glory of Jacob shall be diminished, and the fatness of his
flesh shall become lean.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And it shall be as when the harvest-man
gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be
as he that gathereth ears in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it,
as the shaking of an olive-tree, two or three berries in the top of the
uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches of it,
saith the LORD God of Israel.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> At that day shall a man look to his
Maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And he shall not look to the altars, the
work of his hands, neither shall respect that which his fingers have
made, either the groves, or the images.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> In that day shall his strong cities be as
a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch, which they left because of
the children of Israel: and there shall be desolation.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Because thou hast forgotten the God of
thy salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength,
therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with
foreign slips:

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> In the day shalt thou make thy plant to
grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy seed to flourish: but the
harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Woe to the multitude of many people,
who make a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of
nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters!

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> The nations shall rush like the rushing
of many waters: but God will rebuke them, and they shall flee far off,
and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and
like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And behold at the time of evening
trouble; and before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them
that ravage us, and the lot of them that rob us.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Woe to the land shadowing with wings,
which is beyond the rivers of Cush:

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> That sendeth embassadors by the sea, even
in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers
to a nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their
beginning hitherto; a nation measured by line and trodden down, whose
land the rivers have laid waste.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> All ye inhabitants of the world, and
dwellers on the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the
mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> For so the LORD said to me, I will take
my rest, and I will consider in my dwelling-place like a clear heat upon
herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For before the harvest, when the bud is
perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut
off the sprigs with pruning-hooks, and take away and cut down the
branches.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> They shall be left together to the fowls
of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall
summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon
them.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> In that time shall the present be brought
to the LORD of hosts of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people
terrible from their beginning hitherto; a nation measured by line and
trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of
the name of the LORD of hosts, the mount Zion.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> The burden of Egypt. Behold, the LORD
rideth upon a swift cloud, and will come into Egypt: and the idols of
Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt
in the midst of it.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And I will set the Egyptians against the
Egyptians: and they shall fight every one against his brother, and every
one against his neighbor; city against city, and kingdom against
kingdom.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the
midst of her, and I will destroy her counsel: and they shall seek to the
idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and
to the wizards.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And the Egyptians will I give over into
the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith
the Lord, the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And the waters shall fail from the sea,
and the rivers shall be wasted and dried up.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And they shall turn the rivers far away;
and the brooks of defense shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and
flags shall wither.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The paper-reeds by the brooks, by the
mouth of the brooks, and every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither,
be driven away, and be no more.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> The fishers also shall mourn, and all
they that cast angle into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread
nets upon the waters shall languish.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> Moreover they that work in fine flax, and
they that weave net-works shall be confounded.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And they shall be broken in the
purposes thereof, all that make sluices and ponds for fish.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Surely the princes of Zoan are fools,
the counsel of the wise counselors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say
ye to Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Where are they? where are thy wise men?
and let them tell thee now, and let them know what the LORD of hosts
hath purposed upon Egypt.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> The princes of Zoan are become fools,
the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even
they that are the support of its tribes.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> The LORD hath mingled a perverse spirit
in the midst of it: and they have caused Egypt to err in every work of
it, as a drunken man staggereth in his vomit.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Neither shall there be any work for
Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may perform.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> In that day shall Egypt be like women:
and it shall be afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of
the LORD of hosts, which he shaketh over it.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And the land of Judah shall be a terror
to Egypt, every one that maketh mention of it shall be afraid in
himself, because of the counsel of the LORD of hosts, which he hath
determined against it.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> In that day shall five cities in the
land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to the LORD of
hosts; one shall be called, The city of destruction.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> In that day shall there be an altar to
the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar at its border
to the LORD.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And it shall be for a sign and for a
witness to the LORD of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry to
the LORD because of the oppressors, and he shall send them a savior, and
a great one, and he shall deliver them.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And the LORD shall be known to Egypt,
and the Egyptians shall know the LORD in that day, and shall do
sacrifice and oblation; yes, they shall vow a vow to the LORD, and
perform it.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And the LORD will smite Egypt: he will
smite and heal it: and they shall return even to the LORD, and he will
be entreated by them, and will heal them.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> In that day shall there be a highway
from Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the
Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> In that day shall Israel be the third
with Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land:

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Whom the LORD of hosts will bless,
saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands,
and Israel my inheritance.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> In the year that Tartan came to Ashdod,
(when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod,
and took it;

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> At the same time spoke the LORD by Isaiah
the son of Amoz, saying, Go, and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins,
and put off thy shoe from thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and
barefoot.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And the LORD said, As my servant Isaiah
hath walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon
Egypt and upon Cush;

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> So shall the king of Assyria lead away
the Egyptians prisoners, and the Cushites captives, young and old, naked
and barefoot, even with their hind-parts uncovered, to the shame of
Egypt.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And they shall be afraid and ashamed of
Cush their expectation, and of Egypt their glory.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And the inhabitant of this isle shall say
in that day, Behold, such is our expectation, whither we flee for help
to be delivered from the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The burden of the desert of the sea. As
whirlwinds in the south pass through; so it cometh from the desert, from
a terrible land.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> A grievous vision is declared to me; the
treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler plundereth. Go
up, O Elam: besiege, O Media; all her sighing have I made to cease.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Therefore are my loins filled with pain:
pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth:
I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing of
it.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted
me: the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear to me.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Prepare the table, watch in the
watch-tower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> For thus hath the Lord said to me, Go,
set a watchman, let him declare what he seeth.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And he saw a chariot with a couple of
horsemen, a chariot of asses, and a chariot of camels; and he hearkened
diligently with much heed:

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And he cried, a lion: My lord, I stand
continually upon the watch-tower in the day time, and I am set in my
ward whole nights.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And behold, here cometh a chariot of men,
with a couple of horsemen. And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen,
is fallen; and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken to the
ground.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> O my threshing, and the corn of my
floor; that which I have heard from the LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, have I declared to you.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me
out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The watchman said, The morning cometh,
and also the night: if ye will inquire, inquire ye: return, come.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> The burden upon Arabia. In the forest
in Arabia shall ye lodge, O ye traveling companies of Dedanim.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> The inhabitants of the land of Tema
brought water to him that was thirsty, they met with their bread him
that fled.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> For they fled from the swords, from the
drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> For thus hath the Lord said to me,
Within a year, according to the years of a hireling, and all the glory
of Kedar shall fail:

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the residue of the number of
archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shall be diminished:
for the LORD God of Israel hath spoken it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> The burden of the valley of vision. What
aileth thee now, that thou hast wholly gone up to the house-tops?

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Thou that art full of stirs, a tumultuous
city, a joyous city: thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor
dead in battle.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> All thy rulers have fled together, they
are bound by the archers: all that are found in thee are bound together,
who have fled from far.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Therefore said I, Look away from me; I
will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the devastation
of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> For it is a day of trouble, and of
treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord GOD of hosts in the valley
of vision, breaking down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And Elam bore the quiver with chariots of
men and horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And it shall come to pass, that thy
choicest valleys shall be full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set
themselves in array at the gate.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And he uncovered the coverings of Judah,
and thou didst look in that day to the armor of the house of the forest.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Ye have seen also the breaches of the
city of David, that they are many: and ye collected the waters of the
lower pool.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And ye have numbered the houses of
Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify the wall.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Ye made also a ditch between the two
walls for the water of the old pool: but ye have not looked to its
maker, neither had respect to him that fashioned it long ago.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And in that day did the Lord GOD of
hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding
with sackcloth:

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And behold joy and gladness, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and
drink; for to-morrow we shall die.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And it was revealed in my ears by the
LORD of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye
die, saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, Go,
repair to this treasurer, even to Shebna, who is over the house, and
say,

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> What hast thou here? and whom hast thou
here, that thou hast hewed thee out a sepulcher here, as he that heweth
him out a sepulcher on high, and that graveth a habitation for himself
in a rock?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Behold, the LORD will carry thee away
with a mighty captivity, and will surely cover thee.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> With violence he will surely turn and
toss thee like a ball into a wide country: there shalt thou die, and
there the chariots of thy glory shall be the shame of thy lord's house.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I will drive thee from thy station,
and from thy state shall he pull thee down.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah:

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And I will clothe him with thy robe,
and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy government
into his hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and to the house of Judah.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And the key of the house of David will
I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he
shall shut, and none shall open.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And I will fasten him as a nail in a
sure place; and he shall be for a glorious throne to his father's house.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And they shall hang upon him all the
glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of
small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of
flagons.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> In that day, saith the LORD of hosts,
shall the nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut
down, and fall; and the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for
the LORD hath spoken it.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of
Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering
in: from the land of Chittim it is revealed to them.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle;
thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that pass over the sea, have
replenished.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And by great waters the seed of Sihor,
the harvest of the river, is her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea
hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor
bring forth children, neither do I nourish young men, nor bring up
virgins.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> As at the report concerning Egypt, so
shall they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye
inhabitants of the isle.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity
is of ancient days? her own feet shall carry her far off to sojourn.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre,
the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traders are the
honorable of the earth?

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> The LORD of hosts hath purposed it, to
stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the
honorable of the earth.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Pass through thy land as a river, O
daughter of Tarshish: there is no more strength.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> He stretched his hand over the sea, he
shook the kingdoms: the LORD hath given a commandment against the
merchant city, to destroy its strong holds.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And he said, Thou shalt no more
rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to
Chittim; there also shalt thou have no rest.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this
people was not, till the Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the
wilderness: they set up its towers, they raised up its palaces; and he
brought it to ruin.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your
strength is laid waste.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that Tyre shall be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one
king: after the end of seventy years shall Tyre sing as a harlot.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Take a harp, go about the city, thou
harlot that hast been forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs,
that thou mayest be remembered.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And it shall come to pass after the end
of seventy years, that the LORD will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to
her hire, and shall commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the
world upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And her merchandise and her hire shall
be holiness to the LORD: it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the LORD, for sufficient
food, and for durable clothing.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Behold, the LORD maketh the earth empty,
and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad
its inhabitants.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And it shall be, as with the people, so
with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the
maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as
with the lender, so with the borrower; as with the taker of interest, so
with the giver of interest to him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> The land shall be utterly emptied, and
utterly spoiled: for the LORD hath spoken this word.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the
world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do
languish.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> The earth also is defiled under its
inhabitants; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the
ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Therefore hath the curse devoured the
earth, and they that dwell in it are desolate: therefore the inhabitants
of the earth are burned, and few men left.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The new wine mourneth, the vine
languisheth, all the merry-hearted do sigh.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise
of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They shall not drink wine with a song;
strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> The city of confusion is broken down:
every house is shut up, that no man may enter.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> There is a crying for wine in the
streets; all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> In the city is left desolation, and the
gate is smitten with destruction.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> When thus it shall be in the midst of
the land among the people, there shall be as the shaking of an
olive-tree, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> They shall lift up their voice, they
shall sing for the majesty of the LORD, they shall cry aloud from the
sea.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Wherefore glorify ye the LORD in the
fires, even the name of the LORD God of Israel in the isles of the sea.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> From the uttermost part of the earth
have we heard songs, even glory to the righteous. But I said, My
leanness, my leanness, woe to me! the treacherous dealers have dealt
treacherously; yes, the treacherous dealers have dealt very
treacherously.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are
upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And it shall come to pass, that he who
fleeth from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that
cometh up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for
the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do
shake.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> The earth is utterly broken down, the
earth is entirely dissolved, the earth is exceedingly moved.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> The earth shall reel to and fro like a
drunkard, and shall be removed like a cottage; and the transgression of
it shall be heavy upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the LORD shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high,
and the kings of the earth upon the earth.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And they shall be gathered, as
prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison,
and after many days shall they be visited.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Then the moon shall be confounded, and
the sun ashamed, when the LORD of hosts shall reign on mount Zion, and
in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> O LORD, thou art my God; I will exalt
thee, I will praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things; thy
counsels of old are faithfulness and truth.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> For thou hast made of a city a heap; of a
fortified city a ruin: a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall
never be built.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Therefore shall the strong people glorify
thee, the city of the terrible nations shall fear thee.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> For thou hast been a defense to the poor,
a defense to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shade
from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against
the wall.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Thou wilt bring down the noise of
strangers, as the heat in a dry place; even the heat with the shade of a
cloud: the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And on this mountain will the LORD of
hosts make to all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the
lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And he will destroy on this mountain the
face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread
over all nations.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> He will swallow up death in victory; and
the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of
his people will he remove from all the earth: for the LORD hath spoken
it.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And it shall be said in that day, Lo,
this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is
the LORD, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> For on this mountain shall the hand of
the LORD rest, and Moab shall be trodden down under him, even as straw
is trodden down for the dunghill.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And he will spread forth his hands in
the midst of them, as he that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to
swim: and he will bring down their pride together with the spoils of
their hands.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And the fortress of the high fort of
thy walls will he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to
the dust.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> In that day shall this song be sung in
the land of Judah; We have a strong city; salvation will God appoint for
walls and bulwarks.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Open ye the gates, that the righteous
nation which keepeth the truth may enter in.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee: because he trusteth in thee.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Trust ye in the LORD for ever: for in the
LORD JEHOVAH is everlasting strength:

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> For he bringeth down them that dwell on
high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the
ground; he bringeth it even to the dust.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> The foot shall tread it down, even the
feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The way of the just is uprightness: thou,
most upright, dost weigh the path of the just.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Yes, in the way of thy judgments, O LORD,
have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to
the remembrance of thee.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> With my soul have I desired thee in the
night; yes, with my spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when
thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Let favor be shown to the wicked, yet
he will not learn righteousness: in the land of uprightness he will deal
unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the LORD.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> LORD, when thy hand is lifted up, they
will not see: but they shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the
people; yes, the fire of thy enemies shall devour them.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> LORD, thou wilt ordain peace for us:
for thou also hast wrought all our works in us.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> O LORD our God, other lords beside thee
have had dominion over us; but by thee only will we make mention of thy
name.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> They are dead, they shall not live;
they are deceased, they shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and
destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thou hast increased the nation, O LORD,
thou hast increased the nation; thou art glorified: thou hadst removed
it far to all the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> LORD, in trouble have they visited
thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> As a woman with child, that draweth
near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs;
so have we been in thy sight, O LORD.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> We have been with child, we have been
in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any
deliverance on the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world
fallen.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Thy dead men shall live, together with
my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust:
for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the
dead.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Come, my people, enter thou into thy
chambers, and shut thy doors about thee; hide thyself as it were for a
little moment until the indignation shall be overpast.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For behold, the LORD cometh out of his
place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the
earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> In that day the LORD with his keen and
great and strong sword will punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even
leviathan that crooked serpent; and he will slay the dragon that is in
the sea.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> In that day sing ye to her, A vineyard of
red wine.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> I the LORD do keep it; I will water it
every moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Fury is not in me: who would set the
briers and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would
burn them together.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Or let him take hold of my strength, that
he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> He shall cause them that descend from
Jacob to take root: Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of
the world with fruit.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Hath he smitten him, as he smote those
that smote him? or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that
are slain by him?

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou
wilt debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east
wind.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> By this therefore shall the iniquity of
Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he
maketh all the stones of the altar as chalk-stones that are beaten
asunder, the groves and images shall not stand up.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Yet the fortified city shall be
desolate, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there
shall the calf feed, and there shall he lie down, and consume its
branches.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> When its boughs are withered, they
shall be broken off: the women come and set them on fire: for it is a
people of no understanding: therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the LORD shall gather from the channel of the river to the stream
of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come who were
ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of
Egypt, and shall worship the LORD on the holy mount at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Woe to the crown of pride, to the
drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower; who are
on the head of the rich valleys of them that are overcome with wine!

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong
one, which as a tempest of hail and a destroying storm, as a flood of
mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to the earth with the hand.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> The crown of pride, the drunkards of
Ephraim shall be trodden under feet.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And the glorious beauty, which is on the
head of the rich valley, shall be a fading flower, and as the early
fruit before the summer; which, when he that looketh upon it, seeth
while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> In that day will the LORD of hosts be for
a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, to the residue of his
people,

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And for a spirit of judgment to him that
sitteth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the battle to
the gate.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> But they also have erred through wine,
and through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet
have erred through strong drink, they are overwhelmed with wine, they
are out of the way through strong drink; they err in vision, they
stumble in judgment.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> For all tables are full of vomit and
filthiness, so that there is no place clean.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom
shall he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the
milk, and drawn from the breasts.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> For precept must be upon precept,
precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and
there a little:

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> For with stammering lips and another
tongue will he speak to this people.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> To whom he said, This is the rest with
which ye may cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing: yet
they would not hear.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> But the word of the LORD was to them,
precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon
line; here a little, and there a little; that they might go, and fall
backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Wherefore hear the word of the LORD, ye
scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Because ye have said, We have made a
covenant with death, and with hell are we in agreement; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not reach us: for we
have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid ourselves:

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD,
Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not
make haste.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Judgment also will I lay to the line,
and righteousness to the plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the
refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-place.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And your covenant with death shall be
disannulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by
it.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> From the time that it goeth forth it
shall take you: for morning by morning shall it pass over, by day and by
night: and it shall be a vexation only to understand the report.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For the bed is shorter than that a man
can stretch himself on it: and the covering narrower than that he can
wrap himself in it.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For the LORD will rise as on mount
Perazim, he will be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his
work, his strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest
your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord GOD of hosts a
consumption, even determined upon the whole earth.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> Give ye ear, and hear my voice;
hearken, and hear my speech.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Doth the plowman plow all day to sow?
doth he open and break the clods of his ground?

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> When he hath made even the face of it,
doth he not cast abroad the vetches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in
the principal wheat, and the appointed barley, and the rye in their
place?

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> For his God doth instruct him to
discretion, and doth teach him.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For the vetches are not threshed with a
threshing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon the
cummin; but the vetches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with
a rod.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Bread-corn is bruised; because he will
not always be threshing it, nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor
bruise it with his horsemen.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> This also cometh forth from the LORD of
hosts, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in operation.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where
David dwelt! add ye year to year; let them kill sacrifices.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Yet I will distress Ariel, and there
shall be heaviness and sorrow; and it shall be to me as Ariel.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And I will encamp against thee round
about, and will lay siege against thee with a mount, and I will raise
forts against thee.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt
speak out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust,
and thy voice shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of
the ground, and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Moreover, the multitude of thy strangers
shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones shall
be as chaff that passeth away: yes, it shall be at an instant suddenly.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Thou shalt be visited by the LORD of
hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and
tempest, and the flame of devouring fire.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And the multitude of all the nations that
fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her munition,
and that distress her, shall be as a dream of a night-vision.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> It shall even be as when a hungry man
dreameth, and behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty:
or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold, he drinketh; but he
awaketh, and behold, he is faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall
the multitude of all the nations be, that fight against mount Zion.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out,
and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with
strong drink.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> For the LORD hath poured out upon you
the spirit of deep sleep, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and
your rulers, the seers hath he covered.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And the vision of all is become to you
as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is
learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it
is sealed:

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And the book is delivered to him that
is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee: and he saith, I am not
learned.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as
this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor
me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear towards me
is taught by the precept of men:

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Therefore behold, I will proceed to do
a marvelous work among this people, even an astonishing work and a
wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Woe to them that seek deep to hide
their counsel from the LORD, and their works are in the dark, and they
say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> Surely your turning of things upside
down shall be esteemed as the potter's clay: for shall the work say of
him that made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him
that framed it, He had no understanding?

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Is it not yet a very little while, and
Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field
shall be esteemed as a forest?

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And in that day shall the deaf hear the
words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity,
and out of darkness.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> The meek also shall increase their joy
in the LORD, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of
Israel.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> For the terrible one is brought to
naught, and the scoffer is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are
cut off:

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> That make a man an offender for a word,
and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the
just for a thing of naught.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD, who
redeemed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be
ashamed, neither shall his face now become pale.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> But when he seeth his children, the
work of my hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and
sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> They also that erred in spirit shall
come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Woe to the rebellious children, saith the
LORD, that take counsel, but not from me; and that cover with a
covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add sin to sin:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> That walk to go down into Egypt, and have
not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of
Pharaoh, and to trust in the shade of Egypt!

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh
be your shame, and the trust in the shade of Egypt your confusion.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> For his princes were at Zoan, and his
embassadors came to Hanes.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> They were all ashamed of a people that
could not profit them, nor be a help nor profit, but a shame, and also a
reproach.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> The burden of the beasts of the south:
into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the young and the
old lion, the viper and flying serpent, they will carry their riches
upon the shoulders of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches
of camels, to a people that shall not profit them.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> For the Egyptian shall help in vain, and
to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is
to sit still.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Now go, write it before them in a table,
and note it in a book, that it may be for the time to come for ever and
ever:

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> That this is a rebellious people, lying
children, children that will not hear the law of the LORD:

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Who say to the seers, See not; and to
the prophets, Prophesy not to us right things, speak to us smooth
things, prophesy deceits:

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Withdraw from the way, turn aside from
the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of
Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and
perverseness, and lean upon it:

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Therefore this iniquity shall be to you
as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking
cometh suddenly at an instant.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And he shall break it as the breaking
of the potter's vessel that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so
that there shall not be found in the bursting of it a piece to take fire
from the hearth, or to take water out of the pit.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD, the Holy
One of Israel; In returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and
in confidence shall be your strength: and ye would not.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> But ye said, No; for we will flee upon
horses; therefore shall ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift;
therefore shall they that pursue you be swift.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> One thousand shall flee at the rebuke
of one; at the rebuke of five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon
upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on a hill.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> And therefore will the LORD wait, that
he may be gracious to you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may
have mercy upon you: for the LORD is a God of judgment: blessed are all
they that wait for him.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> For the people shall dwell in Zion at
Jerusalem: thou shalt weep no more: he will be very gracious to thee at
the voice of thy cry; when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And though the Lord shall give you the
bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy
teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thy eyes shall see thy
teachers:

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And thy ears shall hear a word behind
thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right
hand, and when ye turn to the left.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Ye shall defile also the covering of
thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of
gold: thou shalt cast them away as a polluted cloth; thou shalt say to
it, Be gone from me.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Then shall he give the rain of thy
seed, with which thou shalt sow the ground; and bread of the increase of
the earth, and it shall be fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy
cattle feed in large pastures.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> The oxen likewise and the young asses
that plow the ground shall eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed
with the shovel and with the fan.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And there shall be upon every high
mountain, and upon every high hill, rivers and streams of waters in the
day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> Moreover the light of the moon shall be
as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be seven-fold,
as the light of seven days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the
breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> Behold, the name of the LORD cometh
from far, burning with his anger, and the burden of it is heavy: his
lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire:

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> And his breath, as an overflowing
stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the nations with
the sieve of vanity: and there shall be a bridle in the jaws of the
people, causing them to err.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> Ye shall have a song, as in the night,
when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth
with a pipe to come upon the mountain of the LORD, to the mighty One of
Israel.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> And the LORD shall cause his glorious
voice to be heard, and shall show the lighting down of his arm, with the
indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with
scattering, and tempest, and hailstones.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> For through the voice of the LORD shall
the Assyrian be beaten down, who smote with a rod.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> And in every place where the grounded
staff shall pass, which the LORD shall lay upon him, it shall be with
tabrets and harps: and in battles of shaking will he fight with it.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> For Tophet is ordained of old; yes, for
the king it is prepared; he hath made it deep and large: the pile of it
is fire and much wood; the breath of the LORD, like a stream of
brimstone, doth kindle it.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Woe to them that go down to Egypt for
help; and rely on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many;
and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they look not to the
Holy One of Israel, neither seek the LORD!

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil,
and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of
the evil-doers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Now the Egyptians are men, and not God;
and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the LORD shall stretch out
his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is helped shall
fall down, and they all shall fail together.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> For thus hath the LORD spoken to me, As
the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of
shepherds is called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their
voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so will the LORD of
hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> As birds flying, so will the LORD of
hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he will deliver it; and passing
over he will preserve it.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Turn ye to him from whom the children of
Israel have deeply revolted.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> For in that day every man shall cast away
his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have
made to you for a sin.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Then shall the Assyrian fall with the
sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shall
devour him: but he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall be
discomfited.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And he shall pass over to his strong hold
for fear, and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the LORD,
whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Behold, a king shall reign in
righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And a man shall be as a hiding-place from
the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as streams of water in a dry
place, as the shade of a great rock in a weary land.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And the eyes of them that see shall not
be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> The heart also of the rash shall
understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to
speak plainly.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> The vile person shall be no more called
liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> For the vile person will speak villainy,
and his heart will work iniquity, to practice hypocrisy, and to utter
error against the LORD, to make empty the soul of the hungry; and he
will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> The instruments also of the churl are
evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words,
even when the needy speaketh right.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But the liberal deviseth liberal things;
and by liberal things shall he stand.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear
my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear to my speech.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Many days and years shall ye be
troubled, ye careless women: for the vintage shall fail, the gathering
shall not come.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be
troubled, ye careless ones: strip ye, and make you bare, and gird
sackcloth upon your loins.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> They shall lament for the breasts, for
the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Upon the land of my people shall come
up thorns and briers; also, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous
city:

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Because the palaces shall be forsaken;
the multitude of the city shall be left; the forts and towers shall be
for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses, a pasture of flocks;

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Until the spirit shall be poured upon
us from on high, and the wilderness shall be a fruitful field, and the
fruitful field shall be counted for a forest.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> Then judgment shall dwell in the
wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And the work of righteousness shall be
peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for
ever.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> And my people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet
resting-places;

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> When it shall hail, coming down on the
forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Blessed are ye that sow beside all
waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Woe to thee that layest waste, and thou
wast not laid waste; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not
treacherously with thee! when thou shalt cease to lay waste, thou shalt
be wasted; and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they
shall deal treacherously with thee.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> O LORD, be gracious to us; we have waited
for thee: be thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the
time of trouble.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> At the noise of the tumult the people
fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scattered.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And your spoil shall be gathered like the
gathering of the caterpillar: as the running to and fro of locusts shall
he run upon them.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> The LORD is exalted; for he dwelleth on
high: he hath filled Zion with judgment and righteousness.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And wisdom and knowledge shall be the
stability of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the LORD
is his treasure.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Behold, their valiant ones shall cry
without: the embassadors of peace shall weep bitterly.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> The highways lie waste, the way-faring
man ceaseth: he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities,
he regardeth no man.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> The earth mourneth and languisheth:
Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and
Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Now will I rise, saith the LORD; now
will I be exalted; now will I lift up myself.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring
forth stubble: your breath, as fire, shall devour you.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And the people shall be as the burnings
of lime: as thorns cut up shall they be burned in the fire.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Ye that are far off, hear what I have
done; and ye that are near, acknowledge my might.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> The sinners in Zion are afraid;
fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with
the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> He that walketh righteously, and
speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that
shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from
hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil;

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> He shall dwell on high: his place of
defense shall be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him; his
waters shall be sure.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Thy eyes shall see the king in his
beauty: they shall behold the land that is very far off.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Thy heart shall meditate terror. Where
is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the
towers?

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a
people of deeper speech than thou canst perceive; of a stammering
tongue, that thou canst not understand.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Look upon Zion, the city of our
solemnities: thy eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a
tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of its stakes shall
ever be removed, neither shall any of its cords be broken.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> But there the glorious LORD will be to
us a place of broad rivers and streams; in which shall go no galley with
oars, neither shall gallant ship pass through it.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is
our lawgiver, the LORD is our king; he will save us.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Thy tacklings are loosed; they could
not well strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail: then is
the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> And the inhabitants shall not say, I am
sick: the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Come near, ye nations, to hear; and
hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is in it; the
world, and all things that spring from it.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> For the indignation of the LORD is upon
all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly
destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Their slain also shall be cast out, and
their ill smell shall come up from their carcases, and the mountains
shall be melted with their blood.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And all the host of heaven shall be
dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all
their hosts shall fall down, as the leaf falleth from the vine, and as a
falling fig from the fig-tree.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For my sword shall be bathed in heaven:
behold, it shall come down upon Edom, and upon the people of my curse,
to judgment.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> The sword of the LORD is filled with
blood, it is made fat with fatness, and with the blood of lambs and
goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the LORD hath a
sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And the unicorns shall come down with
them, and the bullocks with the bulls; and their land shall be drenched
with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> For it is the day of the LORD'S
vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the controversy of Zion.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And its streams shall be turned into
pitch, and its dust into brimstone, and its land shall become burning
pitch.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> It shall not be quenched night nor day;
the smoke of it shall ascend for ever: from generation to generation it
shall lie waste; none shall pass through it for ever and ever.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> But the cormorant and the bittern shall
possess it; the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall
stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> They shall call her nobles to the
kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And thorns shall come up in her
palaces, nettles and brambles in her fortresses, and it shall be a
habitation of dragons, and a court for owls.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> The wild beasts of the desert shall
also meet with the wild beasts of the isle, and the satyr shall cry to
his fellow; the screech-owl also shall rest there, and find for herself
a place of rest.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> There shall the great owl make her
nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shall the
vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Seek ye out of the book of the LORD,
and read: no one of these shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my
mouth it hath commanded, and his spirit it hath gathered them.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And he hath cast the lot for them, and
his hand hath divided it to them by line: they shall possess it for
ever, from generation to generation shall they dwell therein.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> The wilderness and the solitary place
shall be glad for them; and the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the
rose.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice,
even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given to it,
the excellence of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the
LORD, and the excellence of our God.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm
the feeble knees.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Say to them that are of a fearful heart,
Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God
with a recompense; he will come and save you.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Then the eyes of the blind shall be
opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> Then shall the lame man leap as a hart,
and the tongue of the dumb shall sing: for in the wilderness shall
waters break out, and streams in the desert.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And the parched ground shall become a
pool, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of
dragons, where each lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And a highway shall be there, and a way,
and it shall be called, The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass
over it; but it shall be for those: the way-faring men, though fools,
shall not err therein.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous
beast shall go up thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed
shall walk there:

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And the ransomed of the LORD shall
return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their
heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Now it came to pass in the fourteenth
year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against
all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh
from Lachish to Jerusalem against king Hezekiah with a great army. And
he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's
field.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> Then came forth to him Eliakim, Hilkiah's
son, who was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's
son, the recorder.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And Rabshakeh said to them, Say ye now to
Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Assyria, What
confidence is this in which thou trustest?

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> I say, sayest thou (but they are but vain
words) I have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust,
that thou rebellest against me?

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Lo, thou trustest in the staff of this
broken reed, on Egypt; on which if a man lean, it will enter his hand,
and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in him.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> But if thou shalt say to me, We trust in
the LORD our God: is it not he, whose high places and whose altars
Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall
worship before this altar?

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee,
to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand
horses, if thou canst on thy part set riders upon them.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> How then wilt thou turn away the face of
one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on
Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And am I now come up without the LORD
against this land to destroy it? the LORD said to me, Go up against this
land, and destroy it.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah
to Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian
language; for we understand it: and speak not to us in the Jew's
language, in the ears of the people that are on the wall.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent
me to thy master and to thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me
to the men that sit upon the wall, that they may devour their vilest
excretions with you?

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a
loud voice in the Jew's language, and said, Hear ye the words of the
great king, the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah
deceive you: for he will not be able to deliver you.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in
the LORD, saying, the LORD will surely deliver us: this city shall not
be delivered into the hand of the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith
the king of Assyria, Make an agreement with me by a present, and come
out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his
fig-tree, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern;

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Until I come and take you away to a
land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and
vineyards.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you,
saying, The LORD will deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations
delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad?
where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of
my hand?

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Who are they among all the gods of
these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the
LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> But they held their peace, and answered
him not a word: for the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Then came Eliakim the son of Hilkiah,
that was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of
Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him
the words of Rabshakeh.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah
heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth,
and went into the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he sent Eliakim, who was over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests covered
with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And they said to him, Thus saith
Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy:
for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to
bring forth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> It may be the LORD thy God will hear the
words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master hath sent to
reproach the living God, and will reprove the words which the LORD thy
God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is
left.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> So the servants of king Hezekiah came to
Isaiah.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye
say to your master, Thus saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words that
thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have
blasphemed me.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and
he shall hear a rumor, and return to his own land; and I will cause him
to fall by the sword in his own land.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king
of Assyria warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he had departed
from Lachish.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And he heard it said concerning Tirhakah
king of Cush, He is come forth to make war with thee. And when he heard
it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of
Judah, saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest, deceive thee,
saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
Assyria.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Behold, thou hast heard what the kings
of Assyria have done to all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt
thou be delivered?

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Have the gods of the nations delivered
them which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph,
and the children of Eden who were in Telassar?

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Where is the king of Hamath, and the
king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah?

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And Hezekiah received the letter from
the hand of the messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up to the
house of the LORD, and spread it before the LORD.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And Hezekiah prayed to the LORD,
saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, that
dwellest between the cherubim, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all
the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Incline thy ear, O LORD, and hear; open
thy eyes, O LORD, and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, who
hath sent to reproach the living God.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria
have laid waste all the nations, and their countries,

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> And have cast their gods into the fire:
for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone:
therefore they have destroyed them.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us
from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art
the LORD, even thou only.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to
Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Whereas thou hast
prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> This is the word which the LORD hath
spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath despised
thee, and derided thee; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head
at thee.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> Whom hast thou reproached and
blasphemed; and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted thy
eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> By thy servants hast thou reproached
the Lord, and hast said, By the multitude of my chariots have I come up
to the hight of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut
down its tall cedars, and its choice fir-trees: and I will enter into
the hight of its border, and the forest of its Carmel.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> I have digged, and drank water; and
with the sole of my feet have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged
places.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> Hast thou not heard long ago, how I
have done it; and of ancient times, that I have formed it? now have I
brought it to pass, that thou shouldst be to lay waste fortified cities
into ruinous heaps.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> Therefore their inhabitants were of
small power, they were dismayed and confounded: they were as the grass
of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the house-tops, and
as corn blasted before it is grown up.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> But I know thy abode, and thy going
out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> Because thy rage against me, and thy
tumult, is come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy
nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by
which thou camest.

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> And this shall be a sign to thee, Ye
shall eat this year such as groweth of itself; and the second year that
which springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and
plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> And the remnant that hath escaped of
the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit
upward:

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a
remnant, and they that escape from mount Zion: the zeal of the LORD of
hosts will do this.

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD
concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come into this city, nor
shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a mound
against it.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> By the way that he came, by the same
shall he return, and shall not come into this city, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_37:35">37:35</span> For I will defend this city, to save it
for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake.

<span id="an_37:36">37:36</span> Then the angel of the LORD went forth,
and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty five
thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were
all dead corpses.

<span id="an_37:37">37:37</span> So Sennacherib king of Assyria
departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.

<span id="an_37:38">37:38</span> And it came to pass, as he was
worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and
Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the
land of Armenia: and Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> In those days was Hezekiah sick with a
mortal disease. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him, and
said to him, Thus saith the LORD, Set thy house in order: for thou shalt
die, and not live.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Then Hezekiah turned his face towards the
wall, and prayed to the LORD,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And said, Remember now, O LORD, I beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept
bitterly.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Then came the word of the LORD to Isaiah,
saying,

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Go and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the
LORD, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen
thy tears: behold, I will add to thy days fifteen years.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And I will deliver thee and this city
from the hand of the king of Assyria: and I will defend this city.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And this shall be a sign to thee from the
LORD, that the LORD will do this thing that he hath spoken;

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Behold, I will bring again the shadow of
the degrees, which hath gone down on the sun-dial of Ahaz ten degrees
backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it had gone
down.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah,
when he had been sick, and had recovered from his sickness:

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> I said in the cutting off of my days, I
shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my
years.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> I said, I shall not see the LORD, even
the LORD, in the land of the living: I shall behold man no more with the
inhabitants of the world.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> My age hath departed, and is removed
from me as a shepherd's tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he
will cut me off with pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou
make an end of me.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> I reckoned till morning, that, as a
lion, so will he break all my bones: from day even to night wilt thou
make an end of me.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Like a crane or a swallow, so I
chattered: I mourned as a dove: my eyes fail with looking upward: O
LORD, I am oppressed; undertake for me.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> What shall I say? he hath both spoken
to me, and himself hath done it: I shall go softly all my years in the
bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> O Lord, by these things men live, and
in all these things is the life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me,
and make me to live.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Behold, for peace I had great
bitterness: but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit
of corruption: for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> For the grave cannot praise thee, death
can not celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope for
thy truth.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> The living, the living, he shall praise
thee, as I do this day: the father to the children shall make known thy
truth.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> The LORD was ready to save me:
therefore we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments all the days
of our life in the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> For Isaiah had said, Let them take a
lump of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil, and he will
recover.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Hezekiah also had said, What is the
sign that I shall go up to the house of the LORD?

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> At that time Merodach-baladan, the son of
Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for he
had heard that he had been sick, and had recovered.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And Hezekiah was glad of them, and showed
them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the
spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his armor, and
all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor
in all his dominion, that Hezekiah did not show them.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> Then came Isaiah the prophet to king
Hezekiah, and said to him, What said these men? and from whence came
they to thee? and Hezekiah said, They have come to me from a far
country, even from Babylon.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Then said he, What have they seen in thy
house? And Hezekiah answered, All that is in my house have they seen:
there is nothing among my treasures that I have not showed them.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the
word of the LORD of hosts:

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Behold, the days come, that all that is
in thy house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until
this day, shall be carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the
LORD.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And of thy sons that shall issue from
thee, which thou shalt beget, shall they take away; and they shall be
eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the
word of the LORD which thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there
shall be peace and truth in my days.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith
your God.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and
cry to her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is
pardoned: for she hath received from the LORD'S hand double for all her
sins.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> The voice of him that crieth in the
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the LORD, make straight in the desert
a highway for our God.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Every valley shall be exalted, and every
mountain and hill shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made
straight, and the rough places plain.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And the glory of the LORD shall be
revealed, and all flesh together shall see it: for the mouth of the LORD
hath spoken it.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> The voice said, Cry. And he said, What
shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all its goodliness is as the flower
of the field:

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> The grass withereth, the flower fadeth:
because the spirit of the LORD bloweth upon it: surely the people is
grass.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> The grass withereth, the flower fadeth:
but the word of our God shall shall stand forever.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> O Zion, that bringest good tidings, go up
upon the high mountain: O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up
thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say to the cities of
Judah, Behold your God!

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Behold, the Lord GOD will come with
strong hand, and his arm will rule for him: behold, his reward is with
him, and his work before him.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> He will feed his flock like a shepherd:
he will gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and
will gently lead those that are with young.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand, and measured heaven with the span, and comprehended
the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales,
and the hills in a balance?

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Who hath directed the Spirit of the
LORD, or being his counselor hath taught him?

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> With whom took he counsel, and who
instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him
knowledge, and showed to him the way of understanding?

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> Behold, the nations are as a drop of a
bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance: behold, he
taketh up the isles as a very little thing.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn,
nor the beasts of it sufficient for a burnt-offering.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> All nations before him are as nothing;
and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> To whom then will ye liken God? or what
likeness will ye compare to him?

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> The workman melteth a graven image, and
the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> He that is so impoverished that he hath
no oblation chooseth a tree that will not rot; he seeketh for himself a
skillful workman to prepare a graven image that shall not be moved.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> Have ye not known? have ye not heard?
hath it not been told you from the beginning? have ye not understood
from the foundations of the earth?

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> It is he that sitteth upon the circle
of the earth, and its inhabitants are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth
out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell
in:

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> That bringeth the princes to nothing;
he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> Yes, they shall not be planted; yes,
they shall not be sown: yes, their stock shall not take root in the
earth: and he shall also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the
whirlwind shall take them away as stubble.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> To whom then will ye liken me, or shall
I be equaled? saith the Holy One.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> Lift up your eyes on high, and behold
who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number:
he calleth them all by names, by the greatness of his might, for that he
is strong in power; not one faileth.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest,
O Israel, My way is hid from the LORD, and my judgment is passed over by
my God?

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Hast thou not known? hast thou not
heard, that the everlasting God, the LORD, the Creator of the ends of
the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his
understanding.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> He giveth power to the faint; and to
them that have no might he increaseth strength.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> Even the youths shall faint and be
weary, and the young men shall utterly fall:

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> But they that wait upon the LORD shall
renew their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they
shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Keep silence before me, O isles; and let
the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them
speak: let us come near together to judgment.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Who raised up the righteous man from the
east, called him to his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him
rule over kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven
stubble to his bow.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> He pursued them, and passed safely; even
by the way that he had not gone with his feet.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Who hath wrought and done it, calling the
generations from the beginning? I the LORD, the first, and with the
last; I am he.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of
the earth were afraid, drew near, and came.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> They helped every one his neighbor; and
every one said to his brother, Be of good courage.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> So the carpenter encouraged the
goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the
anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with
nails, that it should not be moved.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob
whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Thou whom I have taken from the ends of
the earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof, and said to thee,
Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be
not dismayed; for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yes, I will help
thee; yes, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Behold, all they that were incensed
against thee shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing;
and they that contend with thee shall perish.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not
find them, even them that contended with thee: they that war against
thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> For I the LORD thy God will hold thy
right hand, saying to thee, Fear not; I will help thee.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men
of Israel; I will help thee, saith the LORD, and thy Redeemer, the Holy
One of Israel.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> Behold, I will make thee a new sharp
threshing instrument having teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and
beat them small, and shalt make the hills as chaff.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall
carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt
rejoice in the LORD, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> When the poor and needy seek water, and
there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD will hear
them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> I will open rivers in high places, and
fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool
of water, and the dry land springs of water.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> I will plant in the wilderness the
cedar, the shittah-tree, and the myrtle, and the oil-tree; I will set in
the desert the fir-tree, the pine, and the box-tree together:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> That they may see, and know, and
consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done
this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> Produce your cause, saith the LORD;
bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> Let them bring them forth, and show us
what shall happen: let them show the former things, what they are that
we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or declare to us
things to come.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> Show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yes, do good, or do evil,
that we may be dismayed, and behold it together.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> Behold, ye are of nothing, and your
work of naught: an abomination is he that chooseth you.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> I have raised up one from the north,
and he shall come: from the rising of the sun shall he call upon my
name: and he shall come upon princes as upon mortar, and as the potter
treadeth clay.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> Who hath declared from the beginning,
that we may know? and before time, that we may say, He is righteous?
verily, there is none that showeth, verily, there is none that
declareth, verily, there is none that heareth your words.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> The first shall say to Zion, Behold,
behold them: and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good
tidings.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> For I beheld, and there was no man;
even among them, and there was no counselor, that, when I asked of them,
could answer a word.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Behold, they are all vanity, their
works are nothing: their molten images are wind and confusion.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Behold my servant, whom I uphold; my
elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he
shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause
his voice to be heard in the street.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> A bruised reed shall he not break, and
the smoking flax shall he not quench: he shall bring forth judgment to
truth.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> He shall not fail nor be discouraged,
till he hath set judgment in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his
law.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Thus saith God the LORD, he that created
the heavens, and expanded them; he that spread forth the earth, and that
which it produceth; he that giveth breath to the people upon it, and
spirit to them that walk therein.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> I the LORD have called thee in
righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee
for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles;

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> To open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
prison-house.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> I am the LORD: that is my name: and my
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> Behold, the former things have come to
pass, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I tell you
of them.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> Sing to the LORD a new song, and his
praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all
that is in it; the isles, and their inhabitants.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Let the wilderness and its cities lift
up their voice, the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the
inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the
mountains.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> Let them give glory to the LORD, and
declare his praise in the isles.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> The LORD will go forth as a mighty man,
he will stir up jealousy like a man of war: he will cry, yes, roar; he
will prevail against his enemies.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> I have long time held my peace; I have
been still, and restrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing
woman; I will destroy and devour at once.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> I will make waste mountains and hills,
and dry up all their herbs; and I will make the rivers to be islands,
and I will dry up the pools.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And I will bring the blind by a way
that they knew not; I will lead them in paths that they have not known:
I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight.
These things will I do for them, and not forsake them.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> They shall be turned back, they shall
be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten
images, Ye are our gods.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that
ye may see.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf,
as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is perfect, and
blind as the LORD'S servant?

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> Seeing many things, but thou observest
not; opening the ears, but he heareth not.

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> The LORD is well pleased for his
righteousness' sake; he will magnify the law, and make it honorable.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> But this is a people robbed and
pillaged; they are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in
prison-houses; they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil,
and none saith, Restore.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> Who among you will give ear to this?
who will hearken, and hear for the time to come?

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel
to the robbers? did not the LORD, he against whom we have sinned? for
they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient to his law.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> Therefore he hath poured upon him the
fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and it hath set him on
fire around, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to
heart.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> But now thus saith the LORD that created
thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have
redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee:
when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> For I am the LORD thy God, the Holy One
of Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Cush and Seba for
thee.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> Since thou hast been precious in my
sight, thou hast been honorable, and I have loved thee: therefore will I
give men for thee, and people for thy life.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> Fear not: for I am with thee: I will
bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west;

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> I will say to the north, Give up; and to
the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from
the ends of the earth;

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> Even every one that is called by my name:
for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; verily, I have
made him.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> Bring forth the blind people that have
eyes, and the deaf that have ears.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Let all the nations be collected, and let
the people be assembled: who among them can declare this, and show us
former things? let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be
justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD,
and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and
understand that I am he: before me there was no god formed, neither
shall there be after me.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> I, even I, am the LORD; and besides me
there is no savior.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> I have declared, and have saved, and I
have shown, when there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my
witnesses, saith the LORD, that I am God.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> Yes, before the day was, I am he; and
there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who
shall hinder it?

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> Thus saith the LORD, your Redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have
brought down all their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the
ships.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> I am the LORD, your Holy One, the
Creator of Israel, your King.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> Thus saith the LORD, who maketh a way
in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters;

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> Who bringeth forth the chariot and
horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they shall
not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> Remember ye not the former things,
neither consider the things of old.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> Behold, I will do a new thing; now it
shall spring forth; shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the
wilderness, and rivers in the desert.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> The beast of the field shall honor me,
the dragons and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and
rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> This people have I formed for myself;
they shall show forth my praise.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> But thou hast not called upon me, O
Jacob; but thou hast been weary of me, O Israel.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> Thou hast not brought me the small
cattle of thy burnt-offerings; neither hast thou honored me with thy
sacrifices. I have not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor
wearied thee with incense.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with
money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but
thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thy
iniquities.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Put me in remembrance: let us plead
together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> Thy first father hath sinned, and thy
teachers have transgressed against me.

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> Therefore I have profaned the princes
of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to
reproaches.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and
Israel, whom I have chosen:

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and
formed thee from the womb, who will help thee: Fear not, O Jacob, my
servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> For I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring:

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And they shall spring up as among the
grass, as willows by the watercourses.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> One shall say, I am the LORD'S; and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall
subscribe with his hand to the LORD, and surname himself by the name of
Israel.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel,
and his redeemer the LORD of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last;
and besides me there is no God.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> And who, as I, shall call, and shall
declare it, and set it in order for me, since I appointed the ancient
people? and the things that are coming, and shall come, let them show to
them.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not
I told thee from that time, and have declared it? ye are even my
witnesses. Is there a God besides me? verily there is no God; I know not
any.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> They that make a graven image are all of
them vanity; and their delectable things shall not profit; and they are
their own witnesses; they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> Who hath formed a god, or cast a graven
image that is profitable for nothing?

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Behold, all his fellows shall be
ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be assembled,
let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed
together.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> The smith with the tongs both worketh
in the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the
strength of his arms: yes, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he
drinketh no water, and is faint.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> The carpenter stretcheth out his rule;
he marketh it out with a line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh
it out with the compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man,
according to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> He heweth down cedars for himself, and
taketh the cypress and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among
the trees of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish
it.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> Then shall it be for a man to burn: for
he will take of it, and warm himself; indeed he kindleth it, and baketh
bread; yes, he maketh a god, and worshipeth it; he maketh it a graven
image, and falleth down to it.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> He burneth part of it in the fire; with
part of it he eateth flesh; he roasteth meat, and is satisfied: yes, he
warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire:

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> And the residue of it he maketh a god,
even his graven image: he falleth down to it, and worshipeth it, and
prayeth to it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They have not known nor understood: for
he hath shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that
they cannot understand.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> And none considereth in his heart,
neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part
of it in the fire; I have also baked bread upon its coals; I have
roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shall I make the residue of it an
abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> He feedeth on ashes: a deceived heart
hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is
there not a lie in my right hand?

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for
thou art my servant: I have formed thee; thou art my servant: O Israel,
thou shalt not be forgotten by me.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> I have blotted out, as a thick cloud,
thy transgressions, and as a cloud, thy sins: return to me; for I have
redeemed thee.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> Sing, O ye heavens; for the LORD hath
done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing,
ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein: for the LORD hath
redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> Thus saith the LORD thy Redeemer, and
he that formed thee from the womb, I am the LORD that maketh all things;
that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth
by myself:

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> That frustrateth the tokens of the
liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and
maketh their knowledge foolish;

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> That confirmeth the word of his
servant, and performeth the counsel of his messengers; that saith to
Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall
be built, and I will raise up her decayed places:

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> That saith to the deep, Be dry, and I
will dry up thy rivers:

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd,
and he shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to
Cyrus, whose right hand I have held to subdue nations before him; and I
will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two-leaved gates,
and the gates shall not be shut;

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> I will go before thee, and make the
crooked places straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and
cut asunder the bars of iron:

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And I will give thee the treasures of
darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that
I, the LORD, who call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel
my elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee,
though thou hast not known me:

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> I am the LORD, and there is none else,
there is no God besides me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known
me:

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> That they may know from the rising of the
sun, and from the west, that there is none besides me. I am the LORD,
and there is none else.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> I form the light, and create darkness: I
make peace, and create evil: I the LORD do all these things.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and
let the skies pour down righteousness: let the earth open, and let them
bring forth salvation, and let righteousness spring up together; I the
LORD have created it.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Woe to him that contendeth with his
Maker! Let the potsherd contend with the potsherds of the earth. Shall
the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work,
He hath no hands?

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Woe to him that saith to his father,
What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth?

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> Thus saith the LORD, the Holy One of
Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and
concerning the work of my hands command ye me.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> I have made the earth, and created man
upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their
host have I commanded.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> I have raised him up in righteousness,
and I will direct all his ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let
go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> Thus saith the LORD, The labor of
Egypt, and merchandise of Cush and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall
come over to thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee;
in chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down to thee, they
shall make supplication to thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and
there is none else, there is no God.

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> Verily thou art a God that hidest
thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> They shall be ashamed, and also
confounded, all of them: they shall go to confusion together that are
makers of idols.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> But Israel shall be saved in the LORD
with an everlasting salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded
world without end.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> For thus saith the LORD that created
the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath
established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited:
I am the LORD; and there is none else.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> I have not spoken in secret, in a dark
place of the earth: I have not said to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in
vain: I the LORD speak righteousness, I declare things that are right.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> Assemble yourselves and come; draw near
together, ye that have escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge
that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray to a god that
cannot save.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> Tell ye, and bring them near; yes, let
them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time?
who hath told it from that time? have not I the LORD? and there is no
God else besides me; a just God and a Savior; there is none besides me.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> Look to me, and be ye saved, all the
ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> I have sworn by myself, the word is
gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That to me
every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> Surely, shall one say, in the LORD have
I righteousness and strength: even to him shall men come; and all that
are incensed against him shall be ashamed.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In the LORD shall all the seed of
Israel be justified, and shall glory.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their
idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle: your loads were heavy;
they were a burden to the weary beast.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> They stoop, they bow down together; they
could not deliver the burden, but themselves have gone into captivity.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Hearken to me, O house of Jacob, and all
the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from the
birth, which are carried from the womb:

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> And even to your old age I am he; and
even to hoary hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even
I will carry, and will deliver you.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> To whom will ye liken me, and make me
equal, and compare me, that we may be like?

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> They lavish gold out of the bag, and
weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a
god: they fall down, yes, they worship.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> They bear him upon the shoulder, they
carry him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place
shall he not remove: yes, one shall cry to him, yet he cannot answer,
nor save him out of his trouble.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> Remember this, and show yourselves men:
bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Remember the former things of old: for I
am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me,

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> Declaring the end from the beginning,
and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure:

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> Calling a ravenous bird from the east,
the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yes, I have spoken
it, I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also
perform it.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> Hearken to me, ye stout-hearted, that
are far from righteousness:

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> I bring near my righteousness; it shall
not be far off, and my salvation shall not delay: and I will place
salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin
daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter
of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Take the millstones, and grind meal:
uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the
rivers.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yes,
thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee
as a man.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> As for our Redeemer, the LORD of hosts is
his name, the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Sit thou silent, and get thee into
darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called,
The lady of kingdoms.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> I was wroth with my people, I have
polluted my inheritance, and given them into thy hand: thou didst show
them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for
ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither
didst remember the latter end of it.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> Therefore hear now this, thou that art
given to pleasures, that dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thy heart,
I am, and none else besides me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither
shall I know the loss of children:

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> But these two things shall come to thee
in a moment in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall
come upon thee in their perfection, for the multitude of thy sorceries,
and for the great abundance of thy enchantments.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> For thou hast trusted in thy
wickedness: thou hast said, None seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge,
it hath perverted thee; and thou hast said in thy heart, I am, and none
else besides me.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> Therefore shall evil come upon thee;
thou shalt not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon
thee; thou shalt not be able to put it off: and desolation shall come
upon thee suddenly, which thou shalt not know.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> Stand now with thy enchantments, and
with the multitude of thy sorceries, in which thou hast labored from thy
youth; if thou shalt be able to profit, if thou mayest prevail.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Thou art wearied in the multitude of
thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly
prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall
come upon thee.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> Behold, they shall be as stubble; the
fire shall burn them; they shall not deliver themselves from the power
of the flame: there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit
before it.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> Thus shall they be to thee with whom
thou hast labored, even thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander
every one to his quarter; none shall save thee.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, who are
called by the name of Israel, and have come forth out of the waters of
Judah, who swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention of the God of
Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> For they call themselves of the holy
city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; The LORD of hosts is
his name.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> I have declared the former things from
the beginning; and they went forth from my mouth, and I showed them; I
did them suddenly, and they came to pass.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Because I knew that thou art obstinate,
and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass;

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> I have even from the beginning declared
it to thee; before it came to pass I showed it thee: lest thou shouldst
say, My idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image,
hath commanded them.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Thou hast heard, see all this; and will
not ye declare it? I have showed ye new things from this time, even
hidden things, and thou didst not know them.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> They are created now, and not from the
beginning; even before the day when thou heardst them not; lest thou
shouldst say, Behold, I knew them.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> Yes, thou heardst not; yes, thou knewest
not; yes, from that time that thy ear was not opened: for I knew that
thou wouldst deal very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor
from the womb.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> For my name's sake will I defer my anger,
and for my praise will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Behold, I have refined thee, but not
with silver; I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> For my own sake, even for my own sake,
will I do it: for how should my name be profaned? and I will not give my
glory to another.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Hearken to me, O Jacob and Israel, my
called; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> My hand also hath laid the foundation
of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call to
them, they stand up together.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> All ye, assemble yourselves and hear;
who among them hath declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he
will do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> I, even I, have spoken, yes, I have
called him: I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> Come ye near to me, hear ye this; I
have not spoken in secret from the beginning; from the time that it was,
there am I: and now the Lord GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel; I am the LORD thy God, who teacheth thee to profit,
who leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldst go.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> O that thou hadst hearkened to my
commandments! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness
as the waves of the sea:

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> Thy seed also had been as the sand, and
the offspring of thy bowels like its gravel; his name should not have
been cut off nor destroyed from before me.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Go ye forth from Babylon, flee ye from
the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it
even to the end of the earth; say ye, The LORD hath redeemed his servant
Jacob.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> And they thirsted not, when he led them
through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for
them: he cleaved the rock also, and the waters gushed out.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> There is no peace, saith the LORD, to
the wicked.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> Listen to me, O Isles; and hearken, ye
people, from far; The LORD hath called me from the womb; from the bowels
of my mother hath he made mention of my name.

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> And he hath made my mouth like a sharp
sword; in the shade of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished
shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me;

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> And said to me, Thou art my servant, O
Israel, in whom I will be glorified.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> Then I said, I have labored in vain, I
have spent my strength for naught, and in vain; yet surely my judgment
is with the LORD, and my work with my God.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> And now, saith the LORD that formed me
from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the LORD,
and my God shall be my strength.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> And he said, It is a light thing that
thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation to the end of the earth.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of
Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the
nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, kings shall see and arise,
princes also shall worship, because of the LORD that is faithful, and
the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Thus saith the LORD, In an acceptable
time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee:
and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to
establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages:

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go
forth; to them that are in darkness, Show yourselves. They shall feed in
the ways, and their pastures shall be in all high places.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> They shall not hunger nor thirst,
neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on
them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> And I will make all my mountains a way,
and my highways shall be exalted.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> Behold, these shall come from far: and
lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of
Sinim.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O
earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the LORD hath
comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> But Zion said, The LORD hath forsaken
me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> Can a woman forget her sucking child,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yes, they
may forget, yet I will not forget thee.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Behold, I have graven thee upon the
palms of my hands; thy walls are continually before me.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Thy children shall make haste; thy
destroyers and they that made thee waste, shall go forth from thee.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> Lift up thy eyes around, and behold:
all these assemble themselves, and come to thee. As I live, saith the
LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament,
and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> For thy waste and thy desolate places,
and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason
of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> The children which thou shalt have,
after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thy ears, The place
is too narrow for me: give place to me that I may dwell.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> Then shalt thou say in thy heart, Who
hath begotten these for me, seeing I have lost my children, and am
desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up
these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where have they been?

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I will
lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people:
and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> And kings shall be thy nursing fathers,
and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow to thee with their
face towards the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt
know that I am the LORD: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Shall the prey be taken from the
mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> But thus saith the LORD, Even the
captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible
shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with
thee, and I will save thy children.

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> And I will feed them that oppress thee
with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as
with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the LORD am thy Savior
and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> Thus saith the LORD, Where is the bill of
your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my
creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities
have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put
away.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> Why, when I came, was there no man? when
I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it
cannot redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry
up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish becometh putrid,
because there is no water, and dieth for thirst.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> I clothe the heavens with blackness, and
I make sackcloth their covering.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of
the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth my ear to
hear as the learned.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> The Lord GOD opened my ear, and I was not
rebellious, neither turned away back.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> I gave my back to the smiters, and my
cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame
and spitting.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> For the Lord GOD will help me; therefore
shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint,
and I know that I shall not be ashamed.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> He is near that justifieth me; who will
contend with me? let us stand together; who is my adversary? let him
come near to me.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> Behold the Lord GOD will help me; who is
he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the
moth shall eat them up.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> Who is among you that feareth the LORD,
that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and
hath no light? let him trust in the name of the LORD, and rely upon his
God.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that
encompass yourselves with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in
the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of my hand; ye shall
lie down in sorrow.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Hearken to me, ye that follow after
righteousness, ye that seek the LORD: look to the rock whence ye are
hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> Look to Abraham your father, and to Sarah
that bore you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased
him.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> For the LORD will comfort Zion: he will
comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden,
and her desert like the garden of the LORD; joy and gladness shall be
found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> Hearken to me, my people; and give ear to
me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my
judgment to rest for a light of the people.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> My righteousness is near; my salvation is
gone forth, and my arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait
upon me, and on my arm shall they trust.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and
look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like
smoke, and the earth shall become old like a garment, and its
inhabitants shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for
ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Hearken to me, ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the
reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> For the moth shall eat them like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness
shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O arm
of the LORD; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old.
Art thou not that which hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> Art thou not that which hath dried the
sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the sea
a way for the ransomed to pass over?

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> Therefore the redeemed of the LORD
shall return, and come with singing to Zion; and everlasting joy shall
be upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; sorrow and
mourning shall flee away.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> I, even I, am he that comforteth you:
who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and
of the son of man who shall be made as grass;

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> And forgettest the LORD thy maker, that
hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth;
and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the
oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the
oppressor?

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> The captive exile hasteneth that he may
be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread
should fail.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> But I am the LORD thy God, that divided
the sea, whose waves roared: The LORD of hosts is his name.

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> And I have put my words in thy mouth,
and have covered thee in the shade of my hand, that I may plant the
heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say to Zion, Thou art
my people.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem,
which hast drank at the hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast
drank the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> There is none to guide her among all
the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh
her by the hand of all the sons that she hath brought up.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> These two things have come to thee; who
shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and famine, and
the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the
head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of the
fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God.

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> Therefore hear now this, thou
afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> Thus saith thy Lord Jehovah, and thy
God that pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of
thy hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury;
thou shalt no more drink it again:

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> But I will put it into the hand of them
that afflict thee; who have said to thy soul, Prostrate thyself, that we
may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the
street, to them that went over.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O
Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for
henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the
unclean.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and
sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O
captive daughter of Zion.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold
yourselves for naught; and ye shall be redeemed without money.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people
went down formerly into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian
oppressed them without cause.

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> Now therefore, what have I here, saith
the LORD, that my people is taken away for naught? they that rule over
them make them to howl, saith the LORD; and my name continually every
day is blasphemed.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> Therefore my people shall know my name:
therefore they shall know in that day that I am he that doth speak:
behold, it is I.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that
bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith to
Zion, Thy God reigneth!

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice;
with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye,
when the LORD shall bring again Zion.

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> Break forth into joy, sing together, ye
waste places of Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people, he
hath redeemed Jerusalem.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in
the eyes of all the nations: and all the ends of the earth shall see the
salvation of our God.

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from
thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye
clean, that bear the vessels of the LORD.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> For ye shall not go out with haste, nor
go by flight: for the LORD will go before you; and the God of Israel
will be your rear-ward.

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> Behold, my servant shall deal
prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> As many were astonished at thee; his
visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons
of men:

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> So shall he sprinkle many nations; the
kings shall shut their mouths at him: for that which had not been told
them shall they see; and that which they had not heard shall they
consider.

<span id="an_53:1">53:1</span> Who hath believed our report? and to whom
is the arm of the LORD revealed?

<span id="an_53:2">53:2</span> For he shall grow up before him as a
tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor
comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him.

<span id="an_53:3">53:3</span> He is despised and rejected by men; a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces
from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

<span id="an_53:4">53:4</span> Surely he hath borne our griefs, and
carried our sorrows: yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten by God, and
afflicted.

<span id="an_53:5">53:5</span> But he was wounded for our transgression,
he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was
upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.

<span id="an_53:6">53:6</span> All we like sheep have gone astray; we
have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the
iniquity of us all.

<span id="an_53:7">53:7</span> He was oppressed, and he was afflicted,
yet he opened not his mouth; he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter,
and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.

<span id="an_53:8">53:8</span> He was taken from prison and from
judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off from
the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he
stricken.

<span id="an_53:9">53:9</span> And he made his grave with the wicked,
and with the rich in his death: because he had done no violence, neither
was any deceit in his mouth.

<span id="an_53:10">53:10</span> Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him;
he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an offering for
sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure
of the LORD shall prosper in his hand.

<span id="an_53:11">53:11</span> He shall see of the travail of his
soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities.

<span id="an_53:12">53:12</span> Therefore I will divide to him a
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong;
because he hath poured out his soul to death: and he was numbered with
the transgressors; and he bore the sin of many, and made intercession
for the transgressors.

<span id="an_54:1">54:1</span> Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear;
break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail
with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children
of the married wife, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_54:2">54:2</span> Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let
them extend the curtains of thy habitations: spare not, lengthen thy
cords, and strengthen thy stakes;

<span id="an_54:3">54:3</span> For thou shalt break forth on the right
hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make
the desolate cities to be inhabited.

<span id="an_54:4">54:4</span> Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed:
neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame; for thou
shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach
of thy widowhood any more.

<span id="an_54:5">54:5</span> For thy maker is thy husband; the LORD of
hosts is his name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of
the whole earth shall he be called.

<span id="an_54:6">54:6</span> For the LORD hath called thee as a woman
forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast
refused, saith thy God.

<span id="an_54:7">54:7</span> For a small moment have I forsaken thee;
but with great mercies will I gather thee.

<span id="an_54:8">54:8</span> In a little wrath I hid my face from thee
for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
saith the LORD thy Redeemer.

<span id="an_54:9">54:9</span> For this is as the waters of Noah to me:
for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more overflow the
earth; so have I sworn that I will not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke
thee.

<span id="an_54:10">54:10</span> For the mountains shall depart, and the
hills be removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither
shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath
mercy on thee.

<span id="an_54:11">54:11</span> Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest,
and not comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and
lay thy foundations with sapphires.

<span id="an_54:12">54:12</span> And I will make thy windows of agates,
and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

<span id="an_54:13">54:13</span> And all thy children shall be taught
from the LORD; and great shall be the peace of thy children.

<span id="an_54:14">54:14</span> In righteousness shalt thou be
established: thou shalt be far from oppression; for thou shalt not fear:
and from terror; for it shall not come near thee.

<span id="an_54:15">54:15</span> Behold, they shall surely assemble but
not by me: whoever shall assemble against thee shall fall for thy sake.

<span id="an_54:16">54:16</span> Behold, I have created the smith that
bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for
his work; and I have created the waster to destroy.

<span id="an_54:17">54:17</span> No weapon that is formed against thee
shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment
thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD,
and their righteousness is from me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_55:1">55:1</span> Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to
the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yes, come,
buy wine and milk without money and without price.

<span id="an_55:2">55:2</span> Why do ye spend money for that which is
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfieth not? hearken
diligently to me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul
delight itself in fatness.

<span id="an_55:3">55:3</span> Incline your ear, and come to me: hear,
and your soul shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with
you, even the sure mercies of David.

<span id="an_55:4">55:4</span> Behold, I have given him for a witness to
the people, a leader and commander to the people.

<span id="an_55:5">55:5</span> Behold, thou shalt call a nation that
thou knowest not, and nations that knew not thee shall run to thee
because of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, for he hath
glorified thee.

<span id="an_55:6">55:6</span> Seek ye the LORD while he may be found,
call ye upon him while he is near:

<span id="an_55:7">55:7</span> Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return to the LORD, and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

<span id="an_55:8">55:8</span> For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
neither are your ways my ways, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_55:9">55:9</span> For as the heavens are higher than the
earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your
thoughts.

<span id="an_55:10">55:10</span> For as the rain cometh down, and the
snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and
maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and
bread to the eater:

<span id="an_55:11">55:11</span> So shall my word be that proceedeth
from my mouth: it shall not return to me void, but it shall accomplish
that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing for which I sent
it.

<span id="an_55:12">55:12</span> For ye shall go out with joy, and be
led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall break forth
before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands.

<span id="an_55:13">55:13</span> Instead of the thorn shall come up the
fir-tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle-tree: and it
shall be to the LORD for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not
be cut off.

<span id="an_56:1">56:1</span> Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment,
and do justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness
to be revealed.

<span id="an_56:2">56:2</span> Blessed is the man that doeth this, and
the son of man that layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from
profaning it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.

<span id="an_56:3">56:3</span> Neither let the son of the stranger, that
hath joined himself to the LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath utterly
separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a
dry tree.

<span id="an_56:4">56:4</span> For thus saith the LORD to the eunuchs
that keep my sabbaths, and choose the things that please me, and take
hold of my covenant;

<span id="an_56:5">56:5</span> Even to them will I give in my house and
within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters:
I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.

<span id="an_56:6">56:6</span> Also the sons of the stranger, that join
themselves to the LORD, to serve him, and to love the name of the LORD,
to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning
it, and taketh hold of my covenant;

<span id="an_56:7">56:7</span> Even them will I bring to my holy
mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their
burnt-offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon my altar;
for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all people.

<span id="an_56:8">56:8</span> The Lord GOD who gathereth the outcasts
of Israel, Yet will I gather others to him, besides those that are
gathered to him.

<span id="an_56:9">56:9</span> All ye beasts of the field, come to
devour, yes, all ye beasts in the forest.

<span id="an_56:10">56:10</span> His watchmen are blind: they are all
ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying
down, loving to slumber.

<span id="an_56:11">56:11</span> Yes, they are greedy dogs which can
never have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they
all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.

<span id="an_56:12">56:12</span> Come ye, say they, I will bring wine,
and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to-morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant.

<span id="an_57:1">57:1</span> The righteous perisheth, and no man
layeth it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.

<span id="an_57:2">57:2</span> He shall enter into peace: they shall
rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.

<span id="an_57:3">57:3</span> But draw near hither, ye sons of the
sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the lewd.

<span id="an_57:4">57:4</span> Against whom do ye sport yourselves?
against whom make ye a wide mouth, and thrust out the tongue? are ye not
children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,

<span id="an_57:5">57:5</span> Inflaming yourselves with idols under
every green tree, slaying the children in the valleys under the cliffs
of the rocks?

<span id="an_57:6">57:6</span> Among the smooth stones of the stream is
thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a
drink-offering, thou hast offered a meat-offering. Should I receive
comfort in these?

<span id="an_57:7">57:7</span> Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou
set thy bed: even thither thou wentest up to offer sacrifice.

<span id="an_57:8">57:8</span> Behind the doors also and the posts hast
thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast uncovered thyself to another
than me, and hast gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a
covenant with them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it.

<span id="an_57:9">57:9</span> And thou wentest to the king with
ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers
far off, and didst debase thyself even to hell.

<span id="an_57:10">57:10</span> Thou art wearied in the greatness of
thy way; yet saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life
of thy hand; therefore thou wast not grieved.

<span id="an_57:11">57:11</span> And of whom hast thou been afraid or
feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to
thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me
not?

<span id="an_57:12">57:12</span> I will declare thy righteousness, and
thy works; for they shall not profit thee.

<span id="an_57:13">57:13</span> When thou criest, let thy companies
deliver thee; but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take
them: but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and
shall inherit my holy mountain;

<span id="an_57:14">57:14</span> And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up,
prepare the way, take up the stumbling-block out of the way of my
people.

<span id="an_57:15">57:15</span> For thus saith the high and lofty One
that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and
holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones.

<span id="an_57:16">57:16</span> For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit would fail before me, and
the souls which I have made.

<span id="an_57:17">57:17</span> For the iniquity of his covetousness I
was wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on
frowardly in the way of his heart.

<span id="an_57:18">57:18</span> I have seen his ways, and will heal
him: I will lead him also, and restore comforts to him and to his
mourners.

<span id="an_57:19">57:19</span> I create the fruit of the lips; Peace,
peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the LORD;
and I will heal him.

<span id="an_57:20">57:20</span> But the wicked are like the troubled
sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

<span id="an_57:21">57:21</span> There is no peace, saith my God, to the
wicked.

<span id="an_58:1">58:1</span> Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of
Jacob their sins.

<span id="an_58:2">58:2</span> Yet they seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the
ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they
take delight in approaching to God.

<span id="an_58:3">58:3</span> Why have we fasted, say they, and thou
seest not? why have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge?
Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your
labors.

<span id="an_58:4">58:4</span> Behold, ye fast for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do
this day, to make your voice to be heard on high.

<span id="an_58:5">58:5</span> Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a
day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a
bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call
this a fast, and an acceptable day to the LORD?

<span id="an_58:6">58:6</span> Is not this the fast that I have chosen?
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

<span id="an_58:7">58:7</span> Is it not to deal thy bread to the
hungry, and that thou shouldst bring the poor that are cast out to thy
house? when thou seest the naked, that thou shouldst cover him; and that
thou shouldst not hide thyself from thy own flesh?

<span id="an_58:8">58:8</span> Then shall thy light break forth as the
morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily: and thy
righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy
rear-ward.

<span id="an_58:9">58:9</span> Then shalt thou call, and the LORD will
answer; thou shalt cry, and he will say, Here I am. If thou shalt take
away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger,
and speaking vanity;

<span id="an_58:10">58:10</span> And if thou shalt draw out thy soul to
the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in
obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noon day:

<span id="an_58:11">58:11</span> And the LORD will guide thee
continually, and satisfy thy soul in drouth, and make fat thy bones: and
thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose
waters fail not.

<span id="an_58:12">58:12</span> And they that shall be of thee shall
build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many
generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The
restorer of paths to dwell in.

<span id="an_58:13">58:13</span> If thou shalt turn away thy foot from
the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the
sabbath a delight, the holy of the LORD, honorable; and shalt honor him,
not doing thy own ways, nor finding thy own pleasure, nor speaking thy
own words:

<span id="an_58:14">58:14</span> Then shalt thou delight thyself in the
LORD; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth,
and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of
the LORD hath spoken it.

<span id="an_59:1">59:1</span> Behold, the LORD'S hand is not shortened,
that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear:

<span id="an_59:2">59:2</span> But your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that
he will not hear.

<span id="an_59:3">59:3</span> For your hands are defiled with blood,
and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue
hath uttered perverseness.

<span id="an_59:4">59:4</span> None calleth for justice, nor any
pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive
mischief, and bring forth iniquity.

<span id="an_59:5">59:5</span> They hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave the
spider's web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is
crushed breaketh out into a viper.

<span id="an_59:6">59:6</span> Their webs shall not become garments,
neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works are
works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.

<span id="an_59:7">59:7</span> Their feet run to evil, and they make
haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity;
wasting and destruction are in their paths.

<span id="an_59:8">59:8</span> The way of peace they know not; and there
is no judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked paths:
whoever goeth therein shall not know peace.

<span id="an_59:9">59:9</span> Therefore is judgment far from us,
neither doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, but behold
obscurity; for brightness, but we walk in darkness.

<span id="an_59:10">59:10</span> We grope for the wall like the blind,
and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at noon day as in the
night; we are in desolate places as dead men.

<span id="an_59:11">59:11</span> We all roar like bears, and mourn
bitterly like doves: we look for judgment, but there is none; for
salvation, but it is far from us.

<span id="an_59:12">59:12</span> For our transgressions are multiplied
before thee, and our sins testify against us: for our transgressions are
with us; and as for our iniquities, we know them;

<span id="an_59:13">59:13</span> In transgressing and lying against the
LORD, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt,
conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

<span id="an_59:14">59:14</span> And judgment is turned away backward,
and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the street, and
equity cannot enter.

<span id="an_59:15">59:15</span> Yes, truth faileth; and he that
departeth from evil maketh himself a prey: and the LORD saw it, and it
displeased him that there was no judgment.

<span id="an_59:16">59:16</span> And he saw that there was no man, and
wondered that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought
salvation to him; and his righteousness, it sustained him.

<span id="an_59:17">59:17</span> For he put on righteousness as a
breast-plate, and a helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the
garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke.

<span id="an_59:18">59:18</span> According to their deeds, accordingly
he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies; to
the isles he will repay recompense.

<span id="an_59:19">59:19</span> So shall they fear the name of the LORD
from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy
shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the LORD will lift up a
standard against him.

<span id="an_59:20">59:20</span> And the Redeemer will come to Zion, and
to them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_59:21">59:21</span> As for me, this is my covenant with
them, saith the LORD; My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the
LORD, from henceforth and for ever.

<span id="an_60:1">60:1</span> Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and
the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee.

<span id="an_60:2">60:2</span> For behold, the darkness shall cover the
earth, and gross darkness the people: but the LORD will arise upon thee,
and his glory will be seen upon thee.

<span id="an_60:3">60:3</span> And the Gentiles shall come to thy light,
and kings to the brightness of thy rising.

<span id="an_60:4">60:4</span> Lift up thy eyes around, and see: all
they assemble themselves, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from
far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.

<span id="an_60:5">60:5</span> Then thou shalt see, and flow together,
and thy heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the
sea shall be converted to thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come to
thee.

<span id="an_60:6">60:6</span> The multitude of camels shall cover thee,
the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come:
they shall bring gold and incense; and they shall show forth the praises
of the LORD.

<span id="an_60:7">60:7</span> All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered
to thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister to thee: they shall come up
with acceptance on my altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.

<span id="an_60:8">60:8</span> Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as
doves to their windows?

<span id="an_60:9">60:9</span> Surely the isles shall wait for me, and
the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver
and their gold with them, to the name of the LORD thy God, and to the
Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.

<span id="an_60:10">60:10</span> And the sons of strangers shall build
up thy walls, and their kings shall minister to thee: for in my wrath I
smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee.

<span id="an_60:11">60:11</span> Therefore thy gates shall be open
continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring to
thee the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.

<span id="an_60:12">60:12</span> For the nation and kingdom that will
not serve thee shall perish; yes, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

<span id="an_60:13">60:13</span> The glory of Lebanon shall come to
thee, the fir-tree, the pine-tree, and the box together, to beautify the
place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.

<span id="an_60:14">60:14</span> The sons also of them that afflicted
thee shall come bending to thee; and all they that despised thee shall
bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee,
The city of the LORD, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_60:15">60:15</span> Whereas thou hast been forsaken and
hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an eternal
excellence, a joy of many generations.

<span id="an_60:16">60:16</span> Thou shalt also suck the milk of the
Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I
the LORD am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob.

<span id="an_60:17">60:17</span> For brass I will bring gold, and for
iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I
will also make thy officers peace, and thy exactors righteousness.

<span id="an_60:18">60:18</span> Violence shall no more be heard in thy
land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call
thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

<span id="an_60:19">60:19</span> The sun shall be no more thy light by
day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light to thee: but the
LORD will be to thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

<span id="an_60:20">60:20</span> Thy sun shall no more go down; neither
shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the LORD will be thy everlasting
light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

<span id="an_60:21">60:21</span> Thy people also shall be all righteous:
they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the
work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

<span id="an_60:22">60:22</span> A little one shall become a thousand,
and a small one a strong nation: I the LORD will hasten it in its time.

<span id="an_61:1">61:1</span> The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me;
because the LORD hath anointed me to publish good tidings to the meek;
he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to
the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound;

<span id="an_61:2">61:2</span> To proclaim the acceptable year of the
LORD, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

<span id="an_61:3">61:3</span> To appoint to them that mourn in Zion, to
give to them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment
of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they may be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that he may be glorified.

<span id="an_61:4">61:4</span> And they shall build the old wastes, they
shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste
cities, the desolations of many generations.

<span id="an_61:5">61:5</span> And strangers shall stand and feed your
flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plowmen and your
vine-dressers.

<span id="an_61:6">61:6</span> But ye shall be named the Priests of the
LORD: men shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the
riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.

<span id="an_61:7">61:7</span> For your shame ye shall have double; and
for confusion they shall rejoice in their portion: therefore in their
land they shall possess the double: everlasting joy shall be to them.

<span id="an_61:8">61:8</span> For I the LORD love judgment, I hate
robbery for burnt-offering; and I will direct their work in truth, and I
will make an everlasting covenant with them.

<span id="an_61:9">61:9</span> And their seed shall be known among the
Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: all that see them shall
acknowledge them, that they are the seed which the LORD hath blessed.

<span id="an_61:10">61:10</span> I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my
soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments
of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a
bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth
herself with her jewels.

<span id="an_61:11">61:11</span> For as the earth bringeth forth her
bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring
forth; so the Lord GOD will cause righteousness and praise to spring
forth before all the nations.

<span id="an_62:1">62:1</span> For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace,
and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until its righteousness shall
go forth as brightness, and its salvation as a lamp that burneth.

<span id="an_62:2">62:2</span> And the Gentiles shall see thy
righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou shalt be called by a
new name, which the mouth of the LORD shall name.

<span id="an_62:3">62:3</span> Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in
the hand of the LORD, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

<span id="an_62:4">62:4</span> Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken;
neither shall thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be
called Hephzi-bah, and thy land Beulah: for the LORD delighteth in thee,
and thy land shall be married.

<span id="an_62:5">62:5</span> For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so
shall thy sons marry thee: and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the
bride, so will thy God rejoice over thee.

<span id="an_62:6">62:6</span> I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night: ye that
make mention of the LORD, keep not silence,

<span id="an_62:7">62:7</span> And give him no rest, till he shall
establish, and till he shall make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

<span id="an_62:8">62:8</span> The LORD hath sworn by his right hand,
and by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn to
be food for thy enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink
thy wine, for which thou hast labored:

<span id="an_62:9">62:9</span> But they that have gathered it shall eat
it, and praise the LORD; and they that have collected it shall drink it
in the courts of my holiness.

<span id="an_62:10">62:10</span> Go through, go through the gates;
prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather
out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.

<span id="an_62:11">62:11</span> Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed to the
end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation
cometh; Behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him.

<span id="an_62:12">62:12</span> And they shall call them, The holy
people, The redeemed of the LORD: and thou shalt be called, Sought out,
A city not forsaken.

<span id="an_63:1">63:1</span> Who is this that cometh from Edom, with
dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save.

<span id="an_63:2">63:2</span> Why art thou red in thy apparel, and thy
garments like him that treadeth in the wine-vat.

<span id="an_63:3">63:3</span> I have trodden the wine-press alone; and
of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them in my anger,
and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

<span id="an_63:4">63:4</span> For the day of vengeance is in my heart,
and the year of my redeemed is come.

<span id="an_63:5">63:5</span> And I looked, and there was none to help;
and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore my own arm
brought salvation to me; and my fury, it upheld me.

<span id="an_63:6">63:6</span> And I will tread down the people in my
anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their
strength to the earth.

<span id="an_63:7">63:7</span> I will mention the loving-kindnesses of
the LORD, and the praises of the LORD, according to all that the LORD
hath bestowed on us, and the great goodness towards the house of Israel,
which he hath bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according
to the multitude of his loving-kindnesses.

<span id="an_63:8">63:8</span> For he said, Surely they are my people,
children that will not lie: so he was their Savior.

<span id="an_63:9">63:9</span> In all their affliction he was afflicted,
and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he
redeemed them; and he bore them, and carried them all the days of old.

<span id="an_63:10">63:10</span> But they rebelled, and vexed his holy
Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against
them.

<span id="an_63:11">63:11</span> Then he remembered the days of old,
Moses, and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them out of the
sea with the shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit
within him?

<span id="an_63:12">63:12</span> That led them by the right hand of
Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make
himself an everlasting name?

<span id="an_63:13">63:13</span> That led them through the deep, as a
horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble?

<span id="an_63:14">63:14</span> As a beast goeth down in the valley,
the Spirit of the LORD caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy
people, to make thyself a glorious name.

<span id="an_63:15">63:15</span> Look down from heaven, and behold from
the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and
thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies towards me?
are they restrained?

<span id="an_63:16">63:16</span> Doubtless thou art our father, though
Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O LORD,
art our father, our Redeemer; thy name is from everlasting.

<span id="an_63:17">63:17</span> O LORD, why hast thou made us to err
from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy
servants' sake, the tribes of thy inheritance.

<span id="an_63:18">63:18</span> The people of thy holiness have
possessed it but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down thy
sanctuary.

<span id="an_63:19">63:19</span> We are thine: thou never didst bear
rule over them; they were not called by thy name.

<span id="an_64:1">64:1</span> Oh that thou wouldst rend the heavens,
that thou wouldst come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy
presence,

<span id="an_64:2">64:2</span> As when the melting fire burneth, the
fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thy
adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!

<span id="an_64:3">64:3</span> When thou didst terrible things which we
looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy
presence.

<span id="an_64:4">64:4</span> For since the beginning of the world men
have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O
God, besides thee, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.

<span id="an_64:5">64:5</span> Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and
worketh righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways: behold,
thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we
shall be saved.

<span id="an_64:6">64:6</span> But we are all as an unclean thing, and
all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a
leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.

<span id="an_64:7">64:7</span> And there is none that calleth upon thy
name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid
thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our iniquities.

<span id="an_64:8">64:8</span> But now, O LORD, thou art our father; we
are the clay, and thou our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.

<span id="an_64:9">64:9</span> Be not very wroth, O LORD, neither
remember iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy
people.

<span id="an_64:10">64:10</span> Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion
is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.

<span id="an_64:11">64:11</span> Our holy and our beautiful house, where
our fathers praised thee, is burned with fire: and all our pleasant
things are laid waste.

<span id="an_64:12">64:12</span> Wilt thou refrain thyself for these
things, O LORD? wilt thou hold thy peace, and grievously afflict us?

<span id="an_65:1">65:1</span> I am sought by them that asked not for
me; I am found by them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me,
to a nation that was not called by my name.

<span id="an_65:2">65:2</span> I have spread out my hands all the day to
a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that is not good, after
their own thoughts;

<span id="an_65:3">65:3</span> A people that provoketh me to anger
continually to my face; that sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense
upon altars of brick;

<span id="an_65:4">65:4</span> Which remain among the graves, and lodge
in the monuments, which eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable
things is in their vessels;

<span id="an_65:5">65:5</span> Which say, Stand by thyself, come not
near to me; for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a
fire that burneth all the day.

<span id="an_65:6">65:6</span> Behold, it is written before me: I will
not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom,

<span id="an_65:7">65:7</span> Your iniquities, and the iniquities of
your fathers together, saith the LORD, who have burned incense upon the
mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills: therefore will I measure
their former work into their bosom.

<span id="an_65:8">65:8</span> Thus saith the LORD, As the new wine is
found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is
in it: so will I do for my servants' sake, that I may not destroy them
all.

<span id="an_65:9">65:9</span> And I will bring forth a seed out of
Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and my elect shall
inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.

<span id="an_65:10">65:10</span> And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks,
and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in, for my
people that have sought me.

<span id="an_65:11">65:11</span> But ye are they that forsake the LORD,
that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and
that furnish the drink-offering to that number.

<span id="an_65:12">65:12</span> Therefore will I number you to the
sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter: because when I
called, ye did not answer; when I spoke, ye did not hear; but did evil
before my eyes, and did choose that in which I delighted not.

<span id="an_65:13">65:13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD,
Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:

<span id="an_65:14">65:14</span> Behold, my servants shall sing for joy
of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for
vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_65:15">65:15</span> And ye shall leave your name for a
curse to my chosen: for the Lord GOD will slay thee, and call his
servants by another name:

<span id="an_65:16">65:16</span> That he who blesseth himself in the
earth shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that sweareth in
the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles
are forgotten, and because they are hid from my eyes.

<span id="an_65:17">65:17</span> For behold, I create new heavens and a
new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

<span id="an_65:18">65:18</span> But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in
that which I create: for behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her
people a joy.

<span id="an_65:19">65:19</span> And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and
joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in
her, nor the voice of crying.

<span id="an_65:20">65:20</span> There shall be no more thence an infant
of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child
shall die a hundred years old: but the sinner being a hundred years old
shall be accursed.

<span id="an_65:21">65:21</span> And they shall build houses, and
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

<span id="an_65:22">65:22</span> They shall not build, and another
inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a
tree are the days of my people, and my elect shall long enjoy the work
of their hands.

<span id="an_65:23">65:23</span> They shall not labor in vain, nor bring
forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the LORD, and
their offspring with them.

<span id="an_65:24">65:24</span> And it shall come to pass, that before
they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

<span id="an_65:25">65:25</span> The wolf and the lamb shall feed
together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall
be the serpents' food. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_66:1">66:1</span> Thus saith the LORD, The heaven is my
throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build
to me? and where is the place of my rest?

<span id="an_66:2">66:2</span> For all these things hath my hand made,
and all these things have been, saith the LORD: but to this man will I
look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth
at my word.

<span id="an_66:3">66:3</span> He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a
man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that
offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine's blood; he that burneth
incense, as if he blessed an idol. Yes, they have chosen their own ways,
and their soul delighteth in their abominations.

<span id="an_66:4">66:4</span> I also will choose their delusions, and
will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did
answer; when I spoke, they did not hear: but they did evil before my
eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not.

<span id="an_66:5">66:5</span> Hear the word of the LORD, ye that
tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for
my name's sake, said, Let the LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to
your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

<span id="an_66:6">66:6</span> A voice of noise from the city, a voice
from the temple, a voice of the LORD that rendereth recompense to his
enemies.

<span id="an_66:7">66:7</span> Before she travailed, she brought forth;
before her pain came, she was delivered of a male child.

<span id="an_66:8">66:8</span> Who hath heard such a thing? who hath
seen such things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or
shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she
brought forth her children.

<span id="an_66:9">66:9</span> Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause
to bring forth? saith the LORD: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut
the womb? saith thy God.

<span id="an_66:10">66:10</span> Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that
mourn for her:

<span id="an_66:11">66:11</span> That ye may suck, and be satisfied with
the breasts of her consolations; that ye may draw milk, and be delighted
with the abundance of her glory.

<span id="an_66:12">66:12</span> For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will
extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides,
and be dandled upon her knees.

<span id="an_66:13">66:13</span> As one whom his mother comforteth, so
will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_66:14">66:14</span> And when ye see this, your heart shall
rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the
LORD shall be known towards his servants, and his indignation towards
his enemies.

<span id="an_66:15">66:15</span> For behold, the LORD will come with
fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with
fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.

<span id="an_66:16">66:16</span> For by fire and by his sword will the
LORD plead with all flesh: and the slain of the LORD shall be many.

<span id="an_66:17">66:17</span> They that sanctify themselves, and
purify themselves in the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating
swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed
together, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_66:18">66:18</span> For I know their works and their
thoughts: it shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and
they shall come, and see my glory.

<span id="an_66:19">66:19</span> And I will set a sign among them, and I
will send those that escape of them to the nations, to Tarshish, Pul,
and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off,
that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall
declare my glory among the Gentiles.

<span id="an_66:20">66:20</span> And they shall bring all your brethren
for an offering to the LORD out of all nations upon horses, and in
chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my
holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring
an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the LORD.

<span id="an_66:21">66:21</span> And I will also take of them for
priests and for Levites, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_66:22">66:22</span> For as the new heavens and the new
earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the LORD, so
shall your seed and your name remain.

<span id="an_66:23">66:23</span> And it shall come to pass, that from
one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all
flesh come to worship before me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_66:24">66:24</span> And they shall go forth, and look upon
the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me: for their
worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall
be an abhorring to all flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah](jer)
