[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hos)  [Next](amo) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Joel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the LORD that came to Joel the
son of Pethuel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye
inhabitants of the land. Hath this been in your days, or even in the
days of your fathers?

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Tell ye your children of it, and let your
children tell their children, and their children another generation.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> That which the palmer-worm hath left hath
the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the
canker-worm eaten; and that which the canker-worm hath left hath the
caterpillar eaten.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl,
all ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut off from
your mouth.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For a nation is come up upon my land,
strong, and without number, whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he
hath the cheek teeth of a great lion.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my
fig-tree: he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; its branches are
made white.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth
for the husband of her youth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> The meat-offering and the drink-offering is
cut off from the house of the LORD; the priests, the LORD'S ministers,
mourn.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The field is wasted, the land mourneth;
for the corn is wasted; the new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen; howl, O
ye vine-dressers, for the wheat and for the barley; because the harvest
of the field hath perished.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> The vine is dried up, and the fig-tree
languisheth; the pomegranate-tree, the palm-tree also, and the
apple-tree, even all the trees of the field, are withered: because joy
is withered away from the sons of men.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests:
howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye
ministers of my God: for the meat-offering and the drink-offering is
withheld from the house of your God.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Sanctify ye a fast, call a solemn
assembly, gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the land into the
house of the LORD your God, and cry to the LORD,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Alas for the day! for the day of the LORD
is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it come.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Is not the food cut off before our eyes,
and joy and gladness from the house of our God?

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The seed hath perished under their clods,
the granaries are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the corn
is withered.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> How do the beasts groan! the herds of
cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yes, the flocks of
sheep are made desolate.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> O LORD, to thee will I cry: for the fire
hath devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame hath burned
all the trees of the field.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> The beasts of the field cry also to thee:
for the rivers of waters are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the
pastures of the wilderness.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an
alarm in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land tremble:
for the day of the LORD cometh, for it is nigh at hand;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day
of clouds and of thick darkness, as the morning spread upon the
mountains: a great people and a strong; there hath not been ever the
like, neither shall be any more after it, even to the years of many
generations.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> A fire devoureth before them; and behind
them a flame burneth: the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and
behind them a desolate wilderness; and nothing shall escape them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The appearance of them is as the appearance
of horses; and as horsemen, so shall they run.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Like the noise of chariots on the tops of
mountains shall they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that
devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Before their face the people shall be much
pained: all faces shall gather blackness.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> They shall run like mighty men; they shall
climb the wall like men of war; and they shall march every one on his
ways, and they shall not break their ranks:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Neither shall one thrust another; they
shall walk every one in his path: and when they fall upon the sword,
they shall not be wounded.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> They shall run to and fro in the city; they
shall run upon the wall, they shall climb upon the houses; they shall
enter in at the windows like a thief.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The earth shall quake before them; the
heavens shall tremble: the sun and the moon shall be dark, and the stars
shall withdraw their shining:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And the LORD will utter his voice before
his army: for his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth
his word: for the day of the LORD is great and very terrible; and who
can abide it?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Therefore also now, saith the LORD, Turn
ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And rend your heart, and not your
garments, and turn to the LORD your God: for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth of the
evil.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who knoweth if he will return and repent,
and leave a blessing behind him; even a meat-offering and a
drink-offering to the LORD your God?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a
fast, call a solemn assembly:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Gather the people, sanctify the
congregation, assemble the elders, gather the children, and those that
suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the
bride out of her closet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Let the priests, the ministers of the
LORD, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy
people, O LORD, and give not thy heritage to reproach, that the heathen
should rule over them: why should they say among the people, Where is
their God?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Then will the LORD be jealous for his
land, and pity his people.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And the LORD will answer and say to his
people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shall be
satisfied with it; and I will no more make you a reproach among the
heathen:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But I will remove far from you the
northern army, and will drive him into a land barren and desolate, with
his face towards the east sea, and his hinder part towards the utmost
sea, and his odious scent shall come up, and his ill savor shall come
up, because he hath done great things.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice:
for the LORD will do great things.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field:
for the pastures of the wilderness do spring, for the tree beareth its
fruit, the fig-tree and the vine do yield their strength.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and
rejoice in the LORD your God: for he hath given you the former rain
moderately, and he will cause to come down for you the rain, the former
rain, and the latter rain in the first month.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the floors shall be full of wheat,
and the vats shall overflow with wine and oil.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And I will restore to you the years that
the locust hath eaten, the canker-worm, and the caterpillar, and the
palmer-worm, my great army which I sent among you.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And ye shall eat in plenty, and be
satisfied, and praise the name of the LORD your God, that hath dealt
wondrously with you: and my people shall never be ashamed.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And ye shall know that I am in the midst
of Israel, and that I am the LORD your God, and none else: and my people
shall never be ashamed.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And it shall come to pass afterward, that
I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young
men shall see visions:

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> And also upon the servants and upon the
handmaids in those days will I pour out my spirit.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> And I will show wonders in the heavens
and on the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the LORD
shall come.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And it shall come to pass, that whoever
shall call on the name of the LORD shall be delivered: for in mount Zion
and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the LORD hath said, and in the
remnant whom the LORD shall call.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For behold, in those days, and in that
time, when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I will also gather all nations, and will
bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them
there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered
among the nations, and divided my land.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And they have cast lots for my people; and
have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might
drink.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Yes, and what have ye to do with me, O
Tyre, and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a
recompense? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and speedily I will return
your recompense upon your own head;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Because ye have taken my silver and my
gold, and have carried into your temples my goodly pleasant things.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> The children also of Judah and the children
of Jerusalem have ye sold to the Grecians, that ye might remove them far
from their border.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Behold, I will raise them out of the place
whither ye have sold them, and will return your recompense upon your own
head:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And I will sell your sons and your
daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shall sell
them to the Sabeans, to a people far off: for the LORD hath spoken it.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles;
Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men of war draw near;
let them come up:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Beat your plow-shares into swords, and
your pruning-hooks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Assemble yourselves, and come, all ye
heathen, and gather yourselves together around: thither cause thy mighty
ones to come down, O LORD.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let the heathen be awakened, and come up
to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for there will I sit to judge all the
heathen on every side.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is
ripe: come, go down; for the press is full, the vats overflow; for their
wickedness is great.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of
decision; for the day of the LORD is near in the valley of decision.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The sun and the moon shall be darkened,
and the stars shall withdraw their shining.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> The LORD also will roar out of Zion, and
utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shall
shake; but the LORD will be the hope of his people, and the strength of
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> So shall ye know that I am the LORD your
God dwelling in Zion, my holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy,
and there shall no strangers pass through her any more.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the mountains shall drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow
with milk, and all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters, and a
fountain shall come forth from the house of the LORD, and shall water
the valley of Shittim.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom
shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence against the children of
Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> But Judah shall dwell for ever, and
Jerusalem from generation to generation.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> For I will cleanse their blood that I
have not cleansed: for the LORD dwelleth in Zion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos](amo)
