[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](oba)  [Next](mic) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Jonah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now the word of the LORD came to Jonah the
son of Amittai, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and
cry against it; for their wickedness is come up before me.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> But Jonah arose to flee to Tarshish from
the presence of the LORD, and went down to Joppa; and he found a ship
going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare of it, and went down into it, to
go with them to Tarshish from the presence of the LORD.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> But the LORD sent out a great wind into the
sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was in
danger of being broken.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Then the mariners were afraid, and cried
every man to his god, and cast the wares that were in the ship into the
sea, to lighten it of them. But Jonah had gone down into the sides of
the ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> So the ship-master came to him, and said to
him, What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, it may be
that God will think upon us, that we perish not.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And they said every one to his fellow,
Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil
is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Then said they to him, Tell us, we pray
thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thy occupation? and
whence comest thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he said to them, I am a Hebrew; and I
fear the LORD, the God of heaven, who hath made the sea and the dry
land.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and
said to him, Why hast thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from
the presence of the LORD, because he had told them.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then said they to him, What shall we do
to thee, that the sea may be calm to us? for the sea wrought, and was
tempestuous.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And he said to them, Take me, and cast me
into the sea; so shall the sea be calm to you: for I know that for my
sake this great tempest is upon you.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring
it to the land; but they could not: for the sea wrought, and was
tempestuous against them.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Wherefore they cried to the LORD, and
said, We beseech thee, O LORD, we beseech thee, let us not perish for
this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O LORD,
hast done as it pleased thee.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So they took Jonah, and cast him into the
sea: and the sea ceased from her raging.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Then the men feared the LORD exceedingly,
and offered a sacrifice to the LORD, and made vows.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now the LORD had prepared a great fish to
swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and
three nights.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then Jonah prayed to the LORD his God out
of the fish's belly,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And said, I cried by reason of my
affliction to the LORD, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried
I, and thou heardst my voice.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in
the midst of the seas; and the floods encompassed me: all thy billows
and thy waves passed over me.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight;
yet I will look again towards thy holy temple.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The waters encompassed me, even to the
soul: the depth inclosed me on every side, the weeds were wrapped about
my head.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> I went down to the bottoms of the
mountains; the earth with her bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou
brought up my life from corruption, O LORD my God.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> When my soul fainted within me I remembered
the LORD: and my prayer came to thee, into thy holy temple.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> They that observe lying vanities forsake
their own mercy.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But I will sacrifice to thee with the voice
of thanksgiving; I will pay that which I have vowed. Salvation is of the
LORD.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And the LORD spoke to the fish, and it
vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And the word of the LORD came to Jonah the
second time, saying,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and
preach to it the preaching that I bid thee.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> So Jonah arose, and went to Nineveh,
according to the word of the LORD. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great
city of three days' journey.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And Jonah began to enter into the city a
day's journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall
be overthrown.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> So the people of Nineveh believed God, and
proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even
to the least of them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For word came to the king of Nineveh, and
he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered
himself with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And he caused it to be proclaimed and
published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles,
saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let
them not feed, nor drink water:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But let man and beast be covered with
sackcloth, and cry mightily to God: yes, let them turn every one from
his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Who can tell if God will turn and repent,
and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And God saw their works, that they turned
from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that
he would do to them; and he did it not.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he
was very angry.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he prayed to the LORD, and said, I pray
thee, O LORD was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country?
Therefore I fled before to Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious
God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest
of the evil.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Therefore now, O LORD, take, I beseech
thee, my life from me; for it is better for me to die than to live.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then said the LORD, Doest thou well to be
angry?

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on
the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat under it
in the shade, till he might see what would become of the city.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the LORD God prepared a gourd, and made
it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shade over his head, to
deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But God prepared a worm when the morning
rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And it came to pass, when the sun rose that
God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of
Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, It is
better for me to die than to live.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And God said to Jonah, Doest thou well to
be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, even to
death.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then said the LORD, Thou hast had pity on
the gourd, for which thou hast not labored, neither made it grow; which
came up in a night, and perished in a night:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And should not I spare Nineveh, that
great city, in which are more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons
that cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand, and
also many cattle?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah](mic)
