[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jer)  [Next](eze) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Lamentations

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> How doth the city sit solitary, that was
full of people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among
the nations, and princess among the provinces, how is she become
tributary.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> She weepeth bitterly in the night, and her
tears are on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath none to comfort
her: all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become
her enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Judah is gone into captivity because of
affliction, and because of great servitude: she dwelleth among the
heathen, she findeth no rest: all her persecutors overtook her between
the straits.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> The ways of Zion do mourn, because none
come to the solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh,
her virgins are afflicted, and she is in bitterness.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies
prosper; for the LORD hath afflicted her for the multitude of her
transgressions: her children are gone into captivity before the enemy.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And from the daughter of Zion all her
beauty hath departed: her princes are become like harts that find no
pasture, and they are gone without strength before the pursuer.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Jerusalem remembered in the days of her
affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that she had in
the days of old, when her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and
none helped her: the adversaries saw her, and mocked at her sabbaths.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore
she is removed: all that honored her despise her, because they have seen
her nakedness: yes, she sigheth and turneth backward.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Her filthiness is in her skirts; she
remembereth not her last end; therefore she hath been wonderfully
abased: she had no comforter. O LORD, behold my affliction: for the
enemy hath magnified himself.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The adversary hath spread out his hand
upon all her pleasant things: for she hath seen that the heathen entered
into her sanctuary, whom thou didst command that they should not enter
into thy congregation.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> All her people sigh, they seek bread;
they have given their pleasant things for food to relieve the soul: see,
O LORD, and consider; for I am become vile.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass
by? behold, and see if there is any sorrow like my sorrow, which hath
fallen upon me, with which the LORD hath afflicted me in the day of his
fierce anger.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> From above hath he sent fire into my
bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for my feet,
he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The yoke of my transgressions is bound by
his hand: they are wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my
strength to fall, the Lord hath delivered me into their hands, from whom
I am not able to rise.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> The Lord hath trodden under foot all my
mighty men in the midst of me: he hath called an assembly against me to
crush my young men: the Lord hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of
Judah, as in a wine-press.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For these things I weep; my eye, my eye
runneth down with water, because the comforter that should relieve my
soul is far from me: my children are desolate, because the enemy
prevailed.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there
is none to comfort her: the LORD hath commanded concerning Jacob, that
his adversaries should be around him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman
among them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> The LORD is righteous; for I have
rebelled against his commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and
behold my sorrow: my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> I called for my lovers, but they deceived
me: my priests and my elders resigned their breath in the city, while
they sought their food to relieve their souls.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Behold, O LORD; for I am in distress: my
bowels are troubled; my heart is turned within me; for I have grievously
rebelled: abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> They have heard that I sigh: there is
none to comfort me: all my enemies have heard of my trouble; they are
glad that thou hast done it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast
called, and they shall be like me.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Let all their wickedness come before
thee; and do to them, as thou hast done to me for all my transgressions:
for my sighs are many, and my heart is faint.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> How hath the Lord covered the daughter of
Zion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from heaven to the earth
the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool in the day of his
anger!

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The Lord hath swallowed up all the
habitations of Jacob, and hath not pitied: he hath thrown down in his
wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; he hath brought them
down to the ground: he hath polluted the kingdom and its princes.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the
horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy,
and he burned against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth on
every side.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he
stood with his right hand as an adversary, and slew all that were
pleasant to the eye in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured
out his fury like fire.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The Lord was as an enemy: he hath swallowed
up Israel, he hath swallowed up all her palaces: he hath destroyed his
strong holds, and hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and
lamentation.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And he hath violently taken away his
tabernacle, as if it were of a garden: he hath destroyed his places of
the assembly: the LORD hath caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be
forgotten in Zion, and in the indignation of his anger hath despised the
king and the priest.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The Lord hath cast off his altar, he hath
abhorred his sanctuary, he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the
walls of her palaces; they have made a noise in the house of the LORD,
as in the day of a solemn feast.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The LORD hath purposed to destroy the wall
of the daughter of Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not
withdrawn his hand from destroying: therefore he made the rampart and
the wall to lament; they languished together.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath
destroyed and broken her bars: her king and her princes are among the
Gentiles: the law is no more: her prophets also find no vision from the
LORD.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The elders of the daughter of Zion sit
upon the ground, and keep silence: they have cast up dust upon their
heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of
Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> My eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are
troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the
daughter of my people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in
the streets of the city.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> They say to their mothers, Where is corn
and wine? when they swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city,
when their soul was poured out into their mothers' bosom.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> What thing shall I take to witness for
thee? what thing shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? What
shall I equal to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of
Zion? for thy breach is great like the sea: who can heal thee?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Thy prophets have seen vain and foolish
things for thee: and they have not revealed thy iniquity, to turn away
thy captivity; but have seen for thee false burdens and causes of
banishment.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> All that pass by, clap their hands at
thee; they hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying,
Is this the city that men call the Perfection of beauty, the Joy of the
whole earth?

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> All thy enemies have opened their mouth
against thee: they hiss and gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallowed
her up: certainly this is the day that we looked for; we have found, we
have seen it.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The LORD hath done that which he had
devised; he hath fulfilled his word that he had commanded in the days of
old: he hath thrown down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused thy
enemy to rejoice over thee, he hath set up the horn of thy adversaries.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Their heart cried to the Lord, O wall of
the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night:
give thyself no rest; let not the apple of thy eye cease.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Arise, cry out in the night: in the
beginning of the watches pour out thy heart like water before the face
of the Lord: lift up thy hands towards him for the life of thy young
children, that faint for hunger at the head of every street.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Behold, O LORD, and consider to whom thou
hast done this. Shall the women eat their fruit, children of a span
long? shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the
Lord?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> The young and the old lie on the ground
in the streets: my virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword;
thou hast slain them in the day of thy anger; thou hast killed, and not
pitied.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Thou hast called as in a solemn day my
terrors around, so that in the day of the LORD'S anger none escaped nor
remained: those that I have swaddled and brought up, hath my enemy
consumed.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> I am the man that hath seen affliction by
the rod of his wrath.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> He hath led me, and brought me into
darkness, but not into light.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Surely against me is he turned; he turneth
his hand against me all the day.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he
hath broken my bones.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He hath built against me, and compassed me
with gall and labor.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He hath set me in dark places, as they that
are dead of old.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get
out: he hath made my chain heavy.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out
my prayer.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone,
he hath made my paths crooked.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> He was to me as a bear lying in wait, and
as a lion in secret places.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> He hath turned aside my ways, and pulled
me in pieces: he hath made me desolate.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> He hath bent his bow, and set me as a
mark for the arrow.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> He hath caused the arrows of his quiver
to enter into my reins.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I was a derision to all my people; and
their song all the day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> He hath filled me with bitterness, he
hath made me drunken with wormwood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> He hath also broken my teeth with gravel
stones, he hath covered me with ashes.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And thou hast removed my soul far off
from peace: I forgat prosperity.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And I said, My strength and my hope hath
perished from the LORD:

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Remembering my affliction and my misery,
the wormwood and the gall.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> My soul hath them still in remembrance,
and is humbled in me.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> This I recall to my mind, therefore have
I hope.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> It is of the LORD'S mercies that we are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> They are new every morning: great is thy
faithfulness.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> The LORD is my portion, saith my soul;
therefore will I hope in him.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> The LORD is good to them that wait for
him, to the soul that seeketh him.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> It is good that a man should both hope
and quietly wait for the salvation of the LORD.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> It is good for a man that he should bear
the yoke in his youth.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> He sitteth alone, and keepeth silence,
because he hath borne it upon him.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> He putteth his mouth in the dust; if
there may be hope.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth
him: he is filled full with reproach.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> For the Lord will not cast off for ever:

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> But though he causeth grief, yet will he
have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> For he doth not afflict willingly nor
grieve the children of men.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> To crush under his feet all the prisoners
of the earth,

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> To turn aside the right of a man before
the face of the most High,

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord
approveth not.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> Who is he that saith, and it cometh to
pass, when the Lord commandeth it not?

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> Out of the mouth of the most High
proceedeth not evil and good?

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> Why doth a living man complain, a man for
the punishment of his sins?

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the LORD.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> Let us lift up our heart with our hands
to God in the heavens.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> We have transgressed and have rebelled:
thou hast not pardoned.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> Thou hast covered with anger, and
persecuted us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud,
that our prayer should not pass through.

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> Thou hast made us as the offscouring and
refuse in the midst of the people.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> All our enemies have opened their mouths
against us.

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> Fear and a snare is come upon us,
desolation and destruction.

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> My eye runneth down with rivers of water
for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> My eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not,
without any intermission,

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> Till the LORD shall look down, and behold
from heaven.

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> My eye affecteth my heart because of all
the daughters of my city.

<span id="an_3:52">3:52</span> My enemies chased me fiercely, like a
bird without cause.

<span id="an_3:53">3:53</span> They have cut off my life in the dungeon,
and cast a stone upon me.

<span id="an_3:54">3:54</span> Waters flowed over my head; then I said,
I am cut off.

<span id="an_3:55">3:55</span> I called upon thy name, O LORD, out of
the low dungeon.

<span id="an_3:56">3:56</span> Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thy
ear at my breathing, at my cry.

<span id="an_3:57">3:57</span> Thou drewest near in the day that I
called upon thee: thou saidst, Fear not.

<span id="an_3:58">3:58</span> O Lord, thou hast pleaded the causes of
my soul; thou hast redeemed my life.

<span id="an_3:59">3:59</span> O LORD, thou hast seen my wrong: judge
thou my cause.

<span id="an_3:60">3:60</span> Thou hast seen all their vengeance and
all their imaginations against me.

<span id="an_3:61">3:61</span> Thou hast heard their reproach, O LORD,
and all their imaginations against me;

<span id="an_3:62">3:62</span> The lips of those that rose up against
me, and their device against me all the day.

<span id="an_3:63">3:63</span> Behold their sitting down, and their
rising up; I am their music.

<span id="an_3:64">3:64</span> Render to them a recompense, O LORD,
according to the work of their hands.

<span id="an_3:65">3:65</span> Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse to
them.

<span id="an_3:66">3:66</span> Persecute and destroy them in anger from
under the heavens of the LORD.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> How is the gold become dim! how is the most
fine gold changed! the stones of the sanctuary are poured out at the
head of every street.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The precious sons of Zion, comparable to
fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the
hands of the potter!

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Even the sea-monsters draw out the breast,
they nurse their young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel,
like the ostriches in the wilderness.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to
the roof of his mouth for thirst: the young children ask bread, and no
man breaketh it to them.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> They that fed delicately are desolate in
the streets: they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For the punishment of the iniquity of the
daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of
Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they
were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their
polishing was of sapphire:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Their visage is blacker than a coal; they
are not known in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is
withered, it is become like a stick.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> They that are slain with the sword are
better than they that are slain with hunger: for these pine away,
stricken through for want of the fruits of the field.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The hands of the pitiful women have
boiled their own children: they were their food in the destruction of
the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The LORD hath accomplished his fury; he
hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and
it hath devoured her foundations.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> The kings of the earth, and all the
inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and
the enemy would have entered into the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For the sins of her prophets, and the
iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blood of the just in the
midst of her.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> They have wandered as blind men in the
streets, they have polluted themselves with blood, so that men could not
touch their garments.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> They cried to them, Depart ye; it is
unclean; depart, depart, touch not: when they fled away and wandered,
they said among the heathen, They shall no more sojourn there.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The anger of the LORD hath divided them;
he will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the
priests, they favored not the elders.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our
vain help: in our watching we have watched for a nation that could not
save us.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in
our streets: our end is near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is
come.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Our persecutors are swifter than the
eagles of heaven: they pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for
us in the wilderness.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> The breath of our nostrils, the anointed
of the LORD, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow
we shall live among the heathen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom,
that dwellest in the land of Uz; the cup also shall pass through to
thee: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thyself naked.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The punishment of thy iniquity is
accomplished, O daughter of Zion; he will no more carry thee away into
captivity: he will visit thy iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will
disclose thy sins.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Remember, O LORD, what is come upon us:
consider, and behold our reproach.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our
houses to aliens.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers
are as widows.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> We have drank our water for money; our wood
is sold to us.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Our necks are under persecution: we labor,
and have no rest.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> We have given the hand to the Egyptians,
and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and
we have borne their iniquities.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Servants have ruled over us: there is none
that doth deliver us out of their hand.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> We procured our bread with the peril of our
lives, because of the sword of the wilderness.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Our skin was black like an oven because
of the terrible famine.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> They ravished the women in Zion, and the
maids in the cities of Judah.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Princes were hanged by their hand: the
faces of elders were not honored.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> They took the young men to grind, and the
children fell under the wood.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> The elders have ceased from the gate, the
young men from their music.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The joy of our heart hath ceased; our
dance is turned into mourning.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> The crown is fallen from our head: woe to
us, that we have sinned!

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For this our heart is faint; for these
things our eyes are dim.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Because of the mountain of Zion, which is
desolate, the foxes walk upon it.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Thou, O LORD, remainest for ever; thy
throne from generation to generation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Why dost thou forget us for ever, and
forsake us so long time?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Turn thou us to thee, O LORD, and we
shall be turned; renew our days as of old.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But thou hast utterly rejected us; thou
art very wroth against us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel](eze)
