[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zac)  [Next](mat) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Malachi

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden of the word of the LORD to
Israel by Malachi.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> I have loved you, saith the LORD. Yet ye
say, In what hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the
LORD: yet I loved Jacob,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains
and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished,
but we will return and build the desolate places; thus saith the LORD of
hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down; and they shall call
them, The border of wickedness, and, The people against whom the LORD
hath indignation for ever.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say,
The LORD will be magnified from the border of Israel.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> A son honoreth his father, and a servant
his master: if then I am a father, where is my honor? and if I am a
master, where is my fear? saith the LORD of hosts to you, O priests,
that despise my name. And ye say, In what have we despised thy name?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Ye offer polluted bread upon my altar? and
ye say, In what have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the
LORD is contemptible.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is
it not evil? and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it
now to thy governor; will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person?
saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And now, I pray you, beseech God that he
will be gracious to us: this hath been by your means: will he regard
your person? saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Who is there even among you that would
shut the doors for nought? neither do ye kindle fire on my altar for
naught. I have no pleasure in you, saith the LORD of hosts, neither will
I accept an offering at your hand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For from the rising of the sun even to
the setting of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles; and
in every place incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure offering:
for my name shall be great among the heathen, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But ye have profaned it, in that ye say,
The table of the LORD is polluted; and the fruit of it, even his
provision, is contemptible.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is
it! and ye have snuffed at it, saith the LORD of hosts; and ye brought
that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an
offering: should I accept this from your hand? saith the LORD.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But cursed be the deceiver, who hath in
his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth to the Lord a corrupt
thing: for I am a great King, saith the LORD of hosts, and my name is
dreadful among the heathen.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And now, O ye priests, this commandment is
for you.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay
it to heart, to give glory to my name, saith the LORD of hosts, I will
even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings; yes, I have
cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and
spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts; and
one shall take you away with it.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And ye shall know that I have sent this
commandment to you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the LORD
of hosts.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> My covenant was with him of life and peace;
and I gave them to him for the fear with which he feared me, and was
afraid before my name.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The law of truth was in his mouth, and
iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and
equity, and turned many away from iniquity.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the priest's lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the
messenger of the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But ye have departed out of the way; ye
have caused many to stumble at the law; ye have corrupted the covenant
of Levi, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore have I also made you contemptible
and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways,
but have been partial in the law.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Have we not all one father? hath not one
God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his
brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath
profaned the holiness of the LORD whom he loved, and hath married the
daughter of a strange god.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The LORD will cut off the man that doeth
this, the master and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and
him that offereth an offering to the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And this have ye done again, covering the
altar of the LORD with tears, with weeping, and with crying out,
insomuch that he regardeth not the offering any more, or receiveth it
with good will at your hand.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Yet ye say, Why? Because the LORD hath
been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou
hast dealt treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy
covenant.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And did he not make one? Yet had he the
residue of the spirit. And why one? That he might seek a godly seed.
Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously
against the wife of his youth.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For the LORD, the God of Israel, saith,
that he hateth putting away: for one covereth violence with his garment,
saith the LORD of hosts: therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye
deal not treacherously.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Ye have wearied the LORD with your words.
Yet ye say, In what have we wearied him? When ye say, Every one that
doeth evil is good in the sight of the LORD, and he delighteth in them;
or, Where is the God of judgment?

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Behold, I will send my messenger, and he
shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, will
suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye
delight in: behold, he will come, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> But who may abide the day of his coming?
and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire,
and like fuller's soap.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier
of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold
and silver, that they may offer to the LORD an offering in
righteousness.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then shall the offering of Judah and
Jerusalem be pleasant to the LORD, as in the days of old, and as in
former years.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And I will come near to you to judgment;
and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress
the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and that turn
aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the LORD of
hosts.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For I am the LORD, I change not; therefore
ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Even from the days of your fathers ye have
gone away from my ordinances, and have not kept them. Return to me, and
I will return to you, saith the LORD of hosts. But ye said, In what
shall we return?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me.
But ye say, In what have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have
robbed me, even this whole nation.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Bring ye all the tithes into the
store-house, that there may be food in my house, and prove me now with
this, saith the LORD of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough
to receive it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And I will rebuke the devourer for your
sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall
your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the LORD of
hosts.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And all nations shall call you blessed:
for ye shall be a delightsome land, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Your words have been stout against me,
saith the LORD. Yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Ye have said, It is vain to serve God:
and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have
walked mournfully before the LORD of hosts?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And now we call the proud happy; yes,
they that work wickedness are set up; even they that tempt God are
delivered.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then they that feared the LORD spoke
often one to another: and the LORD hearkened, and heard it, and a book
of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the LORD, and
that thought upon his name.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And they shall be mine, saith the LORD of
hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, as a
man spareth his own son that serveth him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Then shall ye return and discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that
serveth him not.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> For behold, the day cometh, that shall burn
as an oven; and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be
stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the LORD of
hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> But to you that fear my name, shall the Sun
of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth,
and grow up as calves of the stall.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And ye shall tread down the wicked; for
they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall
do this, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Remember ye the law of Moses my servant,
which I commanded to him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and
judgments.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet
before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the LORD:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And he shall turn the heart of the fathers
to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I
come and smite the earth with a curse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew](mat)
