[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mat)  [Next](luk) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Mark

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ
the Son of God;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I
send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before
thee;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> John was baptizing in the wilderness, and
preaching the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And there went out to him all the land of
Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized by him in the river
Jordan, confessing their sins.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And John was clothed with camels hair, and
with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he ate locusts and wild
honey;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And preached, saying, There cometh after me
one mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop
down and unloose.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I indeed have baptized you with water: but
he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And it came to pass in those days, that
Jesus came from Nazareth to Galilee, and was baptized by John in Jordan.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And immediately coming up out of the
water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending
upon him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And there came a voice from heaven,
saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And immediately the spirit driveth him
into the wilderness.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And he was there in the wilderness forty
days tempted by Satan: and was with the wild beasts, and the angels
ministered to him.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Now after John was put in prison, Jesus
came into Galilee, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And saying, The time is fulfilled, and
the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Now as he was walking by the sea of
Galilee, he saw Simon, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the
sea: for they were fishers.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Jesus said to them, Come ye after me,
and I will make you to become fishers of men.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And immediately they forsook their nets,
and followed him.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And when he had gone a little further
thence, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also
were in the boat mending their nets.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And immediately he called them: and they
left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired servants, and went
after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And they went into Capernaum; and
immediately on the sabbath he entered into the synagogue and taught.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And they were astonished at his doctrine:
for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And there was in their synagogue a man
with an unclean spirit; and he cried out,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do
with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know
thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy
peace, and come out of him.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And when the unclean spirit had torn him,
and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And they were all amazed, so that they
questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new
doctrine is this? for with authority he commandeth even the unclean
spirits, and they obey him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And immediately his fame spread abroad
throughout all the region around Galilee.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And forthwith, when they had come out of
the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with
James and John.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> But the mother of Simon's wife lay sick
with a fever; and forthwith they tell him of her.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And he came and took her by the hand, and
lifted her up; and immediately the fever left her, and she ministered to
them.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And at evening, when the sun had set,
they brought to him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed
with demons.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> And all the city was gathered at the
door.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And he healed many that were sick with
divers diseases, and cast out many demons; and suffered not the demons
to speak, because they knew him.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And in the morning, rising a great while
before day, he went out and departed into a solitary place, and there
prayed.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And Simon, and they that were with him,
followed after him.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> And when they had found him, they said to
him, All men seek for thee.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And he said to them, Let us go into the
next towns, that I may preach there also: for, for this purpose have I
come.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And he preached in their synagogues
throughout all Galilee, and cast out demons.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> And there came a leper to him, beseeching
him, and kneeling down to him, and saying to him, If thou wilt, thou
canst make me clean.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> And Jesus, moved with compassion, put
forth his hand, and touched him, and saith to him, I will; be thou
clean.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And as soon as he had spoken, immediately
the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> And he strictly charged him, and
forthwith sent him away;

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And saith to him, See thou say nothing to
any man; but go, show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing
those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> But he went out, and began to publish it
much, and to blaze abroad the matter, so that Jesus could no more openly
enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to
him from every quarter.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And again he entered into Capernaum, after
some days; and it was understood that he was in the house.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And forthwith many were assembled, so that
there was no room to receive them, no not so much as about the door: and
he preached the word to them.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And they come to him, bringing one sick
with the palsy, who was borne by four.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And when they could not come nigh to him by
reason of the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was: and when they
had broken it up, they let down the bed on which the sick with the palsy
lay.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the
sick with the palsy, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But there were certain of the scribes
sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies?
who can forgive sins but God only?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And immediately, when Jesus perceived in
his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said to them, Why
reason ye these things in your hearts?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Which is easier, to say to the sick with
the palsy, Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy
bed, and walk?

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But that ye may know that the Son of man
hath power on earth to forgive sins, he saith to the sick with the
palsy,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> I say to thee, Arise, and take up thy
bed, and go into thy house.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And immediately he arose, took up the
bed, and went forth before them all; so that they were all amazed, and
glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And he went forth again by the sea-side;
and all the multitude resorted to him, and he taught them.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son
of Alpheus, sitting at the receipt of custom, and said to him, Follow
me. And he arose, and followed him.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And it came to pass, that as Jesus sat at
table in his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together with
Jesus and his disciples; for there were many, and they followed him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And when the scribes and Pharisees saw
him eating with publicans and sinners, they said to his disciples, How
is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> When Jesus heard it, he saith to them,
They that are in health, have no need of a physician, but they that are
sick; I came not to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And the disciples of John, and of the
Pharisees, used to fast: and they come, and say to him, Why do the
disciples of John, and of the Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast
not?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And Jesus said to them, Can the children
of the bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? As long as
they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But the days will come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then they will fast in those
days.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> No man also seweth a piece of new cloth
on an old garment: else the new piece that filled it up, taketh away
from the old, and the rent is made worse.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And no man putteth new wine into old
bottles, else the new wine doth burst the bottles, and the wine is
spilled, and the bottles will be marred: but new wine must be put into
new bottles.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And it came to pass, that he went through
the corn-fields on the sabbath; and his disciples began, as they went,
to pluck the ears of corn.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And the Pharisees said to him, Behold,
why do they on the sabbath that which is not lawful?

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And he said to them, Have ye never read
what David did, when he had need, and was hungry, he and they that were
with him?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> How he went into the house of God, in the
days of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the show-bread, which it is
not lawful to eat, but for the priests, and gave also to them who were
with him?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And he said to them, The sabbath was made
for man, and not man for the sabbath:

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of
the sabbath.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he entered again into the synagogue;
and there was a man there who had a withered hand.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And they watched him, to see whether he
would heal him on the sabbath; that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And he saith to the man who had the
withered hand, Stand forth.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he saith to them, Is it lawful to do
good on the sabbath, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? but they
held their peace.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And when he had looked around on them with
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith to the
man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand was
restored whole as the other.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the Pharisees went forth, and
immediately took counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might
destroy him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But Jesus withdrew himself with his
disciples to the sea: and a great multitude from Galilee followed him,
and from Judea.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and
from beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude,
when they had heard what great things he did, came to him.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he spoke to his disciples, that a small
boat should wait on him, because of the multitude, lest they should
throng him.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For he had healed many; so that they
pressed upon him to touch him, as many as had diseases.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And unclean spirits, when they saw him,
fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he strictly charged them, that they
should not make him known.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he goeth up upon a mountain, and
calleth to him whom he would: and they came to him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And he ordained twelve, that they should
be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And to have power to heal sicknesses, and
to cast out demons.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Simon he surnamed Peter.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And James the son of Zebedee, and John
the brother of James, (and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, Sons of
thunder,)

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew,
and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus, and
Simon the Canaanite,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed
him: and they went into a house.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And the multitude cometh together again,
so that they could not so much as eat bread.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And when his friends heard of it, they
went out to lay hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And the scribes who came down from
Jerusalem, said, He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the demons he
casteth out demons.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And he called them to him, and said to
them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And if a kingdom be divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And if a house be divided against itself,
that house cannot stand.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And if Satan rise up against himself, and
be divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> No man can enter into a strong man's
house, and seize his goods, except he will first bind the strong man;
and then he will plunder his house.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Verily I say to you, All sins shall be
forgiven to the sons of men, and any blasphemies with which they shall
blaspheme:

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> But he that shall blaspheme against the
Holy Spirit never hath forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal
damnation:

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Because they said, He hath an unclean
spirit.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> There came then his brethren and his
mother, and standing without, they sent to him, calling him.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> And the multitude sat about him, and they
said to him, Behold, thy mother, and thy brethren without seek for thee.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> And he answered them, saying, Who is my
mother, or my brethren?

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And he looked around on them who sat
about him, and said, Behold, my mother and my brethren!

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> For whoever shall do the will of God, the
same is my brother, and my sister, and mother.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And he began again to teach by the
sea-side: and there was gathered to him a great multitude, so that he
entered into a boat, and sat on the sea; and the whole multitude was by
the sea, on the land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And he taught them many things by parables,
and said to them in his doctrine,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Hearken; Behold, a sower went out to sow:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And it came to pass as he sowed, some fell
by the way-side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And some fell on stony ground, where it had
not much earth; and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of
earth.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> But when the sun had risen, it was
scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And some fell among thorns, and the thorns
grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And other fell on good ground, and yielded
fruit that sprang up, and increased, and brought forth, some thirty, and
some sixty, and some a hundred.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he said to them, He that hath ears to
hear, let him hear.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And when he was alone, they that were
about him, with the twelve, asked of him the parable.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he said to them, To you it is given
to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but to them that are without,
all these things are done in parables:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> That seeing they may see, and not
perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any
time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he said to them, Know ye not this
parable? and how then will ye know all parables?

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> The sower soweth the word.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And these are they by the way-side, where
the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately,
and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And these are they likewise who are sown
on stony ground; who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive
it with gladness;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And have no root in themselves, and so
endure but for a time: afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth
for the word's sake, immediately they relapse.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And these are they who are sown among
thorns; such as hear the word,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in,
choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And these are they who are sown on good
ground; such as hear the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit,
some thirty-fold, some sixty, and some a hundred.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And he said to them, Is a candle brought
to be put under a close vessel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a
candlestick?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For there is nothing hid, which shall not
be manifested; neither hath any thing been kept secret, but that it
should come abroad.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> If any man hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And he said to them, Take heed what ye
hear: With the measure which ye give, it shall be measured to you: and
to you that hear shall more be given.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For he that hath, to him shall be given:
and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he hath.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as
if a man should cast seed into the ground;

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And should sleep, and rise night and day,
and the seed should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For the earth bringeth forth fruit of
itself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the
ear.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But when the fruit is brought forth,
immediately he putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And he said, To what shall we liken the
kingdom of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> It is like a grain of mustard-seed,
which, when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that are
in the earth.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> But when it is sown, it groweth up, and
becometh greater than all herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so
that the fowls of the air may lodge under its shade.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with many such parables he spoke the
word to them, as they were able to hear it.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> But without a parable he spoke not to
them: and when they were alone, he expounded all things to his
disciples.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And the same day, when the evening was
come, he saith to them, Let us pass over to the other side.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And when they had sent away the
multitude, they took him even as he was in the boat. And there were also
with him other small boats.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> And there arose a great storm of wind,
and the waves beat into the boat, so that it was now full.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> And he was in the hinder part of the
boat, asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and say to him, Master,
carest thou not that we perish?

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and
said to the sea, Peace, be still: and the wind ceased, and there was a
great calm.

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> And he said to them, Why are ye so
fearful? how is it that ye have no faith?

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> And they feared exceedingly, and said one
to another, What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea
obey him?

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And they came over to the other side of the
sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And when he had come out of the boat,
immediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Who had his dwelling among the tombs; and
no man could bind him, no, not with chains:

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For he had been often bound with fetters
and chains, and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the
fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And always, night and day, he was on the
mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself with stones.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and
worshiped him,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And cried with a loud voice, and said, What
have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I adjure
thee by God, that thou torment me not.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> (For he said to him, Come out of the man,
thou unclean spirit.)

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And he asked him, What is thy name? And he
answered, saying, My name is Legion: for we are many.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And he besought him much that he would
not send them away out of the country.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Now there was there nigh to the mountains
a great herd of swine feeding.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And all the demons besought him, saying,
Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And
the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and the herd
ran violently down a steep place into the sea (they were about two
thousand) and were choked in the sea.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And they that fed the swine fled, and
told it in the city, and in the country. And they went out to see what
it was that was done.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And they come to Jesus, and see him that
was possessed with the demon, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed,
and in his right mind: and they were afraid.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And they that saw it told them how it
befell him that was possessed with the demon, and also concerning the
swine.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And they began to pray him to depart out
of their borders.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And when he had come into the boat, he
that had been possessed with the demon prayed him that he might be with
him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Yet Jesus suffered him not, but saith to
him, Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord
hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And he departed, and began to publish in
Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him. And all men wondered.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And when Jesus had passed over again in a
boat to the other side, much people gathered to him: and he was nigh to
the sea.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And behold, there cometh one of the
rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he fell at
his feet,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And besought him greatly, saying, My
little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee, come and lay
thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she will live.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And Jesus went with him; and many people
followed him, and thronged him.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> And a certain woman who had an issue of
blood twelve years,

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And had suffered many things from many
physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was not relieved, but
rather grew worse,

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> When she had heard of Jesus, came in the
crowd behind, and touched his garment.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> For she said, If I may touch but his
clothes, I shall be whole.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And immediately the fountain of her blood
was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that
infirmity.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself
that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the throng, and
said, Who touched my clothes?

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And his disciples said to him, Thou seest
the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And he looked around, to see her that had
done this thing.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But the woman fearing and trembling,
knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before him, and told
him all the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> And he said to her, Daughter, thy faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be healed of thy infirmity.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> While he was yet speaking, there came
from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain who said, Thy daughter
is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further?

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> As soon as Jesus heard the word that was
spoken, he saith to the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only
believe,

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> And he suffered no man to follow him,
save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And he cometh to the house of the ruler
of the synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed
greatly.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> And when he had come in, he saith to
them, Why make ye this tumult, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but
sleepeth.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And they derided him: but when he had put
them all out, he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and
them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And he took the damsel by the hand, and
said to her, Talitha cumi: which is, being interpreted, Damsel (I say to
thee) arise.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And forthwith the damsel arose, and
walked; for she was of the age of twelve years. And they were astonished
with a great astonishment.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> And he charged them strictly that no man
should know it; and commanded that something should be given her to eat.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And he went out from thence, and came into
his own country, and his disciples follow him.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And when the sabbath was come, he began to
teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying,
From whence hath this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is
given to him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary,
the brother of James, and Joses, and of Judas, and Simon? and are not
his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not
without honor, but in his own country, and among his own kindred, and in
his own house.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And he could there do no mighty work, save
that he laid his hands upon a few sick persons, and healed them.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And he marveled because of their unbelief.
And he went around the villages teaching.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he calleth to him the twelve, and began
to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean
spirits;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And commanded them that they should take
nothing for their journey, save a staff only; no bag, no bread, no money
in their purse:

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But be shod with sandals; and not put on
two coats.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And he said to them, In whatever place ye
enter into a house, there abide till ye depart from that place.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And whoever shall not receive you, nor
hear you, when ye depart thence shake off the dust under your feet, for
a testimony against them. Verily I say to you, It shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that
city.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And they went out and preached that men
should repent.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And they cast out many demons, and
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And king Herod heard of him (for his name
was spread abroad:) and he said, That John the Baptist had risen from
the dead, and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Others said, That it is Elijah. And
others said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> But when Herod heard of him, he said, It
is John, whom I beheaded: he hath risen from the dead.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For Herod himself had sent forth and laid
hold upon John, and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his
brother Philip's wife: for he had married her.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> For John had said to Herod, It is not
lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against
him, and would have killed him; but she could not:

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For Herod feared John, knowing that he
was a just and holy man, and observed him: and when he heard him, he did
many things, and heard him gladly.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And when a convenient day had come, that
Herod on his birth-day made a supper to his lords, high captains, and
chief men of Galilee;

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And when the daughter of the said
Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod, and them that sat with
him, the king said to the damsel, Ask of me whatever thou wilt, and I
will give it thee.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And he swore to her, Whatever thou shalt
ask of me, I will give it thee, to the half of my kingdom.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And she went forth, and said to her
mother, What shall I ask? and she said, The head of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And she came in forthwith with haste to
the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou shouldst give me,
immediately, in a dish, the head of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And the king was exceeding sorry: yet for
his oath's sake, and for their sakes who sat with him, he would not
reject her.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And immediately the king sent an
executioner, and commanded his head to be brought: and he went and
beheaded him in the prison,

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And brought his head in a dish, and gave
it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And when his disciples heard of it, they
came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And the apostles assembled themselves to
Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they
had taught.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And he said to them, Come ye yourselves
apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming
and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> And they departed into a desert place in
a boat privately.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And the people saw them departing, and
many knew him, and ran on foot thither out of all cities, and out went
them, and came together to him.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> And Jesus, when he came out, saw many
people, and was moved with compassion towards them, because they were as
sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And when the day was now far spent, his
disciples came to him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the
time is far passed:

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> Send them away, that they may go into the
country around, and into the villages, and buy themselves bread: for
they have nothing to eat.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> He answered and said to them, Give ye
them to eat. And they say to him, Shall we go and buy two hundred
pennyworth of bread, and give them to eat?

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> He saith to them, How many loaves have
ye? go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And he commanded them to make all sit
down by companies upon the green grass.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds,
and by fifties.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> And when he had taken the five loaves,
and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, and broke the
loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before them; and the two
fishes he divided among them all.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> And they all ate, and were satisfied.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> And they took up twelve baskets full of
the fragments, and of the fishes.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> And they that ate of the loaves, were
about five thousand men.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> And immediately he constrained his
disciples to get into the boat, and to go to the other side before to
Bethsaida, while he sent away the people.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> And when he had dismissed them, he
departed to a mountain to pray.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> And when evening was come, the boat was
in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> And he saw them toiling in rowing; for
the wind was contrary to them: and about the fourth watch of the night
he cometh to them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> But when they saw him walking upon the
sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> (For they all saw him, and were
troubled.) And immediately he talked with them, and saith to them, Be of
good cheer: It is I; be not afraid.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> And he went up to them into the boat; and
the wind ceased: and they were greatly amazed in themselves beyond
measure, and wondered.

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> For they considered not the miracle of
the loaves; for their heart was hardened.

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> And when they had passed over, they came
into the land of Gennesaret, and drew to the shore.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> And when they had come out of the boat
forthwith they knew him,

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> And ran through that whole region around,
and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard
he was.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> And whithersoever he entered, into
villages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and
besought him that they might touch, if it were but the border of his
garment: and as many as touched him, were healed.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Then came together to him the Pharisees,
and certain of the scribes, who came from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And when they saw some of his disciples
eating bread with defiled (that is to say with unwashed) hands, they
found fault.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except
they wash their hands often eat not, holding the tradition of the
elders.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And when they come from the market, except
they wash, they eat not. And many other things there are, which they
have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, and of brazen
vessels, and tables.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Then the Pharisees and scribes asked him,
Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but
eat bread with unwashed hands?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> He answered and said to them, Well hath
Isaiah prophesied concerning you hypocrites, as it is written, This
people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But, in vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For laying aside the commandment of God, ye
hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and many
other such like things ye do.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And he said to them, Full well ye reject
the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy
mother; and, Whoever curseth father or mother, let him die the death:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But ye say, If a man shall say to his
father or mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatever thou
mightest be profited by me; he shall be free.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And ye suffer him no more to do aught for
his father or his mother;

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Making the word of God of no effect
through your traditions, which ye have delivered: and many such like
things ye do.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And when he had called all the people to
him, he said to them, Hearken to me every one of you, and understand.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> There is nothing from without a man, that
entering into him, can defile him: but the things which come out of him,
those are they that defile the man.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> If any man hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And when he had entered into the house
from the people, his disciples asked him concerning the parable.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And he saith to them, Are ye so void of
understanding also? Do ye not perceive, that whatever thing from without
entereth into the man, it cannot defile him.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Because it entereth not into his heart,
but into the belly, and goeth out into the draught, purging all kinds of
food.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And he said, That which cometh out of the
man, that defileth the man.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For from within, out of the heart of men,
proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> All these evil things come from within,
and defile the man.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And from thence he arose, and went into
the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into a house, and would have
no man know it: but he could not be hid.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> For a certain woman, whose young daughter
had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at his feet:

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> (The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician
by nation,) and she besought him that he would cast forth the demon out
of her daughter.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But Jesus said to her, Let the children
first be satisfied: for it is not meet to take the children's bread, and
to cast it to the dogs.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And she answered and said to him, Yes,
Lord: yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crums.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And he said to her, For this saying,
depart; the demon is gone out of thy daughter.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And when she had come to her house, she
found the demon had gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And again, departing from the borders of
Tyre and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the
borders of Decapolis.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And they bring to him one that was deaf,
and had an impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to put his
hand upon him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And he took him aside from the multitude,
and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> And looking up to heaven, he sighed, and
saith to him, Effatha, that is, Be opened.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> And immediately his ears were opened, and
the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke plain.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> And he charged them that they should tell
no man: but the more he charged them; so much the more a great deal they
published it;

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> And were beyond measure astonished,
saying, He hath done all things well; he maketh both the deaf to hear,
and the dumb to speak.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> In those days the multitude being very
great, and having nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples, and saith
to them,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I have compassion on the multitude, because
they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to eat:

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And if I send them away fasting to their
own houses, they will faint by the way: for some of them came from a
distance.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And his disciples answered him, From whence
can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he asked them, How many loaves have ye?
And they said, Seven.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And he commanded the people to sit down on
the ground: and he took the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and broke,
and gave to his disciples to set before them; and they set them before
the people.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And they had a few small fishes: and he
blessed, and commanded to set them also before them.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> So they ate, and were satisfied: and they
took up of the fragments that were left, seven baskets.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And they that had eaten were about four
thousand: and he dismissed them.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And forthwith he entered into a boat with
his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the Pharisees came forth, and began
to question with him, seeking from him a sign from heaven, tempting him.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and
saith, Why doth this generation seek for a sign? Verily I say to you,
There shall no sign be given to this generation.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And he left them, and entering into the
boat again, departed to the other side.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Now the disciples had forgotten to take
bread, neither had they in the boat with them more than one loaf.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he charged them saying, Take heed,
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And they reasoned among themselves,
saying, It is because we have no bread.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And when Jesus knew it, he saith to them,
Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither
understand? have ye your heart yet hardened?

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears,
hear ye not? and do ye not remember?

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> When I divided the five loaves among five
thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? They say to
him, Twelve.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And when the seven among four thousand,
how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he said to them, How is it that ye do
not understand?

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they
bring a blind man to him, and besought him to touch him.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And he took the blind man by the hand,
and led him out of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put
his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw aught.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And he looked up, and said, I see men as
trees walking.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> After that, he put his hands again upon
his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every man
clearly.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And he sent him away to his house,
saying, Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any in the town.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And Jesus went out, and his disciples,
into the towns of Cesarea Philippi: and by the way he asked his
disciples, saying to them, Who do men say that I am?

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And they answered, John the Baptist: but
some say, Elijah; and others, One of the prophets,

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And he saith to them, But who say ye that
I am? And Peter answereth and saith to him, Thou art the Christ.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And he charged them that they should tell
no man of him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he began to teach them, that the Son
of man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and the
chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise
again.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he spoke that saying openly. And
Peter took him, and began to rebuke him.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> But when he had turned about, and looked
on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan:
for thou savorest not the things that are of God, but the things that
are of men.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And when he had called the people to him
with his disciples also, he said to them, Whoever will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whoever will save his life, shall
lose it; but whoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's,
the same shall save it.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> For what shall it profit a man, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul:

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> Or what will a man give in exchange for
his soul?

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> Whoever therefore shall be ashamed of me,
and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also
will the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his
Father with the holy angels.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And he said to them, Verily I say to you,
that there are some of them that stand here who shall not taste death,
till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And after six days, Jesus taketh with him
Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up upon a high mountain
apart by themselves; and he was transfigured before them.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And his raiment became shining, exceeding
white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can whiten them.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And there appeared to them Elijah, with
Moses: and they were talking with Jesus.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And Peter answered and said to Jesus,
Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three tabernacles;
one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For he knew not what to say: for they were
greatly terrified.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And there was a cloud that overshadowed
them: and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son:
hear him.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And suddenly, when they had looked around,
they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And as they came down from the mountain, he
charged them that they should tell no man what things they had seen,
till the Son of man were risen from the dead.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they kept that saying with
themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead
should mean.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And they asked him, saying, Why say the
scribes that Elijah must first come?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And he answered and told them, Elijah
verily cometh first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written
concerning the Son of man, that he must suffer many things, and be set
at naught.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But I say to you, that Elijah is indeed
come, and they have done to him whatever they pleased, as it is written
concerning him.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And when he came to his disciples, he saw
a great multitude about them, and the scribes questioning with them.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And immediately all the people, when they
beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to him, saluted him.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And he asked the scribes, What question
ye with them?

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And one of the multitude answered and
said, Master, I have brought to thee my son, who hath a dumb spirit;

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And wherever he taketh him, he teareth
him; and he foameth and gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth away; and I
spoke to thy disciples that they should cast him out, and they could
not.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> He answered him, and saith, O faithless
generation, how long shall I be with you, how long shall I suffer you?
bring him to me.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And they brought him to him: and when he
saw him, immediately the spirit tore him; and he fell on the ground, and
wallowed, foaming.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And he asked his father, How long is it
since this came to him? and he said, From a child.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And often it hath cast him into the fire,
and into the waters to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have
compassion on us, and help us.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Jesus said to him, If thou canst believe,
all things are possible to him that believeth.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And immediately the father of the child
cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou my unbelief.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> When Jesus saw that the people came
running together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying to him, Thou dumb
and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter no more into
him.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And the spirit cried, and rent him
severely, and came out of him: and he was as one dead; so that many
said, He is dead.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Jesus took him by the hand, and
lifted him up; and he arose.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And when he had come into the house, his
disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out?

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And he said to them, This kind can come
forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And they departed thence, and passed
through Galilee; and he would not that any man should know it.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> For he taught his disciples, and said to
them, The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they will
kill him; and after that he is killed, he will rise the third day.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But they understood not that saying, and
were afraid to ask him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And he came to Capernaum: and being in
the house, he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among yourselves
by the way?

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But they held their peace: for by the way
they had disputed among themselves, who should be the greatest.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And he sat down, and called the twelve,
and saith to them, If any man desireth to be first, the same shall be
last of all, and servant of all.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And he took a child, and set him in the
midst of them: and when he had taken him in his arms, he said to them,

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Whoever shall receive one of such
children in my name, receiveth me: and whoever shall receive me,
receiveth not me, but him that sent me.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And John answered him, saying, Master, we
saw one casting out demons in thy name, and he followeth not us; and we
forbad him, because he followeth not us.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> But Jesus said, Forbid him not; for there
is no man who shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil
of me.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> For he that is not against us, is on our
part.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> For whoever shall give you a cup of water
to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say to you,
he shall not lose his reward.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And whoever shall cause one of these
little ones that believe in me, to fall into sin, it is better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the
sea.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And if thy hand causeth thee to fall into
sin, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter life maimed, than having
two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched:

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> Where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched.

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> And if thy foot causeth thee to fall into
sin, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter halt into life, than
having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched:

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> Where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched.

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> And if thy eye causeth thee to fall into
sin, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of
God with one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast into hell-fire.

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> Where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched.

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> For every one shall be salted with fire,
and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> Salt is good: but if the salt hath lost
its saltness, with what will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and
have peace one with another.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And he arose from thence, and cometh into
the borders of Judea, by the further side of Jordan: and the people
resort to him again; and, as he was accustomed, he taught them again.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And the Pharisees came to him, and asked
him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting him.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And he answered and said to them, What
did Moses command you?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And they said, Moses suffered to write a
bill of divorcement, and to put her away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And Jesus answered and said to them, For
the hardness of your heart, he wrote you this precept.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But from the beginning of the creation,
God made them male and female.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> For this cause shall a man leave his
father and mother, and cleave to his wife;

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And they two shall be one flesh: so then
they are no more two, but one flesh.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> What therefore God hath joined together,
let not man separate.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And in the house his disciples asked
him again of the same matter.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he saith to them, Whoever shall put
away his wife, and marry another, committeth adultery against her.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And if a woman shall put away her
husband, and be married to another, she committeth adultery.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And they brought young children to him,
that he should touch them; and his disciples rebuked those that brought
them.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But when Jesus saw it, he was much
displeased, and said to them, Suffer the little children to come to me,
and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Verily I say to you, Whoever shall not
receive the kingdom of God, as a little child, he shall not enter it.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And he took them up in his arms, put
his hands upon them, and blessed them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And when he had gone forth into the
way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good
Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Jesus said to him, Why callest thou
me good? there is none good, but one, that is God.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Thou knowest the commandments, Do not
commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness,
Defraud not, Honor thy father and mother.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And he answered and said to him,
Master, all these have I observed from my youth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and
said to him, One thing thou lackest: go, sell whatever thou hast, and
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and come, take
up the cross, and follow me.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And he was sad at that saying, and went
away grieved: for he had great possessions.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And Jesus looked around, and saith to
his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the
kingdom of God!

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And the disciples were astonished at
his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith to them, Children, how
hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of
God!

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And they were astonished beyond
measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved?

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And Jesus looking upon them, saith,
With men it is impossible, but not with God: for with God all things are
possible.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Then Peter began to say to him, Lo, we
have left all, and have followed thee.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Jesus answered and said, Verily I say
to you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and
the gospel's,

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> But he shall receive a hundred-fold now
in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and
children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come,
eternal life.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> But many that are first shall be last;
and the last first.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And they were in the way, going up to
Jerusalem; and Jesus went before them: and they were amazed; and as they
followed, they were afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began to
tell them what things should happen to him,

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Saying, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem;
and the Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests, and to the
scribes; and they will condemn him to death, and will deliver him to the
Gentiles;

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And they will mock him, and will
scourge him, and will spit upon him, and will kill him: and the third
day he will rise again.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And James and John the sons of Zebedee
come to him, saying, Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us
whatever we shall desire.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And he said to them, What would ye that
I should do for you?

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> They said to him, Grant to us that we
may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy
glory.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But Jesus said to them, Ye know not
what ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with?

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And they said to him, We can. And Jesus
said to them, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of: and with
the baptism that I am baptized with shalt ye be baptized;

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> But to sit on my right hand and on my
left hand, is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom
it is prepared.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> And when the ten heard it, they began
to be much displeased with James and John.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> But Jesus called them, and saith to
them, Ye know that they who are accounted to rule over the Gentiles,
exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority
upon them.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> But so it shall not be among you: but
whoever will be great among you, shall be your minister:

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> And whoever of you will be the chief,
shall be servant of all.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> For even the son of man came not to be
ministered to, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> And they came to Jericho: and as he
went out of Jericho with his disciples, and a great number of people,
blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, sat by the highway-side begging.

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> And when he heard that it was Jesus of
Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou son of David, have
mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And many charged him that he should
hold his peace: but he cried the more a great deal, Thou son of David,
have mercy on me.

<span id="an_10:49">10:49</span> And Jesus stood still, and commanded
him to be called: and they call the blind man, saying to him, Be of good
comfort, rise; he calleth thee.

<span id="an_10:50">10:50</span> And he, casting away his garment, rose,
and came to Jesus.

<span id="an_10:51">10:51</span> And Jesus answered and said to him,
What wilt thou that I should do to thee? The blind man said to him,
Lord, that I may receive my sight.

<span id="an_10:52">10:52</span> And Jesus said to him, Go, thy faith
hath made thee whole. And immediately he received his sight, and
followed Jesus in the way.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, to
Bethphage, and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of
his disciples,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And saith to them, Go into the village
over against you: and as soon as ye have entered into it, ye shall find
a colt tied, on which never man sat; loose him, and bring him.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And if any man shall say to you, Why do
ye this? say ye that the Lord hath need of him; and immediately he will
send him hither.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they went, and found the colt tied by
the door without, in a place where two ways met; and they loose him.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And certain of them that stood there,
said to them, What do ye, loosing the colt?

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And they said to them even as Jesus had
commanded; and they let them go.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And they brought the colt to Jesus, and
cast their garments on him; and he sat upon him.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And many spread their garments in the
way: and others cut down branches off trees, and strewed them in the
way.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And they that went before, and they that
followed, cried, saying, Hosanna: Blessed is he that cometh in the name
of the Lord.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Blessed be the kingdom of our Father
David, that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and
into the temple: and when he had looked round upon all things, it being
now evening, he went out to Bethany, with the twelve.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And on the morrow, when they had come
from Bethany, he was hungry,

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And seeing a fig-tree afar off, having
leaves, he came, if haply he might find any thing on it: and when he
came to it, he found nothing but leaves: for the time of figs had not
yet come.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Jesus answered and said to it, Let
no man eat fruit of thee hereafter for ever. And his disciples heard it.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And they come to Jerusalem: and Jesus
went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in
the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the
seats of them that sold doves;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And would not suffer that any man
should carry any vessel through the temple.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And he taught, saying to them, Is it
not written, My house shall be called by all nations the house of
prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And the scribes and chief priests heard
it, and sought how they might destroy him: for they feared him, because
all the people were astonished at his doctrine.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And when evening had come, he went out
of the city.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And in the morning, as they passed by,
they saw the fig-tree dried up from the roots.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And Peter calling to remembrance, saith
to him, Master, behold, the fig-tree which thou cursedst is withered.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And Jesus answering, saith to them,
Have faith in God.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For verily I say to you, that whoever
shall say to this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the
sea; and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that the things
which he saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatever he saith.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Therefore I say to you, Whatever things
ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have
them.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And when ye stand praying, forgive, if
ye have aught against any: that your Father also who is in heaven may
forgive you your trespasses.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> But if ye do not forgive, neither will
your Father who is in heaven forgive your trespasses.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And they come again to Jerusalem: and
as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests,
and the scribes, and the elders,

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And say to him, By what authority doest
thou these things? and who gave thee this authority to do these things?

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And Jesus answered and said to them, I
will also ask of you one question, and answer me, and I will tell you by
what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The baptism of John, was it from
heaven, or from men? answer me.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> And they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not
believe him?

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> But if we shall say, from men; they
feared the people: for all men counted John that he was a prophet
indeed.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And they answered and said to Jesus, We
cannot tell. And Jesus answering saith to them, Neither do I tell you by
what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And he began to speak to them by
parables. A certain man planted a vineyard, and set a hedge about it,
and digged a place for the wine-vat, and built a tower, and let it out
to husbandmen, and went into a far country.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And at the season he sent to the
husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the
fruit of the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And they caught him, and beat him and
sent him away empty.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And again, he sent to them another
servant: and at him they cast stones, and wounded him in the head, and
sent him away shamefully handled.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And again he sent another; and him they
killed, and many others; beating some, and killing some.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Having yet therefore one son, his
well-beloved, he sent him also last to them, saying, They will reverence
my son.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But those husbandmen said among
themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and the inheritance
will be ours.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And they took him, and killed him, and
cast him out of the vineyard.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> What therefore will the Lord of the
vineyard do? he will come and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the
vineyard to others.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And have ye not read this scripture;
The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner:

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> This was the Lord's doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And they sought to lay hold on him, but
feared the people; for they knew that he had spoken the parable against
them: and they left him, and departed.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And they sent to him certain of the
Pharisees, and of the Herodians, to catch him in his words.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And when they had come, they say to
him, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou
regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth:
Is it lawful to give tribute to Cesar, or not?

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Shall we give, or shall we not give?
But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, Why tempt ye me? bring me
a penny, that I may see it.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And they brought it: and he saith to
them, Whose is this image and superscription? And they said to him,
Cesar's.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And Jesus answering, said to them,
Render to Cesar the things that are Cesar's, and to God the things that
are God's. And they wondered at him.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Then come to him the Sadducees, who say
there is no resurrection; and they asked him, saying,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Master, Moses wrote to us, If a man's
brother shall die, and leave his wife, and leave no children, that his
brother should take his wife, and raise seed to his brother.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now there were seven brothers: and the
first took a wife, and dying left no seed.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And the second took her, and died,
neither left he any seed: and the third likewise.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the seven had her, and left no
seed: last of all the woman died also.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> In the resurrection therefore, when
they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of them? for the seven had her
for a wife.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And Jesus answering, said to them, Do
ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures, neither the
power of God?

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For when they shall rise from the dead,
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as the angels who
are in heaven.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And concerning the dead that they rise;
have ye not read in the book of Moses, how in the bush God spoke to him,
saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> He is not the God of the dead, but the
God of the living: ye therefore do greatly err.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And one of the scribes came, and having
heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them
well, asked him, Which is the first commandment of all?

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And Jesus answered him, The first of
all the commandments is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength: this is the first commandment.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And the second is like, namely this,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself: there is no other commandment
greater than these.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And the scribe said to him, Well,
Master, thou hast said the truth: for there is one God; and there is no
other but he.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And to love him with all the heart, and
with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the
strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> And when Jesus saw that he answered
discreetly, he said to him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.
And no man after that durst ask him any question.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And Jesus answered and said, while he
taught in the temple, How say the scribes that Christ is the son of
David?

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> For David himself said by the Holy
Spirit, The LORD said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make
thy enemies thy footstool.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> David therefore himself calleth him
Lord, and whence is he then his son? and the common people heard him
gladly.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And he said to them in his doctrine,
Beware of the scribes, who love to go in long clothing, and love
salutations in the market-places,

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And the chief seats in the synagogues,
and the uppermost rooms at feasts:

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> Who devour widows' houses, and for a
pretense make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> And Jesus sat over against the
treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury: and
many that were rich cast in much.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> And there came a certain poor widow,
and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And he called his disciples, and saith
to them, Verily I say to you, that this poor widow hath cast in more,
than all they who have cast into the treasury.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> For all they cast in of their
abundance: but she of her want cast in all that she had, even all her
living.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And as he was going out of the temple,
one of his disciples saith to him, Master, see what manner of stones,
and what buildings are here!

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And Jesus answering said to him, Seest
thou these great buildings? there shall not be left one stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And as he sat upon the mount of Olives,
over against the temple, Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, asked
him privately,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Tell us, when will these things be? and
what will be the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And Jesus answering them, began to say,
Take heed lest any man deceive you:

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For many will come in my name, saying, I
am Christ; and will deceive many.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And when ye shall hear of wars, and
rumors of wars, be ye not troubled: for such things must needs be; but
the end will not be yet.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> For nation will rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom: and there will be earthquakes in divers places,
and there will be famines, and troubles: these are the beginnings of
sorrows.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But take heed to yourselves: for they
will deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye will be
beaten: and ye will be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for
a testimony against them.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And the gospel must first be published
among all nations.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> But when they shall lead you, and
deliver you up, be not anxious beforehand what ye shall speak, neither
do ye premeditate: but whatever shall be given you in that hour, that
speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Now the brother will betray the brother
to death, and the father the son: and children will rise up against
their parents, and will cause them to be put to death.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And ye will be hated by all men for my
name's sake: but he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be
saved.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But when ye shall see the abomination
of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought
not, (let him that readeth understand) then let them that are in Judea
flee to the mountains:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And let him that is on the house-top
not go down into the house, neither enter it, to take any thing out of
his house:

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And let him that is in the field not
turn back again to take up his garment.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> But woe to them that are with child,
and to them that nurse infants in those days.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And pray ye that your flight be not in
the winter.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> For in those days shall be affliction,
such as hath not been from the beginning of the creation which God
created to this time, neither shall be.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And except the Lord had shortened those
days, no flesh would be saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he hath
chosen, he hath shortened the days.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And then, if any man shall say to you,
Lo, here is Christ; or lo, he is there; believe him not.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> For false Christs, and false prophets
will rise, and will show signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were
possible, even the elect.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But take ye heed: behold, I have
foretold you all things.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> But in those days, after that
tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not give her
light,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And the stars of heaven shall fall, and
the powers that are in heaven shall be shaken.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And then they shall see the Son of man
coming in the clouds with great power and glory.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And then he will send his angels, and
will assemble his elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of
the earth to the uttermost part of heaven.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Now learn a parable of the fig-tree:
When its branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that
summer is near:

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> So ye in like manner, when ye shall see
these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the doors.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Verily I say to you, that this
generation shall not pass, till all these things shall be done.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Heaven and earth shall pass away: but
my words shall not pass away.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> But of that day and that hour knoweth
no man, no not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye
know not when the time is.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> For the son of man is as a man taking a
long journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants,
and to every man his work; and commanded the porter to watch.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Watch ye therefore: for ye know not
when the master of the house cometh, at evening, or at midnight, or at
the cock-crowing, or in the morning:

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Lest coming suddenly, he should find
you sleeping.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> And what I say to you, I say to all,
Watch.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> After two days was the feast of the
passover, and of unleavened bread: and the chief priests, and the
scribes, sought how they might take him by craft, and put him to death.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But they said, Not on the feast-day, lest
there should be an uproar of the people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And being in Bethany, in the house of
Simon the leper, as he sat at table, there came a woman having an
alabaster box of ointment of spikenard, very precious; and she broke the
box, and poured it on his head.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And there were some that had indignation
within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made?

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> For it might have been sold for more than
three hundred pence, and have been given to the poor. And they murmured
against her.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And Jesus said, Let her alone; why
trouble ye her? she hath wrought a good work on me.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For ye have the poor with you always, and
whenever ye will ye may do them good: but me ye have not always.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> She hath done what she could: she is come
beforehand to anoint my body to the burying.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Verily I say to you, Wherever this gospel
shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she hath
done shall be spoken of, for a memorial of her.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve,
went to the chief priests, to betray him to them.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And when they heard it, they were glad,
and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently
betray him.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And the first day of unleavened bread,
when they killed the passover, his disciples said to him, Where wilt
thou that we go and prepare, that thou mayest eat the passover?

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And he sendeth two of his disciples,
and saith to them, Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a man
bearing a pitcher of water: follow him.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And wherever he shall go in, say ye to
the master of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guest-chamber,
where I may eat the passover with my disciples?

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And he will show you a large upper room
furnished and prepared: there make ready for us.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And his disciples went, and came into
the city, and found as he had said to them: and they made ready the
passover.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And in the evening he cometh with the
twelve.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And as they sat, and were eating, Jesus
said, Verily I say to you, One of you who eateth with me, will betray
me.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And they began to be sorrowful, and to
say to him one by one, Is it I? and another said, Is it I?

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And he answered and said to them, It is
one of the twelve that dippeth with me in the dish.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is
written concerning him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is
betrayed! good were it for that man if he had never been born.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And as they were eating, Jesus took
bread, and blessed, and broke it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat:
this is my body.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And he took the cup, and when he had
given thanks, he gave it to them: and they all drank of it.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And he said to them, This is my blood
of the new testament, which is shed for many.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Verily I say to you, I will drink no
more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the
kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And when they had sung a hymn, they
went out to the mount of Olives.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And Jesus saith to them, All ye will be
offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> But after that I am risen, I will go
before you into Galilee.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But Peter said to him, Although all
shall be offended, yet will not I.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And Jesus saith to him, Verily I say to
thee, that this day, even in this night, before the cock shall crow
twice, thou wilt deny me thrice.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But he spoke the more vehemently, If I
should die with thee, I will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also
said they all.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And they came to a place which was
named Gethsemane: and he saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I
shall pray.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And he taketh with him Peter, and
James, and John, and began to be greatly amazed, and to be very heavy;

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And saith to them, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful to death: tarry ye here, and watch.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And he went forward a little, and fell
on the ground, and prayed that, If it were possible, the hour might pass
from him.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And he said, Abba, Father, all things
are possible to thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless, not what
I will, but what thou wilt.

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> And he cometh, and findeth them
sleeping, and saith to Peter, Simon, sleepest thou? couldst not thou
watch one hour?

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation. The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> And again he went away, and prayed, and
spoke the same words.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> And when he returned, he found them
asleep again (for their eyes were heavy:) neither knew they what to
answer him.

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> And he cometh the third time, and saith
to them, Sleep on now, and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is
come; behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Rise, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth
me is at hand.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> And immediately while he was yet
speaking, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great
multitude with swords and staffs, from the chief priests, and the
scribes, and the elders.

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> And he that betrayed him, had given
them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take
him, and lead him away safely.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> And as soon as he was come, he goeth
immediately to him, and saith, Master, master; and kissed him.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> And they laid their hands on him, and
took him.

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> And one of them that stood by drew a
sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> And Jesus answered and said to them,
Have ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and with staffs to
take me?

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> I was daily with you in the temple,
teaching, and ye took me not: but the scriptures must be fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> And they all forsook him, and fled.

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> And there followed him a certain young
man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body; and the young men
laid hold on him.

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> And he left the linen cloth, and fled
from them naked.

<span id="an_14:53">14:53</span> And they led Jesus away to the high
priest: and with him were assembled all the chief priests, and the
elders and the scribes.

<span id="an_14:54">14:54</span> And Peter followed him at a distance,
even into the palace of the high priest: and he sat with the servants,
and warmed himself at the fire.

<span id="an_14:55">14:55</span> And the chief priests, and all the
council sought for testimony against Jesus to put him to death; and
found none.

<span id="an_14:56">14:56</span> For many bore false testimony against
him, but their testimony agreed not together.

<span id="an_14:57">14:57</span> And there arose certain, and bore false
testimony against him, saying,

<span id="an_14:58">14:58</span> We heard him say, I will destroy this
temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build
another made without hands.

<span id="an_14:59">14:59</span> But neither so did their testimony
agree together.

<span id="an_14:60">14:60</span> And the high priest stood up in the
midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which
these testify against thee?

<span id="an_14:61">14:61</span> But he held his peace, and answered
nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and said to him, Art thou the
Christ, the Son of the Blessed?

<span id="an_14:62">14:62</span> And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see
the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of heaven.

<span id="an_14:63">14:63</span> Then the high priest rent his clothes,
and saith, What need we any further witnesses?

<span id="an_14:64">14:64</span> Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think
ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.

<span id="an_14:65">14:65</span> And some began to spit on him, and to
cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say to him, Prophesy: and the
servants struck him with the palms of their hands.

<span id="an_14:66">14:66</span> And as Peter was below in the palace,
there cometh one of the maids of the high priest:

<span id="an_14:67">14:67</span> And when she saw Peter warming himself,
she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of
Nazareth.

<span id="an_14:68">14:68</span> But he denied, saying, I know not,
neither do I understand what thou sayest. And he went out into the
porch; and the cock crowed.

<span id="an_14:69">14:69</span> And a maid saw him again, and began to
say to them that stood by, This is one of them.

<span id="an_14:70">14:70</span> And he denied it again. And a little
after, they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of
them: for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agreeth thereto.

<span id="an_14:71">14:71</span> But he began to curse and to swear,
saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak.

<span id="an_14:72">14:72</span> And the second time the cock crowed.
And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said to him, Before the
cock shall crow twice, thou wilt deny me thrice. And when he thought
thereon, he wept.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And forthwith in the morning the chief
priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes, and the whole
council, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to
Pilate.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King
of the Jews? And he answering, said to him, Thou sayest it.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And the chief priests accused him of many
things: but he answered nothing.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And Pilate asked him again, saying,
Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they testify against
thee.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But Jesus yet answered nothing: so that
Pilate marveled.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Now at that feast he released to them one
prisoner, whom they desired.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And there was one named Barabbas, who lay
bound with them that had made insurrection with him, who had committed
murder in the insurrection.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the multitude crying aloud, began to
desire him to do as he had ever done to them.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye
that I release to you the King of the Jews?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> (For he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him for envy.)

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But the chief priests moved the people
that he should rather release Barabbas to them.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And Pilate answered, and said again to
them, What will ye then that I shall do to him whom ye call the King of
the Jews?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And they cried out again, Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Then Pilate said to them, Why, what
evil hath he done? And they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And so Pilate, willing to content the
people, released Barabbas to them, and having scourged Jesus, delivered
him to be crucified.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And the soldiers led him away into the
hall, called Pretorium; and they call together the whole band;

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And they clothed him with purple, and
platted a crown of thorns, and put it about his head,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And began to salute him, Hail, King of
the Jews!

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> And they struck him on the head with a
reed, and spit upon him, and bowing their knees, worshiped him.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And when they had mocked him, they took
off the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out
to crucify him.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And they constrain one Simon, a
Cyrenian, who was passing by, coming from the country, the father of
Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And they bring him to the place
Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, The place of a skull.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And they gave him to drink, wine
mingled with myrrh: but he received it not.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And when they had crucified him, they
parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> And it was the third hour, and they
crucified him.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> And the superscription of his
accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And with him they crucify two thieves,
the one on his right hand, and the other on his left.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And the scripture was fulfilled, which
saith, And he was numbered with the transgressors.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And they that passed by, railed on him,
wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple,
and buildest it in three days,

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Save thyself, and come down from the
cross.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Likewise also the chief priests
mocking, said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others,
himself he cannot save.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Let Christ the king of Israel descend
now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were
crucified with him, reviled him.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And when the sixth hour was come, there
was darkness over the whole land, until the ninth hour.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with
a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama, sabacthani? which is, being
interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And some of them that stood by, when
they heard it, said, Behold, he calleth Elijah.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And one ran and filled a sponge full of
vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone;
let us see whether Elijah will come to take him down.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and
expired.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And the vail of the temple was rent in
two, from the top to the bottom.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And when the centurion who stood over
against him, saw that he so cried out, and expired, he said, Truly this
man was the Son of God.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> There were also women looking on at a
distance, among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James
the younger, and of Joses, and Salome;

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> Who also, when he was in Galilee,
followed him, and ministered to him; and many other women who came with
him to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> And now, when the evening was come,
(because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the sabbath)

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable
counselor, who also waited for the kingdom of God, came, and went in
boldly to Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus.

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> And Pilate wondered if he was already
dead: and calling the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any
while dead.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> And when he knew it from the centurion,
he gave the body to Joseph.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> And he bought fine linen, and took him
down, and wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulcher which
was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a stone to the door of the sepulcher.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother
of Joses, beheld where he was laid.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And when the sabbath was past, Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet
spices, that they might come and anoint him.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And very early in the morning, the first
day of the week, they came to the sepulcher at the rising of the sun:

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And they said among themselves, Who shall
roll away for us the stone from the door of the sepulcher?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> (And when they looked, they saw that the
stone was rolled away) for it was very great.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And entering into the sepulcher, they saw
a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment;
and they were frightened.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And he saith to them, Be not frightened:
ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified: he is risen; he is not
here: behold the place where they laid him:

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But go, tell his disciples and Peter,
that he goeth before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he
said to you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And they went out quickly, and fled from
the sepulcher; for they trembled, and were amazed: neither said they any
thing to any man; for they were afraid.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Now when Jesus was risen early, the first
day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had
cast seven demons.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And she went and told them that had
been with him, as they mourned and wept.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And they, when they had heard that he
was alive, and had been seen by her, believed not.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> After that, he appeared in another form
to two of them, as they were walking and going into the country.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And they went and told it to the
residue: neither believed they them.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Afterward he appeared to the eleven, as
they sat at table, and upbraided them with their unbelief, and hardness
of heart, because they believed not them who had seen him after he was
risen.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And he said to them, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the gospel to every creature.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> He that believeth and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And these signs shall follow them that
believe: In my name shall they cast out demons; they shall speak in new
languages;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> They shall take up serpents; and if
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall lay
hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> So then after the Lord had spoken to
them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And they went forth, and preached every
where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs
following. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke](luk)
