[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mic)  [Next](hab) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Nahum

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden of Nineveh. The book of the
vision of Nahum the Elkoshite,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> God is jealous, and the LORD avengeth; the
LORD avengeth, and is furious; the LORD will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The LORD is slow to anger, and great in
power, and will not at all acquit the wicked: the LORD hath his way in
the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and
drieth up all the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower
of Lebanon languisheth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The mountains quake at him, and the hills
melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, even the world, and all
that dwell therein.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Who can stand before his indignation? and
who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out
like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The LORD is good, a strong hold in the day
of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But with an over-running flood he will make
an utter end of the place thereof, and darkness shall pursue his
enemies.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What do ye imagine against the LORD? he
will make an utter end: affliction shall not rise up the second time.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For while they are folded together as
thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shall be devoured
as stubble fully dry.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> There is one come out of thee, that
imagineth evil against the LORD, a wicked counselor.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Thus saith the LORD; Though they are
quiet, and likewise many, yet thus shall they be cut down, when he shall
pass through. Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For now I will break his yoke from off
thee, and will burst thy bonds asunder.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the LORD hath given a commandment
concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown: out of the house of
thy gods will I cut off the graven image and the molten image: I will
make thy grave; for thou art vile.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Behold upon the mountains the feet of him
that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, keep thy
solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the wicked shall no more pass
through thee; he is utterly cut off.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> He that dasheth in pieces is come up before
thy face: keep the munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong,
fortify thy power mightily.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For the LORD hath turned away the
excellence of Jacob, as the excellence of Israel: for the emptiers have
emptied them out, and marred their vine branches.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> The shield of his mighty men is made red,
the valiant men are in scarlet: the chariots shall be with flaming
torches in the day of his preparation, and the fir-trees shall be
terribly shaken.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The chariots shall rage in the streets,
they shall jostle one against another in the broad ways: they shall seem
like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> He shall recount his worthies: they shall
stumble in their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof, and
the defense shall be prepared.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The gates of the rivers shall be opened,
and the palace shall be dissolved.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she
shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with the voice of
doves, tabering upon their breasts.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water:
yet they shall flee away. Stand, stand, shall they cry; but none shall
look back.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil
of gold: for there is no end of the store and glory out of all the
pleasant furniture.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> She is empty, and void, and waste: and
the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and much pain is in all
loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Where is the dwelling of the lions, and
the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion,
walked, and the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The lion tore in pieces enough for his
whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes with prey,
and his dens with ravin.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Behold, I am against thee, saith the LORD
of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall
devour thy young lions: and I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and
the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Woe to the bloody city! it is all full of
lies and robberies; the prey departeth not;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The noise of a whip, and the noise of the
rattling of the wheels, and of the prancing horses, and of the bounding
chariots.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The horseman lifteth up both the bright
sword, and the glittering spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and
a great number of carcasses; and there is no end of their corpses; they
stumble upon their corpses:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Because of the multitude of the lewd deeds
of the well-favored harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, that selleth
nations through her lewd deeds, and families through her witchcrafts.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Behold, I am against thee, saith the LORD
of hosts; and I will remove thy skirts upon thy face, and I will show
the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And I will cast abominable filth upon thee,
and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazing-stock.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And it shall come to pass, that all they
that look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid
waste: who will bemoan her; whence shall I seek comforters for thee?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Art thou better than populous No, that was
situated among the rivers, that had the waters around it, whose rampart
was the sea, and her wall was from the sea?

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Cush and Egypt were her strength, and it
was infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Yet was she carried away, she went into
captivity: her young children also were dashed in pieces at the head of
all the streets: and they cast lots for her honorable men, and all her
great men were bound in chains.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be
hid, thou also shalt seek strength because of the enemy.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All thy strong holds shall be like
fig-trees with the first ripe figs: if they be shaken, they shall even
fall into the mouth of the eater.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Behold, thy people in the midst of thee
are women: the gates of thy land shall be set wide open to thy enemies:
the fire shall devour thy bars.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Draw thee waters for the siege, fortify
thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the mortar, make strong the
brick-kiln.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> There shall the fire devour thee; the
sword shall cut thee off, it shall eat thee up like the canker-worm:
make thyself many as the canker-worm, make thyself many as the locusts.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above
the stars of heaven: the canker-worm spoileth, and flieth away.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy
captains as the great grasshoppers, which settle in the hedges in the
cold day, but when the sun ariseth they flee away, and their place is
not known where they are.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria:
thy nobles shall dwell in the dust: thy people are scattered upon the
mountains, and no man gathereth them.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> There is no healing of thy bruise; thy
wound is grievous: all that hear the fame of thee shall clap the hands
over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wickedness passed continually?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Habakkuk](hab)
