[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jam)  [Next](pe2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 1 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the
strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Elect according to the foreknowledge of God
the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, to obedience and
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace to you, and peace, be
multiplied.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again
to a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> To an inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Who are kept by the power of God through
faith to salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> In which ye greatly rejoice, though now for
a season (if need be) ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> That the trial of your faith, being much
more precious than of gold that perisheth, though tried with fire, might
be found to praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom,
though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Receiving the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Concerning which salvation the prophets
have inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that
should come to you:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Searching what, or what manner of time
the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified
beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> To whom it was revealed, that not to
themselves, but to us they ministered the things which are now reported
to you by them that have preached the gospel to you, with the Holy
Spirit sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to look
into.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind,
be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought to you
at the revelation of Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> As obedient children, not fashioning
yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance:

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> But as he who hath called you is holy, so
be ye holy in all manner of deportment.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Because it is written, Be ye holy; for I
am holy.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And if ye call on the Father, who without
respect of persons judgeth according to every man's work, pass the time
of your sojourning here in fear:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
course of life received by tradition from your fathers;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> But with the precious blood of Christ, as
of a lamb without blemish and without spot:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Who verily was fore-ordained before the
foundation of the world, but was manifested in these last times for you,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Who by him do believe in God, that raised
him from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be
in God.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Seeing ye have purified your souls in
obeying the truth through the Spirit to unfeigned love of the brethren,
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Being born again, not of corruptible
seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth
for ever.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> For all flesh is as grass, and all the
glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth, and its flower
falleth away:

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But the word of the Lord endureth for
ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached to you.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Wherefore, laying aside all malice, and all
guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil-speakings,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> As new-born babes, desire the pure milk of
the word, that ye may grow thereby:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> If indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> To whom coming as to a living stone,
disallowed indeed by men, but chosen by God, and precious,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Ye also, as living stones, are built up a
spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Wherefore also it is contained in the
scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner-stone, elect, precious:
and he that believeth on him shall not be confounded.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> To you therefore who believe he is
precious: but to them who are disobedient, the stone which the builders
disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of
offense, even to them who stumble at the word, being disobedient: to
which also they were appointed.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth
the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his
marvelous light:

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Who in time past were not a people, but
are now the people of God: who had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Dearly beloved, I beseech you as
strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against
the soul;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Having your manner of life honest among
the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, they
may by your good works, which they shall behold, glorify God in the day
of visitation.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Submit yourselves to every ordinance of
man for the Lord's sake: whether to the king, as supreme;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Or to governors, as to them that are sent
by him for the punishment of evil-doers, and for the praise of them that
do well.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For so is the will of God, that with
well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> As free, and not using your liberty for a
cloke of maliciousness, but as the servants of God.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear
God. Honor the king.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Servants, be subject to your masters with
all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience towards God endureth grief, suffering wrongfully.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For what glory is it, if, when ye are
buffeted for your faults, ye bear it patiently? but if, when ye do well,
and suffer for it, ye bear it patiently, this is acceptable with God.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For even to this were ye called: because
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should
follow his steps:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who committed no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him
that judgeth righteously:

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Who himself bore our sins in his own body
on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live to righteousness;
by whose stripes ye were healed.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For ye were as sheep going astray; but
are now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to
your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they also may without
the word be won by the deportment of the wives;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> While they behold your chaste manner of
life coupled with fear.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Whose adorning let it not be that outward
adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing gold, or of putting on
apparel;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But let it be the hidden man of the heart,
in that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For after this manner in former times the
holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in
subjection to their own husbands:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him
lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well, and are not afraid
with any amazement.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them
according to knowledge, giving honor to the wife, as to the weaker
vessel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that your
prayers be not hindered.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Finally, be ye all of one mind, having
compassion one of another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for
railing: but on the contrary, blessing; knowing that ye are called to
this, that ye should inherit a blessing.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For he that will love life, and see good
days, let him restrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they
speak no guile:

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Let him shun evil, and do good; let him
seek peace, and pursue it.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For the eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous, and his ears are open to their prayers: but the face of the
Lord is against them that do evil.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And who is he that will harm you, if ye
are followers of that which is good?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But if ye suffer for righteousness' sake,
happy are ye: and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts:
and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a
reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Having a good conscience; that, whereas
they speak evil of you, as of evil-doers, they may be ashamed that
falsely accuse your good deportment in Christ.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For it is better, if the will of God is
so, that ye suffer for well-doing, than for evil-doing.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For Christ also hath once suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put
to death in the flesh, but made alive by the Spirit:

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> By which also he went and preached to the
spirits in prison;

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Who formerly were disobedient, when once
the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was
preparing, in which few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> The like figure to which, even baptism,
doth also now save us (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good conscience towards God,) by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Who is gone into heaven, and is on the
right hand of God; angels, and authorities, and powers being made
subject to him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for
us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that
hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> That he no longer should live the rest of
his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For the time past of our life may suffice
us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revelings, banquetings, and
abominable idolatries:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> In which they think it strange that ye run
not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Who shall give account to him that is ready
to judge the living and the dead.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For, for this cause was the gospel preached
also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according to men
in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But the end of all things is at hand: be ye
therefore sober, and watch to prayer.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And above all things have fervent charity
among yourselves: for charity will cover a multitude of sins.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Use hospitality one to another without
grudging.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> As every man hath received the gift, even
so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold
grace of God.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> If any man speaketh let him speak as the
oracles of God; if any man ministereth let him do it as of the ability
which God giveth: that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus
Christ; to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Beloved, think it not strange concerning
the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing
happened to you:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But rejoice, seeing ye are partakers of
Christ's sufferings; that, when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be
glad also with exceeding joy.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> If ye are reproached for the name of
Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon
you. On their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is
glorified.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or as a thief, or as an evil-doer, or as a busy-body in other men's
matters.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Yet if any man suffereth as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For the time is come that judgment must
begin at the house of God: and if it first beginneth at us, what will be
the end of them that obey not the gospel of God?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And if the righteous is scarcely saved,
where will the ungodly and the sinner appear?

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Wherefore, let them that suffer according
to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him in
well-doing, as to a faithful Creator.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> The elders who are among you I exhort, who
am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a
partaker of the glory that shall be revealed:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Feed the flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight of it, not by constraint, but willingly; not for
filthy lucre, but from a ready mind;

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Neither as being lords over God's heritage,
but being examples to the flock.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And when the chief Shepherd shall appear,
ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves to
the elder. Yes, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed
with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the
humble.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Humble yourselves therefore under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time:

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Casting all your care upon him; for he
careth for you.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Be sober, be vigilant; because your
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he
may devour:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing
that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are in
the world.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> But the God of all grace, who hath called
us to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have suffered a while,
make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> To him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> By Silvanus, a faithful brother to you,
as I suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting, and testifying that
this is the true grace of God in which ye stand.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> The church that is at Babylon, elected
together with you, saluteth you; and so doth Mark my son.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Greet ye one another with a kiss of
charity. Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter](pe2)
