[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe1)  [Next](jo1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: 2 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith with us
through the righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace and peace be multiplied to you
through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> According as his divine power hath given to
us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge
of him that hath called us to glory and virtue:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Whereby are given to us exceeding great and
precious promises; that by these ye might be partakers of the divine
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And besides this, giving all diligence, add
to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And to knowledge temperance; and to
temperance patience; and to patience godliness;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And to godliness brotherly kindness; and to
brotherly kindness charity.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For if these things be in you, and abound,
they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But he that lacketh these things is blind,
and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was purified from
his old sins.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Wherefore the rather, brethren, give
diligence to make your calling and election sure: for if ye do these
things, ye shall never fall:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For so an entrance shall be ministered to
you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Wherefore I will not be negligent to put
you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and are
established in the present truth.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Indeed, I think it meet, as long as I am
in this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Knowing that shortly I must put off this
my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shown me.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Moreover, I will endeavor that ye may be
able, after my decease, to have these things always in remembrance.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For we have not followed cunningly
devised fables, when we made known to you the power and coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his majesty.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he received from God the Father honor
and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And this voice which came from heaven we
heard, when we were with him on the holy mount.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> We have also a more sure word of
prophecy; to which ye do well that ye take heed, as to a light that
shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in
your hearts:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Knowing this first, that no prophecy of
the scripture is of any private interpretation.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For prophecy came not in old time by the
will of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But there were false prophets also among
the people, even as there will be false teachers among you, who will
privately bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And many will follow their pernicious ways;
by reason of whom the way of truth will be evil spoken of.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And through covetousness they will with
feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time
lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For if God spared not the angels that
sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into chains of
darkness, to be reserved to judgment;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And spared not the old world, but saved
Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousness, bringing the flood
upon the world of the ungodly;

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And turning the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, making them an
example to those that afterwards should live ungodly lives.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And delivered just Lot, grieved with the
habitual lewdness of the wicked:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (For that righteous man dwelling among
them, in seeing and hearing, grieved his righteous soul from day to day
with their unlawful deeds;)

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly
out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to
be punished:

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But chiefly them that walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government. Presumptuous
are they, self-willed; they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Whereas angels, who are greater in power
and might, bring not railing accusation against them before the Lord.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But these, as natural brute beasts, made
to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand
not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And shall receive the reward of
unrighteousness, as they that count it pleasure to riot in the day-time.
Spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own
deceivings while they feast with you;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Having eyes full of adultery, and that
cannot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: they have a heart
exercised with covetous practices; cursed children:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Who have forsaken the right way, and gone
astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the
wages of unrighteousness;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But was rebuked for his iniquity: the
dumb ass speaking with man's voice, forbad the madness of the prophet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These are wells without water, clouds
that are carried with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkness is
reserved for ever.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For when they speak great swelling words
of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much
wantonness, those that had quite escaped from them who live in error.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> While they promise them liberty, they
themselves are the servants of corruption: for by whom a man is
overcome, by the same is he brought into bondage.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For if after they have escaped the
pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in them, and overcome, the latter
end is worse with them than the beginning.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For it had been better for them not to
have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to
turn from the holy commandment delivered to them.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But it hath happened to them according to
the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and, The sow
that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This second epistle, beloved, I now write
to you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> That ye may be mindful of the words which
were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the commandment of us
the apostles of the Lord and Savior:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Knowing this first, that there will come in
the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And saying, Where is the promise of his
coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the creation.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this they willingly are ignorant of,
that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing
out of the water and in the water:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> By which the world that then was, being
overflowed with water, perished:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the heavens and the earth, which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved to fire against the
day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one
thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand
years as one day.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, as some men count slackness; but is long-suffering toward us,
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night; in which the heavens will pass away with a great
noise, and the elements will melt with fervent heat, the earth also and
the works that are therein will be burned up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Seeing then that all these things will be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy deportment
and godliness,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Looking for and hasting to the coming of
the day of God, in which the heavens being on fire will be dissolved,
and the elements will melt with fervent heat?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Nevertheless we, according to his
promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, in which dwelleth
righteousness.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look
for such things, be diligent that ye may be found by him in peace,
without spot, and blameless.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And account that the long-suffering of
our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also, according
to the wisdom given to him, hath written to you;

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> As also in all his epistles, speaking in
them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the
other scriptures, to their own destruction.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know
these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error
of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John](jo1)
