[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jde) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Revelation

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God
gave to him, to show to his servants things which must shortly come to
pass; and he sent and signified it by his angel to his servant John:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Who bore testimony of the word of God, and
of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Blessed is he that readeth, and they that
hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein: for the time is at hand.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> John to the seven churches which are in
Asia: Grace be to you, and peace, from him who is, and who was, and who
is to come; and from the seven Spirits who are before his throne;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful
witness, and the first-begotten of the dead, and the prince of the kings
of the earth. To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
own blood,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And hath made us kings and priests to God
and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every
eye shall see him, and they also who pierced him: and all kindreds of
the earth shall wail because of him. Even so, Amen.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, saith the Lord, who is, and who was, and who is to come, the
Almighty.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> I John, who also am your brother, and
companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus
Christ, was in the isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and
for the testimony of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day,
and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first
and the last: and, What thou seest, write in a book, and send it to the
seven churches which are in Asia; to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to
Pergamos, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to
Laodicea.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And I turned to see the voice that spoke
with me. And having turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And in the midst of the seven
candlesticks one like the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the
foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> His head and his hairs were white like
wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And his feet like fine brass, as if they
burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And he had in his right hand seven stars:
and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance
was as the sun shineth in his strength.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as
dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying to me, Fear not; I am
the first and the last:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> I am he that liveth, and was dead; and
behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and of
death.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Write the things which thou hast seen,
and the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> The mystery of the seven stars which thou
sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven
stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks
which thou sawest are the seven churches.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> To the angel of the church of Ephesus
write; These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right
hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy
patience, and that thou canst not bear them who are evil; and thou hast
tried them who say they are apostles, and are not; and hast found them
liars:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And hast borne, and hast patience, and for
my name's sake hast labored, and hast not fainted.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee,
because thou hast left thy first love.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Remember therefore from whence thou hast
fallen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I will come to thee
quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of its place, except thou
repent.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But this thou hast, that thou hatest the
deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith to the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to eat
of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And to the angel of the church in Smyrna,
write; These things saith the first and the last, who was dead, and is
alive;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> I know thy works, and tribulation, and
poverty, (but thou art rich) and I know the blasphemy of them who say
they are Jews, and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Fear none of those things which thou
shalt suffer. Behold, the devil will cast some of you into prison, that
ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days. Be thou
faithful to death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches; He that overcometh, shall not be hurt
by the second death.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And to the angel of the church in
Pergamos write; These things saith he who hath the sharp sword with two
edges;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I know thy works, and where thou
dwellest, even where Satan's seat is: and thou holdest fast my name, and
hast not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my
faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But I have a few things against thee,
because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who
taught Balak to cast a stumbling-block before the children of Israel, to
eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit lewdness.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> So hast thou also them that hold the
doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I hate.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Repent; or else I will come to thee
quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to
eat of the hidden manna, and will give him a white stone, and on the
stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, he excepted, that
receiveth it.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And to the angel of the church in
Thyatira write; These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes
like a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine brass;

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> I know thy works, and charity, and
service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to be
more than the first:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Notwithstanding, I have a few things
against thee, because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel, who calleth
herself a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants to commit
lewdness, and to eat things sacrificed to idols.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And I gave her time to repent of her
lewdness, and she repented not.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and
them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they
repent of their deeds.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I will kill her children with death;
and all the churches shall know that I am he who searcheth the reins and
hearts: and I will give to every one of you according to your works.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But to you I say, and to the rest in
Thyatira, As many as have not this doctrine, and who have not known the
depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you no other burden:

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> But that which ye have already hold fast
till I come.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And he that overcometh, and keepeth my
works to the end, to him will I give power over the nations:

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> (And he shall rule them with a rod of
iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers:) even
as I received of my Father.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And I will give him the morning-star.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And to the angel of the church in Sardis
write; These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the
seven stars; I know thy works, that thou hast a name, that thou livest,
and art dead.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Be watchful, and strengthen the things
which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works
perfect before God.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Remember therefore how thou hast received
and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch,
I will come on thee as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will
come upon thee.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which
have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white:
for they are worthy.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He that overcometh, the same shall be
clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot out his name out of the
book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and before
his angels.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith to the churches.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And to the angel of the church in
Philadelphia write; These things saith he that is holy, he that is true,
he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shutteth; and
shutteth, and no man openeth:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> I know thy works: behold, I have set before
thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little
strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Behold, I will make them of the synagogue
of Satan, who say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I will
make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have
loved thee.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Because thou hast kept the word of my
patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall
come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast
which thou hast, that no man take thy crown.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Him that overcometh, will I make a pillar
in the temple of my God, and he shall go out no more: and I will write
upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which
is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I
will write upon him my new name.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And to the angel of the church of the
Laodiceans write; These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true
witness, the beginning of the creation of God;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> I know thy works, that thou art neither
cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> So then, because thou art luke-warm, and
neither cold nor hot, I will vomit thee out of my mouth:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Because thou sayest, I am rich, and
increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that
thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in
the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest
be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness may not appear; and
anoint thy eyes with eye-salve, that thou mayest see.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten:
be zealous therefore, and repent.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Behold, I stand at the door, and knock:
If any man shall hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> To him that overcometh will I grant to
sit with me on my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with
my Father on his throne.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> He that hath an ear, let him hear what
the Spirit saith to the churches.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> After this I looked, and behold, a door was
opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard, was as it were of a
trumpet talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I will show
thee things which must be hereafter.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And immediately I was in the spirit: and
behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he that sat was in appearance like a
jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow around the throne in
sight like an emerald.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And around the throne were four and twenty
seats; and upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed
in white raiment; and they had on their heads crowns of gold.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And out of the throne proceeded lightnings
and thunderings and voices. And there were seven lamps of fire burning
before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And before the throne there was a sea of
glass like crystal: And in the midst of the throne, and around the
throne, were four living beings full of eyes before and behind.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And the first living being was like a lion,
and the second living being like a calf, and the third living being had
a face as a man, and the fourth living being was like a flying eagle.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And the four living beings had each of them
six wings about him; and they were full of eyes within: and they rest
not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was,
and is, and is to come.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And when those living beings give glory,
and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever
and ever,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The four and twenty elders fall down
before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever
and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying,

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory, and honor, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for
thy pleasure they are and were created.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> And I saw in the right hand of him that sat
on the throne a book written within and on the backside, sealed with
seven seals.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a
loud voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose its seals?

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither
under the earth, was able to open the book, neither to look upon it.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And I wept much, because no man was found
worthy to open, and to read the book, neither to look upon it.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And one of the elders saith to me, Weep
not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, hath
prevailed to open the book, and to loose its seven seals.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the
throne, and of the four living beings, and in the midst of the elders
stood a Lamb as it had been slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes,
which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And he came and took the book out of the
right hand of him that sat upon the throne.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And when he had taken the book, the four
living beings, and four and twenty elders fell down before the Lamb,
having every one of them harps, and golden vials full of odors, which
are the prayers of saints.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art
worthy to take the book, and to open the seals of it: for thou wast
slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred,
and language, and people, and nation;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And hast made us to our God kings and
priests: and we shall reign on the earth.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And I beheld, and I heard the voice of
many angels around the throne, and the living beings, and the elders:
and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And every creature which is in heaven,
and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and
all that are in them, I heard saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory,
and power, be to him that sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb for
ever and ever.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the four living beings said, Amen.
And the four and twenty elders fell down and worshiped him that liveth
for ever and ever.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the
seals, and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder, one of the four
living beings saying, Come and see.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And I saw, and behold, a white horse: and
he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given to him: and he went
forth conquering, and to conquer.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And when he had opened the second seal, I
heard the second living being say, Come and see.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And there went out another horse that was
red: and power was given to him that sat upon him to take peace from the
earth, and that they should kill one another: and there was given to him
a great sword.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And when he had opened the third seal, I
heard the third living being say, Come and see. And I beheld, and lo, a
black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And I heard a voice in the midst of the
four living beings say, A measure of wheat for a penny, and three
measures of barley for a penny; and see thou hurt not the oil and the
wine.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And when he had opened the fourth seal, I
heard the voice of the fourth living being say, Come and see.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And I looked, and behold, a pale horse: and
his name that sat on him was Death, and hell followed with him. And
power was given to them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with
sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the
earth.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And when he had opened the fifth seal, I
saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of
God, and for the testimony which they held:

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they cried with a loud voice, saying,
How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And white robes were given to every one
of them; and it was said to them, that they should rest yet for a little
season, until their fellow-servants also and their brethren, that should
be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And I beheld when he had opened the sixth
seal, and lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as
sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood:

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And the stars of heaven fell to the
earth, even as a fig-tree casteth its untimely figs, when it is shaken
by a mighty wind.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the heaven departed as a scroll when
it is rolled together; and every mountain and isle were moved out of
their places.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And the kings of the earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and
every bond-man, and every free-man, hid themselves in the dens and in
the rocks of the mountains;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall
on us, and hide us from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For the great day of his wrath is come;
and who will be able to stand?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And after these things I saw four angels
standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the
earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor
on any tree.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And I saw another angel ascending from the
east, having the seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice
to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the
sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their
foreheads.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And I heard the number of them who were
sealed: and there were sealed a hundred and forty four thousand of all
the tribes of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Of the tribe of Asher were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the tribe of Naphtalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe
of Isachar were sealed twelve thousand.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve
thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> After this I beheld, and lo, a great
multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and
people, and languages, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb,
clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands;

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And cried with a loud voice, saying,
Salvation to our God who sitteth upon the throne, and to the Lamb.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And all the angels stood around the
throne, and about the elders and the four living beings, and fell before
the throne on their faces, and worshiped God,

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Saying, Amen: Blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might, be to our God
for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And one of the elders answered, saying to
me, Who are these that are arrayed in white robes? and whence came they?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And I said to him, Sir, thou knowest. And
he said to me, These are they who came out of great tribulation, and
have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Therefore they are before the throne of
God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on
the throne will dwell among them.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more; neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> For the Lamb who is in the midst of the
throne will feed them, and will lead them to living fountains of waters:
and God will wipe away all tears from their eyes.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And when he had opened the seventh seal,
there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I saw the seven angels who stood before
God; and to them were given seven trumpets.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And another angel came and stood at the
altar, having a golden censer; and there was given to him much incense,
that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden
altar which was before the throne.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the smoke of the incense, which came
with the prayers of the saints, ascended before God out of the angel's
hand.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the angel took the censer, and filled
it with fire of the altar, and cast it upon the earth: and there were
voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the seven angels who had the seven
trumpets prepared themselves to sound.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> The first angel sounded, and there followed
hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth: and
the third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the second angel sounded, and as it
were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the
third part of the sea became blood;

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And the third part of the creatures which
were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships
were destroyed.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And the third angel sounded, and there
fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell
upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters;

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the name of the star is called
Wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood; and many men
died by the waters, because they were made bitter.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And the fourth angel sounded, and the
third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the moon, and
the third part of the stars; so that the third part of them was
darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night
likewise.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And I beheld, and heard an angel flying
through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to
the inhabiters of the earth, by reason of the other voices of the
trumpet of the three angels, which are yet to sound!

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a
star fall from heaven to the earth: and to him was given the key of the
bottomless pit.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And he opened the bottomless pit; and there
arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the
sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And there came out of the smoke locusts
upon the earth: and to them was given power, as the scorpions of the
earth have power.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And it was commanded them that they should
not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any
tree; but only those men who have not the seal of God in their
foreheads.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And to them it was given that they should
not kill them, but that they should be tormented five months: and their
torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And in those days shall men seek death, and
shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from
them.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And the shapes of the locusts were like to
horses prepared for battle; and on their heads were as it were crowns
like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And they had hair as the hair of women, and
their teeth were as the teeth of lions.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And they had breast-plates, as it were
breast-plates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of
chariots of many horses running to battle.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they had tails like scorpions, and
there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five
months.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And they had a king over them, who is the
angel of the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew language is
Abaddon, but in the Greek language he hath his name Apollyon.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> One woe is past; and behold, there come
two woes more hereafter.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard
a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Saying to the sixth angel who had the
trumpet, Loose the four angels who are bound in the great river
Euphrates.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And the four angels were loosed, who were
prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, to slay the
third part of men.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And the number of the army of the
horsemen was two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of
them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And thus I saw the horses in the vision,
and them that sat on them, having breast-plates of fire, and of jacinth,
and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions:
and out of their mouths issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> By these three was the third part of men
killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which
issued out of their mouths.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For their power is in their mouth, and in
their tails: for their tails were like to serpents, and had heads, and
with them they do hurt.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And the rest of the men who were not
killed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands,
that they should not worship demons, and idols of gold, and silver, and
brass, and stone, and of wood: which neither can see, nor hear, nor
walk:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Neither repented they of their murders,
nor of their sorceries, nor of their lewdness, nor of their thefts.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And I saw another mighty angel come down
from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and
his face was as it were the sun, and his feet as pillars of fire:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And he had in his hand a little book
open: and he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the
earth,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And cried with a loud voice, as when a
lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their
voices.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And when the seven thunders had uttered
their voices, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven
saying to me, Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and
write them not.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And the angel which I saw stand upon the
sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And swore by him that liveth for ever and
ever, who created heaven, and the things that are in it, and the earth,
and the things that are in it, and the sea, and the things which are in
it, that there should be time no longer:

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But in the days of the voice of the
seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should
be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And the voice which I heard from heaven
spoke to me again, and said, Go, and take the little book which is open
in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And I went to the angel, and said to him,
Give me the little book. And he said to me, Take it, and eat it, and it
shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as
honey.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And I took the little book out of the
angel's hand, and ate it; and it was in my mouth sweet as honey: and as
soon as I had eaten it my belly was bitter.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he said to me, Thou must prophesy
again before many peoples, and nations, and languages, and kings.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And there was given me a reed like a rod:
and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and
the altar, and them that worship in it.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> But the court which is without the
temple, leave out, and measure it not; for it is given to the Gentiles:
and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And I will give power to my two
witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty
days, clothed in sackcloth.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> These are the two olive-trees, and the
two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And if any man will hurt them, fire
proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any
man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> These have power to shut heaven, that it
rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to
turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as
they will.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And when they shall have finished their
testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make
war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And their dead bodies shall lie in the
street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt,
where also our Lord was crucified.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And they of the people, and kindreds, and
languages, and nations, shall see their dead bodies three days and a
half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And they that dwell upon the earth
shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to
another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the
earth.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And after three days and a half the
Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their
feet; and great fear fell upon them who saw them.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And they heard a great voice from
heaven, saying to them, Come up hither. And they ascended to heaven in a
cloud; and their enemies beheld them.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the same hour was there a great
earthquake, and the tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake
were killed of men seven thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and
gave glory to the God of heaven.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> The second woe is past; and behold, the
third woe cometh quickly.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And the seventh angel sounded; and
there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world
are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he will
reign for ever and ever.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And the four and twenty elders, who sat
before God on their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshiped God,

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God
Almighty, who art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to
thee thy great power, and hast reigned.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And the nations were angry, and thy
wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and
that thou shouldest give reward to thy servants the prophets, and to the
saints, and them that fear thy name, small and great; and shouldest
destroy them who destroy the earth.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And the temple of God was opened in
heaven, and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: and
there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake,
and great hail.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And there appeared a great wonder in
heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And she being with child, cried,
travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And there appeared another wonder in
heaven; and behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten
horns, and seven crowns upon his heads.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And his tail drew the third part of the
stars of heaven, and cast them to the earth: and the dragon stood before
the woman who was ready to be delivered, to devour her child as soon as
it was born.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And she brought forth a male child, who
was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up
to God, and to his throne.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And the woman fled into the wilderness,
where she hath a place prepared by God, that they should feed her there
a thousand two hundred and sixty days.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And there was war in heaven: Michael and
his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his
angels,

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And prevailed not; neither was their
place found any more in heaven.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And the great dragon was cast out, that
old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole
world: he was cast out upon the earth, and his angels were cast out with
him.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And I heard a loud voice saying in
heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God,
and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast
down, who accused them before our God day and night.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And they overcame him by the blood of
the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their
lives to the death.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye
that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea!
for the devil is come down to you, having great wrath, because he
knoweth that he hath but a short time.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And when the dragon saw that he was
cast to the earth, he persecuted the woman who brought forth the
male-child.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And to the woman were given two wings
of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness, into her
place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time,
from the face of the serpent.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And the serpent cast out of his mouth
water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried
away by the flood.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And the earth helped the woman, and the
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast
out of his mouth.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And the dragon was wroth with the
woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, who keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and
saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and
upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And the beast which I saw was like a
leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the
mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and
great authority.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And I saw one of his heads as it were
wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and all the world
wondered after the beast.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And they worshiped the dragon which gave
power to the beast: and they worshiped the beast, saying, Who is like
the beast? who is able to make war with him?

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And there was given to him a mouth
speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given to him to
continue forty and two months.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And he opened his mouth in blasphemy
against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that
dwell in heaven.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And it was given to him to make war with
the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over all
kindreds, and languages, and nations.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And all that dwell upon the earth shall
worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> If any man hath an ear, let him hear.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> He that leadeth into captivity shall go
into captivity: he that killeth with the sword must be killed with the
sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And I beheld another beast coming up
out of the earth, and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a
dragon.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And he exerciseth all the power of the
first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them who dwell in it
to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And he doeth great wonders, so that he
maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men,

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And deceiveth them that dwell on the
earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the
sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they
should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and
lived.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And he had power to give life to the
image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and
cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be
killed.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And he causeth all, both small and
great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads:

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And that no man might buy or sell, save
him that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his
name.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Here is wisdom. Let him that hath
understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a
man; and his number is six hundred and sixty six.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on the
mount Sion, and with him a hundred and forty four thousand, having his
Father's name written in their foreheads.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And I heard a voice from heaven, as the
voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard
the voice of harpers harping with their harps:

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And they sung as it were a new song
before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no
man could learn that song but the hundred and forty four thousand, who
were redeemed from the earth.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> These are they who were not defiled with
women; for they are virgins. These are they who follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goeth. These were redeemed from among men, being the
first-fruits to God and to the Lamb.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And in their mouth was found no guile:
for they are without fault before the throne of God.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And I saw another angel fly in the midst
of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on
the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and language, and people,

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and
give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him
that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And there followed another angel, saying,
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all
nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her lewdness.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the third angel followed them, saying
with a loud voice, If any man worshipeth the beast and his image, and
receiveth his mark in his forehead, or in his hand,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The same shall drink of the wine of the
wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation; and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the
presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb:

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And the smoke of their torment
ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who
worship the beast and his image, and whoever receiveth the mark of his
name.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Here is the patience of the saints:
here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And I heard a voice from heaven, saying
to me, Write, Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth:
Verily, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and
their works follow them.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And I looked, and behold, a white
cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like the Son of man, having on his
head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And another angel came out of the
temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in
thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come for thee to reap; for the
harvest of the earth is ripe.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And he that sat on the cloud thrust in
his sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And another angel came out of the
temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And another angel came out from the
altar, who had power over fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that
had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the
clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fully ripe.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the angel thrust in his sickle into
the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the
great wine-press of the wrath of God.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And the wine-press was trodden without
the city, and blood came out of the wine-press, even to the horses'
bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And I saw another sign in heaven, great
and marvelous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; for in them
is filled up the wrath of God.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And I saw as it were a sea of glass
mingled with fire: and them that had gained the victory over the beast,
and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name,
stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And they sing the song of Moses the
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous
are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King
of saints.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and
glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come and
worship before thee; for thy judgments are made manifest.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And after that I looked, and behold, the
temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened:

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the seven angels came out of the
temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and
having their breasts girded with golden girdles.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And one of the four living beings gave to
the seven angels seven golden vials full of the wrath of God, who liveth
for ever and ever.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the temple was filled with smoke from
the glory of God, and from his power; and no man was able to enter into
the temple, till the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfilled.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And I heard a great voice out of the
temple, saying to the seven angels, Go, and pour out the vials of the
wrath of God upon the earth.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And the first went, and poured out his
vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the
men who had the mark of the beast, and upon them who worshiped his
image.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And the second angel poured out his vial
upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living
soul died in the sea.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And the third angel poured out his vial
upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And I heard the angel of the waters say,
Thou art righteous, O Lord, who art, and wast, and wilt be, because thou
hast judged thus.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> For they have shed the blood of saints
and prophets, and thou hast given them blood to drink; for they are
worthy.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And I heard another from the altar say,
Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And the fourth angel poured out his vial
upon the sun; and power was given to him to scorch men with fire.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And men were scorched with great heat,
and blasphemed the name of God, who hath power over these plagues: and
they repented not to give him glory.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And the fifth angel poured out his vial
upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was full of darkness; and
they gnawed their tongues for pain,

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And blasphemed the God of heaven,
because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And the sixth angel poured out his vial
upon the great river Euphrates; and the water of it was dried up, that
the way of the kings of the east might be prepared.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And I saw three unclean spirits like
frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the
beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> For they are the spirits of demons,
working miracles, which go forth to the kings of the earth, and of the
whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is
he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they
see his shame.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And he gathered them into a place
called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And the seventh angel poured out his
vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of
heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And there were voices, and thunders,
and lightnings; and there was a great earthquake, such as hath not been
since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And the great city was divided into
three parts, and the cities of the nations fell: and great Babylon came
in remembrance before God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the
fierceness of his wrath.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And every isle fled away, and the
mountains were not found.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And there fell upon men a great hail
out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men
blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague of it
was exceeding great.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And there came one of the seven angels
who had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying to me, Come hither;
I will show to thee the judgment of the great harlot that sitteth upon
many waters;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> With whom the kings of the earth have
committed lewd deeds, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made
drunk with the wine of her lewdness.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> So he carried me away in the spirit into
the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet-colored beast, full
of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And the woman was arrayed in purple and
scarlet-color, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls,
having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of
her lewdness:

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And upon her forehead was a name written,
MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF
THE EARTH.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And I saw the woman drunken with the
blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and
when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And the angel said to me, Why didst thou
wonder? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that
carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The beast that thou sawest, was, and is
not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition:
and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, whose names were not
written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they
behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And here is the mind which hath wisdom.
The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And there are seven kings: five are
fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh,
he must continue a short time.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And the beast that was, and is not,
even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And the ten horns which thou sawest are
ten kings, who have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as
kings one hour with the beast.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> These have one mind, and shall give
their power and strength to the beast.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> These will make war with the Lamb, and
the Lamb will overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings;
and they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And he saith to me, The waters which
thou sawest, where the harlot sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and
nations, and languages.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And the ten horns which thou sawest
upon the beast, these shall hate the harlot, and shall make her desolate
and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> For God hath put in their hearts to
fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their kingdom to the beast,
until the words of God shall be fulfilled.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And the woman whom thou sawest is that
great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And after these things I saw another
angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was
lightened with his glory.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And he cried mightily with a strong
voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the
habitation of demons, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of
every unclean and hateful bird.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> For all nations have drank of the wine of
the wrath of her lewdness, and the kings of the earth have committed
lewd deeds with her, and the merchants of the earth have become rich
through the abundance of her delicacies.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And I heard another voice from heaven,
saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For her sins have reached to heaven, and
God hath remembered her iniquities.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> Reward her even as she rewarded you, and
double to her double according to her works: in the cup which she hath
filled, fill to her double.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> How much she hath glorified herself, and
lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in
her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Therefore shall her plagues come in one
day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burned
with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And the kings of the earth, who have
committed lewdness and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and
lament for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning,

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Standing afar off for the fear of her
torment, saying, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city!
for in one hour is thy judgment come.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And the merchants of the earth shall
weep and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchandise any more:

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> The merchandise of gold, and silver,
and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and
silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all vessels of ivory, and
all vessels of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And cinnamon, and odors, and ointments,
and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and
beasts, and sheep, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of
men.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And the fruits that thy soul lusted
after have departed from thee, and all things which were dainty and
goodly have departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more at all.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The merchants of these things who were
made rich by her, shall stand afar off, for the fear of her torment,
weeping and wailing,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And saying, Alas, alas, that great
city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and
decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls!

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> For in one hour so great riches is come
to naught. And every ship-master, and all the company in ships, and
sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stood afar off,

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And cried when they saw the smoke of
her burning, saying, What city is like this great city!

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And they cast dust on their heads, and
cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas, that great city, in
which were made rich all that had ships in the sea by reason of her
opulence! for in one hour is she made desolate.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye
holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And a mighty angel took up a stone like
a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence
shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be no more
found.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And the voice of harpers, and
musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shall be no more heard in
thee; and no artificer, of whatever craft he be, shall be found any more
in thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be no more heard in thee;

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And the light of a candle shall shine
no more in thee; and the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall
be heard no more in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the
earth; for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And in her was found the blood of
prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And after these things I heard a great
voice of many people in heaven, saying, Alleluia: Salvation, and glory,
and honor, and power, to the Lord our God:

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> For true and righteous are his judgments:
for he hath judged the great harlot, who corrupted the earth with her
lewdness, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And again they said, Alleluia. And her
smoke rose up for ever and ever.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And the four and twenty elders and the
four living beings fell down and worshiped God who sat on the throne,
saying, Amen; Alleluia.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And a voice came out of the throne,
saying, Praise our God, all ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both
small and great.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And I heard as it were the voice of a
great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of
mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent
reigneth.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Let us be glad and rejoice, and give
honor to him: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath
made herself ready.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And to her was granted that she should be
arrayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the
righteousness of saints.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And he saith to me, Write, Blessed are
they who are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb. And he saith to
me, These are the true sayings of God.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And I fell at his feet to worship him.
And he said to me, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow-servant, and of
thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And I saw heaven opened, and behold, a
white horse; and he that sat upon him was called Faithful and True, and
in righteousness he doth judge and make war.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> His eyes were as a flame of fire, and
on his head were many crowns; and he had a name written, that no man
knew, but he himself.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And he was clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood: and his name is called, The Word of God.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And the armies which were in heaven
followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And out of his mouth goeth a sharp
sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the wine-press of the fierceness and
wrath of Almighty God.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And he hath on his vesture and on his
thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And I saw an angel standing in the sun;
and he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the
midst of heaven, Come, and assemble yourselves to the supper of the
great God;

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and
the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of
horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both
free and bond, both small and great.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And I saw the beast, and the kings of
the earth, and their armies, assembled to make war against him that sat
on the horse, and against his army.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And the beast was taken, and with him
the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he
deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that
worshiped his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And the remnant were slain with the
sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceedeth out of his
mouth: and all the fowls were filled with their flesh.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And I saw an angel come down from heaven,
having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And he laid hold on the dragon, that old
serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And cast him into the bottomless pit, and
shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations
no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled; and after that he
must be loosed a little season.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And I saw thrones, and they sat upon
them, and judgment was given to them: and I saw the souls of them that
were beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God, and
who had not worshiped the beast, neither his image, neither had received
his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> But the rest of the dead lived not again
until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Blessed and holy is he that hath part in
the first resurrection: on such the second death hath no power, but they
shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand years.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And when the thousand years have expired,
Satan shall be loosed from his prison,

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And shall go out to deceive the nations
which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather
them to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And they went up on the breadth of the
earth, and encompassed the camp of the saints, and the beloved city: and
fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> And the devil that deceived them was
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false
prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And I saw a great white throne, and him
that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and
there was found no place for them.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And I saw the dead, small and great,
stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was
opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of the
things which were written in the books, according to their works.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> And the sea gave up the dead which were
in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them: and
they were judged every man according to their works.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And death and hell were cast into the
lake of fire. This is the second death.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And whoever was not found written in
the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> And I saw a new heaven and a new earth:
for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away; and there was
no more sea.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And I John saw the holy city, new
Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride
adorned for her husband.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And I heard a great voice out of heaven,
saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself will be with
them, and be their God.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And God will wipe away all tears from
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things have
passed away.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And he that sat upon the throne said,
Behold, I make all things new. And he said to me, Write: for these words
are true and faithful.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And he said to me, It is done. I am Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to him that is thirsty
of the fountain of the water of life freely.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> He that overcometh shall inherit all
things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and lewd men, and sorcerers, and idolaters,
and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire
and brimstone: which is the second death.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And there came to me one of the seven
angels, who had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and
talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will show thee the bride, the
Lamb's wife.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And he carried me away in the spirit to
a great and high mountain, and showed me that great city, the holy
Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God,

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Having the glory of God: and her light
was like to a stone most precious, even like a jasper-stone, clear as
crystal;

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And had a wall great and high, and had
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written on them,
which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> On the east three gates; on the north
three gates; on the south three gates; and on the west three gates.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And the wall of the city had twelve
foundations, and on them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And he that talked with me, had a
golden reed to measure the city, and its gates, and its wall.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And the city lieth foursquare, and the
length is as large as the breadth: and he measured the city with the
reed, twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth and the hight
of it are equal.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And he measured the wall of it a
hundred and forty four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that
is, of the angel.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And the building of the wall of it was
of jasper: and the city was pure gold, like clear glass.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And the foundations of the wall of the
city were garnished with all manner of precious stones. The first
foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony;
the fourth, an emerald;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth,
sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz;
the tenth, a chrysoprase; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an
amethyst.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And the twelve gates were twelve
pearls; every several gate was of one pearl; and the street of the city
was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And I saw no temple in it: for the Lord
God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And the city had no need of the sun,
neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God enlightened
it, and the Lamb is the light of it.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And the nations of them who are saved
shall walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth bring their
glory and honor into it.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And the gates of it shall not be shut
by day: for there shall be no night there.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And they shall bring the glory and
honor of the nations into it.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And there shall in no wise enter into
it any thing that defileth, neither whatever worketh abomination, or
maketh a lie; but they who are written in the Lamb's book of life.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> And he showed me a pure river of water of
life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the
Lamb.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> In the midst of the street of it, and on
each side of the river, was there the tree of life, which bore twelve
kinds of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of
the tree were for the healing of the nations.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And there shall be no more curse: but the
throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it; and his servants shall
serve him:

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> And they shall see his face; and his name
shall be in their foreheads.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And there shall be no night there; and
they need no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth
them light: and they shall reign for ever and ever.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And he said to me, These sayings are
faithful and true. And the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel
to show to his servants the things which must shortly be done.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Behold, I come quickly: blessed is he
that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy of this book.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And I John saw these things, and heard
them. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the
feet of the angel who showed me these things.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then saith he to me, See thou do it not:
for I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of
them who keep the sayings of this book: worship God.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And he saith to me, Seal not the
sayings of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He that is unjust, let him be unjust
still: and he who is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is
righteous, let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be
holy still.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And behold, I come quickly; and my
reward is with me, to give to every man according as his work shall be.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, the first and the last.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may
enter in through the gates into the city.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> For without are dogs, and sorcerers,
and lewd men, and murderers, and idolaters, and whoever loveth and
maketh a lie.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> I Jesus have sent my angel to testify
to you these things in the churches. I am the root and the offspring of
David, and the bright and morning-star.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And the Spirit and the bride say, Come.
And let him that heareth, say, Come. And let him that is thirsty, come:
And whoever will, let him take the water of life freely.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> For I testify to every man that heareth
the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man shall add to these
things, God will add to him the plagues that are written in this book:

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And if any man shall take away from the
words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part out of
the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which
are written in this book.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He who testifieth these things saith,
Surely I come quickly: Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.
