[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hag)  [Next](mal) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Webster's Bible: Zechariah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the eighth month, in the second year of
Darius, came the word of the LORD to Zechariah, the son of Barachiah,
the son of Iddo the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The LORD hath been greatly displeased with
your fathers.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Therefore say thou to them, Thus saith the
LORD of hosts; Turn ye to me, saith the LORD of hosts, and I will turn
to you, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Be ye not as your fathers, to whom the
former prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Turn
ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not
hear, nor hearken to me, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Your fathers, where are they? and the
prophets, do they live for ever?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But my words and my statutes, which I
commanded my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your
fathers? and they returned and said, As the LORD of hosts thought to do
to us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so hath he
dealt with us.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Upon the four and twentieth day of the
eleventh month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius,
came the word of the LORD to Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, the son of
Iddo the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> I saw by night, and behold a man riding
upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle-trees that were in the
bottom; and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then said I, O my lord, what are these? And
the angel that talked with me said to me, I will show thee what these
are.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And the man that stood among the
myrtle-trees answered and said, These are they whom the LORD hath sent
to walk to and fro through the earth.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And they answered the angel of the LORD
that stood among the myrtle-trees, and said, We have walked to and fro
through the earth, and behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at
rest.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then the angel of the LORD answered and
said, O LORD of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem
and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation
these seventy years.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the LORD answered the angel that
talked with me with good words and comforting words.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> So the angel that communed with me said
to me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I am jealous for
Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And I am very greatly displeased with the
heathen that are at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they
helped forward the affliction.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Therefore thus saith the LORD; I have
returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house shall be built in it, saith
the LORD of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the LORD of
hosts; My cities through prosperity shall yet be spread abroad; and the
LORD shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Then I lifted up my eyes, and saw, and
behold four horns.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And I said to the angel that talked with
me, What are these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have
scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the LORD showed me four carpenters.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Then said I, What come these to do? And
he spoke, saying, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, so
that no man lifted up his head: but these are come to terrify them, to
cast down the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted their horn over the
land of Judah to scatter it.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I lifted up my eyes again, and looked, and
behold a man with a measuring line in his hand.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he
said to me, To measure Jerusalem, to see what is its breadth, and what
is its length.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And behold, the angel that talked with me
went forth, and another angel went out to meet him,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And said to him, Run, speak to this young
man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the
multitude of men and cattle in it.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For I, saith the LORD, will be to her a
wall of fire on every side, and will be the glory in the midst of her.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land
of the north, saith the LORD: for I have spread you abroad as the four
winds of the heaven, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with
the daughter of Babylon.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts; After the
glory hath he sent me to the nations which wasted you: for he that
toucheth you, toucheth the apple of his eye.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> For behold, I will shake my hand upon them,
and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and ye shall know that the
LORD of hosts hath sent me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Sing, and rejoice, O daughter of Zion:
for lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And many nations shall be joined to the
LORD in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst
of thee, and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me to
thee.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And the LORD shall inherit Judah his
portion in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem again.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Be silent, O all flesh, before the LORD:
for he is raised up out of his holy habitation.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And he showed me Joshua the high priest
standing before the angel of the LORD, and Satan standing at his right
hand to resist him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the LORD said to Satan, The LORD rebuke
thee, O Satan; even the LORD that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is
not this a brand plucked out of the fire?

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Now Joshua was clothed with filthy
garments, and stood before the angel.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he answered and spoke to those that
stood before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And to
him he said, Behold, I have caused thy iniquity to pass from thee, and I
will clothe thee with change of raiment.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And I said, Let them set a fair miter upon
his head. So they set a fair miter upon his head, and clothed him with
garments. And the angel of the LORD stood by.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the angel of the LORD protested to
Joshua, saying,

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If thou wilt
walk in my ways, and if thou wilt keep my charge, then thou shalt also
judge my house, and shalt also keep my courts, and I will give thee
places to walk among these that stand by.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou
and thy fellows that sit before thee: for they are men wondered at: for
behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For behold, the stone that I have laid
before Joshua; upon one stone shall be seven eyes; behold, I will
engrave the graving of it saith the LORD of hosts, and I will remove the
iniquity of that land in one day.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In that day, saith the LORD of hosts,
shall ye call every man his neighbor under the vine and under the
fig-tree.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the angel that talked with me came
again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his sleep,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And said to me, What seest thou? And I
said, I have looked, and behold a candlestick: all of gold, with a bowl
upon the top of it, and its seven lamps, and seven pipes to the seven
lamps, which were upon the top of it.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And two olive-trees by it, one upon the
right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> So I answered and spoke to the angel that
talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord?

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then the angel that talked with me answered
and said to me, Knowest thou not what these are? and I said, No, my
lord.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Then he answered and spoke to me, saying,
This is the word of the LORD to Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by
power, but by my spirit, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Who art thou, O great mountain? before
Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shall bring forth its
head-stone with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace, to it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Moreover the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the
foundation of this house; his hands shall also finish it; and thou shalt
know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me to you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For who hath despised the day of small
things? for they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of
Zerubbabel with those seven; they are the eyes of the LORD, which run to
and fro through the whole earth.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Then I answered, and said to him, What
are these two olive-trees upon the right side of the candlestick and
upon its left side?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And I answered again, and said to him,
What are these two olive branches which through the two golden pipes
empty the golden oil out of themselves?

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he answered me and said, Knowest thou
not what these are? And I said, No, my lord.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then said he, These are the two anointed
ones, that stand by the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then I turned, and lifted up my eyes, and
looked, and behold a flying roll.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And he said to me, What seest thou? And I
answered, I see a flying roll; its length is twenty cubits, and its
breadth ten cubits.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then said he to me, This is the curse that
goeth forth over the face of the whole earth: for every one that
stealeth shall be cut off as on this side according to it; and every one
that sweareth shall be cut off as on that side according to it.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> I will bring it forth, saith the LORD of
hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the
house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shall remain in
the midst of his house, and shall consume it with its timber and its
stones.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Then the angel that talked with me went
forth, and said to me, Lift up now thy eyes, and see what is this that
goeth forth.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I said, What is it? And he said, This
is an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, This is their
resemblance through all the earth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And behold, there was lifted up a talent of
lead: and this is a woman that sitteth in the midst of the ephah.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And he said, This is wickedness. And he
cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon
its mouth.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then I lifted up my eyes, and looked and
behold, there came out two women, and the wind was in their wings; for
they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they lifted up the ephah
between the earth and the heaven.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Then said I to the angel that talked with
me, Whither do these bear the ephah?

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And he said to me, To build for it a
house in the land of Shinar: and it shall be established, and set there
upon her own base.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And I turned, and lifted up my eyes, and
looked, and behold, there came four chariots out from between two
mountains; and the mountains were mountains of brass.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> In the first chariot were red horses; and
in the second chariot black horses;

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And in the third chariot white horses; and
in the fourth chariot grizzled and bay horses.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Then I answered and said to the angel that
talked with me, What are these, my lord?

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the angel answered and said to me,
These are the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing
before the Lord of all the earth.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> The black horses which are therein go forth
into the north country; and the white go forth after them; and the
grizzled go forth towards the south country.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the bay went forth, and sought to go
that they might walk to and fro through the earth: and he said, Go
hence, walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro
through the earth.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Then he cried upon me, and spoke to me,
saying, Behold, these that go towards the north country have quieted my
spirit in the north country.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And the word of the LORD came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Take of them of the captivity, even of
Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, who are come from Babylon, and come
thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then take silver and gold, and make
crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the
high priest.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And speak to him, saying, Thus speaketh
the LORD of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and
he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the
LORD;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Even he shall build the temple of the
LORD; and he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his
throne: and he shall be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of
peace shall be between them both.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to
Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial
in the temple of the LORD.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And they that are far off shall come and
build in the temple of the LORD, and ye shall know that the LORD of
hosts hath sent me to you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will
diligently obey the voice of the LORD your God.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And it came to pass in the fourth year of
king Darius, that the word of the LORD came to Zechariah in the fourth
day of the ninth month, even in Chisleu;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> When they had sent to the house of God
Sherezer and Regem-melech, and their men, to pray before the LORD,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And to speak to the priests who were in the
house of the LORD of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep
in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many
years?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then came the word of the LORD of hosts to
me, saying,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Speak to all the people of the land, and to
the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh
month, even those seventy years, did ye at all fast to me, even to me?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And when ye ate, and when ye drank, did ye
not eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Should ye not hear the words which the LORD
hath cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in
prosperity, and her cities around her, when men inhabited the south and
the plain?

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the word of the LORD came to Zechariah,
saying,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying,
Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassions every man to his
brother:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And oppress not the widow, nor the
fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and let none of you imagine evil
against his brother in your heart.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> But they refused to hearken, and withdrew
the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Yes, they made their hearts as an adamant
stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the LORD of
hosts hath sent in his spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a
great wrath from the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Therefore it is come to pass, that as he
cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear,
saith the LORD of hosts:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> But I scattered them with a whirlwind
among all the nations whom they knew not. Thus the land was desolate
after them, that no man passed through nor returned: for they laid the
pleasant land desolate.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Again the word of the LORD of hosts came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I was jealous
for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Thus saith the LORD; I have returned to
Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shall be
called a city of truth; and the mountain of the LORD of hosts the holy
mountain.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; There shall
yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every
man with his staff in his hand for very age.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the streets of the city shall be full
of boys and girls playing in its streets.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If it is
marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days,
should it also be marvelous in my eyes? saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I
will save my people from the east country, and from the west country;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And I will bring them, and they shall dwell
in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be my people, and I will be
their God, in truth and in righteousness.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Let your
hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of
the prophets, who were in the day when the foundation of the house of
the LORD of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For before these days there was no hire
for man, nor any hire for beast; neither was there any peace to him that
went out or came in because of the affliction: for I set all men every
one against his neighbor.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But now I will not be to the residue of
this people as in the former days, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For the seed shall be prosperous; the
vine shall give her fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and
the heavens shall give their dew; and I will cause the remnant of this
people to possess all these things.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And it shall come to pass, that as ye
were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel;
so will I save you, and ye shall be a blessing: fear not, let your hands
be strong.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For thus saith the LORD of hosts; As I
thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the
LORD of hosts, and I repented not;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> So again have I thought in these days to
do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: fear ye not.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> These are the things that ye shall do;
Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor; execute the judgment of
truth and peace in your gates:

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And let none of you imagine evil in your
hearts against his neighbor; and love no false oath: for all these are
things that I hate, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the word of the LORD of hosts came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The fast of
the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the
seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy
and gladness, and cheerful feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts: It shall
yet come to pass, that there shall come people, and the inhabitants of
many cities:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And the inhabitants of one city shall go
to another, saying, Let us go speedily to pray before the LORD, and to
seek the LORD of hosts: I will go also.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And many people and strong nations shall
come to seek the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the
LORD.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Thus saith the LORD of hosts: In those
days it shall come to pass, that ten men out of all languages of the
nations, shall take hold, shall even take hold of the skirt of him that
is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have heard that God is
with you.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> The burden of the word of the LORD in the
land of Hadrach, and Damascus shall be the rest of it: when the eyes of
man, as of all the tribes of Israel, shall be towards the LORD.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And Hamath also shall border by it; Tyre
and Zidon, though it be very wise.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And Tyre built herself a strong hold, and
amassed silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and he
will smite her power in the sea; and she shall be devoured with fire.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza also
shall see it, and be very sorrowful, and Ekron; for her expectation
shall be ashamed; and the king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon
shall not be inhabited.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I
will cut off the pride of the Philistines.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And I will take away his blood out of his
mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth: but he that
remaineth, even he, shall be for our God, and he shall be as a governor
in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And I will encamp about my house because of
the army, because of him that passeth by, and because of him that
returneth: and no oppressor shall pass through them any more: for now
have I seen with my eyes.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout,
O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh to thee: he is just,
and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the
foal of an ass.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And I will cut off the chariot from
Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle-bow shall be cut
off: and he shall speak peace to the heathen: and his dominion shall be
from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> As for thee also, by the blood of thy
covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit in which is no
water.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners
of hope: even to-day do I declare that I will render double to thee;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> When I have bent Judah for me, filled the
bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O
Greece, and made thee as the sword of a mighty man.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And the LORD shall be seen over them, and
his arrow shall go forth as the lightning: and the Lord GOD will blow
the trumpet, and will go with whirlwinds of the south.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> The LORD of hosts will defend them; and
they shall devour, and subdue with sling-stones; and they shall drink,
and make a noise as through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls,
and as the corners of the altar.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And the LORD their God will save them in
that day as the flock of his people: for they shall be as the stones of
a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For how great is his goodness, and how
great is his beauty! corn shall make the young men cheerful, and new
wine the maids.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Ask ye of the LORD rain in the time of
the latter rain; so the LORD will make bright clouds, and give them
showers of rain, to every one grass in the field.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For the idols have spoken vanity, and the
diviners have seen a lie, and have told false dreams; they comfort in
vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, they were troubled
because there was no shepherd.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> My anger was kindled against the
shepherds, and I punished the goats: for the LORD of hosts hath visited
his flock the house of Judah, and hath made them as his goodly horse in
the battle.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Out of him came forth the corner, out of
him the nail, out of him the battle-bow, out of him every oppressor
together.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And they shall be as mighty men, who
tread down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle: and
they shall fight, because the LORD is with them, and the riders on
horses shall be confounded.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And I will strengthen the house of Judah,
and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them again to
place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shall be as though I
had not cast them off: for I am the LORD their God, and will hear them.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And they of Ephraim shall be like a
mighty man, and their heart shall rejoice as through wine: yes, their
children shall see it, and be glad; their heart shall rejoice in the
LORD.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> I will hiss for them, and gather them:
for I have redeemed them: and they shall increase as they have
increased.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And I will sow them among the people: and
they shall remember me in remote countries; and they shall live with
their children, and turn again.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> I will bring them again also out of the
land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria; and I will bring them
into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and place shall not be found for
them.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he shall pass through the sea with
affliction, and shall smite the waves in the sea, and all the deeps of
the river shall dry up: and the pride of Assyria shall be brought down,
and the scepter of Egypt shall depart.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And I will strengthen them in the LORD;
and they shall walk up and down in his name, saith the LORD.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire
may devour thy cedars.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Howl, fir-tree, for the cedar is fallen;
because the mighty are laid waste: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for the
forest of the vintage is come down.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> There is a voice of the howling of the
shepherds; for their glory is destroyed: a voice of the roaring of young
lions; for the pride of Jordan is laid waste.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Thus saith the LORD my God; Feed the
flock of the slaughter;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Whose possessors slay them, and hold
themselves not guilty: and they that sell them say, Blessed be the LORD;
for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them not.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> For I will no more pity the inhabitants
of the land, saith the LORD: but lo, I will deliver the men every one
into his neighbor's hand, and into the hand of his king: and they shall
smite the land, and out of their hand I will not deliver them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And I will feed the flock of slaughter,
even you, O poor of the flock. And I took to me two staffs; the one I
called Beauty, and the other I called Bands; and I fed the flock.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Three shepherds also I cut off in one
month; and my soul lothed them, and their soul also abhorred me.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Then said I, I will not feed you: that
which dieth, let it die; and that which is to be cut off, let it be cut
off; and let the rest eat, every one the flesh of another.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And I took my staff, even Beauty, and
cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all
the people.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And it was broken in that day: and so
the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it was the word of
the LORD.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And I said to them, If ye think good,
give me my price; and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my price
thirty pieces of silver.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the LORD said to me, Cast it to the
potter: a goodly price that I was prized at by them. And I took the
thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the
LORD.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Then I cut asunder my other staff, even
Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And the LORD said to me, Take to thee
yet the instruments of a foolish shepherd.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in
the land, who shall not visit those that are cut off, neither shall seek
the young one, nor heal that which is broken, nor feed that which
standeth still: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their
claws in pieces.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Woe to the idle shepherd that leaveth
the flock! the sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his
arm shall be wholly dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly
darkened.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> The burden of the word of the LORD for
Israel, saith the LORD, who stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the
foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of
trembling to all the people around, when they shall be in the siege both
against Judah and against Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And in that day will I make Jerusalem a
burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it
shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be assembled
against it.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> In that day, saith the LORD, I will smite
every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness: and I will
open my eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the
people with blindness.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And the governors of Judah shall say in
their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the
LORD of hosts their God.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> In that day will I make the governors of
Judah like a hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in
a sheaf; and they shall devour all the people around, on the right hand
and on the left: and Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own
place, even in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> The LORD also will save the tents of
Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem may not magnify themselves against Judah.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> In that day will the LORD defend the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is feeble among them at that day
shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel
of the LORD before them.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of
supplications: and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and
they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be
in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> In that day shall there be a great
mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddon.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And the land shall mourn, every family
apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart;
the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The family of the house of Levi apart,
and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives
apart;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> All the families that remain, every
family apart, and their wives apart.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin
and for uncleanness.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
saith the LORD of hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols out
of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will cause
the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And it shall come to pass, that when any
shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him shall
say to him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in the name of
the LORD: and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him
through when he prophesieth.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath
prophesied; neither shall they wear a rough garment to deceive:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> But he shall say, I am no prophet, I am a
husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And one shall say to him, What are these
wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was
wounded in the house of my friends.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and
against the man that is my fellow, saith the LORD of hosts: smite the
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered: and I will turn my hand upon
the little ones.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And it shall come to pass, that in all
the land, saith the LORD, two parts therein shall be cut off and die;
but the third shall be left therein.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And I will bring the third part through
the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them
as gold is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I
will say, It is my people; and they shall say, The LORD is my God.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, and
thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For I will gather all nations against
Jerusalem to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled,
and the women ravished; and half of the city shall go forth into
captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the
city.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Then will the LORD go forth, and fight
against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And his feet will stand in that day upon
the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the
mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst of it towards the east and
towards the west, and there shall be a very great valley; and half of
the mountain shall remove towards the north, and half of it towards the
south.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And ye shall flee to the valley of the
mountains; for the valley of the mountains shall reach to Azal: yes, ye
shall flee as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah
king of Judah: and the LORD my God shall come, and all the saints with
thee.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the light shall not be clear, nor dark:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> But it shall be one day which shall be
known to the LORD, not day, nor night: but it shall come to pass, that
at evening it shall be light.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And it shall be in that day, that living
waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half of them towards the former sea,
and half of them towards the hinder sea: in summer and in winter shall
it be.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the LORD will be king over all the
earth: in that day will there be one LORD, and his name one.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> All the land shall be turned as a plain
from Geba to Rimmon, south of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up, and
inhabited in her place, from Benjamin's gate to the place of the first
gate, to the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananeel to the king's
wine-presses.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And men shall dwell in it, and there
shall be no more utter destruction; but Jerusalem shall be safely
inhabited.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And this shall be the plague with which
the LORD will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem;
Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and
their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall
consume away in their mouth.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that a great tumult from the LORD shall be among them; and they shall
lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbor, and his hand shall rise
up against the hand of his neighbor.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And Judah also shall fight at
Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the heathen around shall be collected,
gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And so shall be the plague of the
horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the ass, and of all the beasts
that shall be in these tents, as this plague.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And it shall come to pass, that every
one that is left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall
even go up from year to year to worship the King, the LORD of hosts, and
to keep the feast of tabernacles.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And it shall be, that whoever will not
come up of all the families of the earth to Jerusalem to worship the
King, the LORD of hosts, even upon them shall be no rain.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And if the family of Egypt shall not go
up, and shall not come, that have no rain; there shall be the plague,
with which the LORD will smite the heathen that come not up to keep the
feast of tabernacles.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> This shall be the punishment of Egypt,
and the punishment of all nations that come not up to keep the feast of
tabernacles.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> In that day there shall be upon the
bells of the horses, HOLINESS TO THE LORD; and the pots in the LORD'S
house shall be like the bowls before the altar.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Yes, every pot in Jerusalem and in
Judah shall be holiness to the LORD of hosts: and all they that
sacrifice shall come and take of them, and seethe in them: and in that
day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the LORD of
hosts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi](mal)
