[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lku00)  [Next](lku02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

THERE are several reasons for the publication of this work, the
translation of which pleasantly employed me while imprisoned by the
present rulers of Hawaii. It will be to my friends a souvenir of that
part of my own life, and possibly it may also be of value to
genealogists and scientific men of a few societies to which a copy will
be forwarded. The folk-lore or traditions of an aboriginal people have
of late years been considered of inestimable value; language itself
changes, and there are terms and allusions herein to the natural history
of Hawaii, which might be forgotten in future years without some such
history as this to preserve them to posterity. Further, it is the
special property of the latest ruling family of the Hawaiian Islands,
being nothing less than the genealogy in remote times of the late King
Kalakaua,--who had it printed in the original Hawaiian language,--and
myself.

This is the very chant which was sung by Puou, the High Priest of our
ancient worship, to Captain Cook whom they had surnamed Lono, one of the
four chief gods, dwelling high in the heavens, but at times appearing on
the earth. This was the cause of the deification of Captain Cook under
that name, and of the offerings to him made at the temple or Heiau at
Hikiau, Kealakekua, where this song was rendered.

Captain Cook's appearance was regarded by our people then as a
confirmation of their own traditions. For it was prophesied by priests
at the time of the death of Ka-I-i-mamao that he, Lono, would return
anew from the sea in a Spanish man-of-war or Auwaalalua. To the great
navigator they accordingly gave a welcome with the name of Lono.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

The chanters of this great poem were Hewahewa and Ahukai, and by them it
was originally dedicated to Alapai, our ancestress, a woman-chief of the
highest rank, then at Koko Oahu. Keeaumoku was lying on his death-bed.
The Lonoikamakahiki, of whom this chant sings so eloquently in our
native tongue, is none other than Kalaninuiiamamao (Ka-I-i-mamao). His
name was also Lonoikamakahiki. He was thus called by his mother,
Lonomaikanaka, from the very moment of his birth. It was his grandmother
Keakealani who changed his name at the time he was dedicated to the gods
and the sacred tabus of the Wela, Hoano, and the Moe; or, translated,
Fire, Honor, and Adoration were conferred upon him at the time when his
navel string was cut at the Heiau at Nueku, Kahaluu, Kona, Hawaii. The
correct name of this chief was Ka-I-i-mamao, but the bards of his day
named him in their chants Kalaninuiiamamao; thus he was styled in their
Mele or chant called Kekoauli-kookea ka lani. The words "lani nui" were
simply inserted by them as it was their intention to hand the young
prince's name down to posterity in song, while to explain the object of
the parents in naming him Ka-I-i-mamao it signified that when Keawe
married Lonoma-I-Kanaka it was an infusion of a new royal blood with
that of their own royal line of I, the father of Ahu, the grandfather of
Lonomaikanaka. By this it was also intended to show that he, that is
Ka-I-i-mamao, was above all other I's, for there were many families,
descendants of I, a high and powerful chief, and the last term, "mamao,"
means "far off" and above all the rest of the I's.

Before he was deposed by the people of Kau he was called Wakea on
account of his wicked actions, and, like Wakea, he married his own
daughter. By this name he wandered through the wilds of Kahihikolo at
Kalihikai, Kalihiwai, and Hanalei, and ultimately became demented.
Through all his wanderings he was followed by his faithful attendant and
retainer Kapaihi a Hilina.

This historical character is distinct from the Lonoikamakahiki, son of
Keawenuiaumi, the same one who challenged

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kakuhihewa at checkers, Konane. He figured at a
different period. There were really three persons of the name of
Lonoikamakahiki; the first of these was the son of Keawenuiaumi; the
second was a celebrated hunchback son of Kapulehuwaihele, and belonged
to Makakaualii. The third Lonoikamakahiki is the one for whom this
prayer was composed. His parents were Keaweikekahialiiokamoku and
Lonomaikaamaka. Ka-I-i-mamao was the father of Kalaniopuu, this
last-named being ancestor in the third degree of King Kalakaua, who
reigned over the Hawaiian kingdom from 1874 to 1891, and of
Liliuokalani, who reigned from 1891 to 1893. He was also ancestor in
second and third degree to the wife of Kalakaua, at present the dowager
Queen Kapiolani.

It will be seen, therefore, that as connecting the earlier kings of
ancient history with the monarchs latest upon the throne this chant is a
contribution to the history of the Hawaiian Islands, and as it is the
only record of its kind in existence it seemed to me worthy of
preservation in convenient form.

I have endeavored to give the definition of each name as far as it came
within my knowledge of words, but in some cases this could not be done
because the true signification has been lost. The ancient Hawaiians were
astronomers, and the terms used appertained to the heavens, the stars,
terrestrial science, and the gods. Curious students will notice in this
chant analogies between its accounts of the creation and that given by
modern science or Sacred Scripture. As with other religions, our ancient
people recognized an all-powerful evil spirit: Mea was the King of Milu
as Satan is of the infernal regions, or hell.

I hope that to some interested in all that pertains to Hawaii, this may
give one-half the pleasure which it gave to me in the translation and
preparation of the manuscript.

LILIUOKALANI, *of Hawaii*,         
*Patron of the Polynesian Historical Society*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Era](lku02)
