[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj202)  [Next](loj204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I

JOSEPH--THE FAVORITE SON--JOSEPH HATED BY HIS BRETHREN--JOSEPH CAST INTO
THE PIT--THE SALE--JOSEPH'S THREE MASTERS--JOSEPH'S COAT BROUGHT TO HIS
FATHER--JUDAH AND HIS SONS--THE WIVES OF THE SONS OF JACOB--JOSEPH THE
SLAVE OF POTIPHAR--JOSEPH AND ZULEIKA--JOSEPH RESISTS TEMPTATION--JOSEPH
IN PRISON--PHARAOH'S DREAMS--JOSEPH BEFORE PHARAOH--THE RULER OF
EGYPT--JOSEPH'S BRETHREN IN EGYPT--JOSEPH MEETS HIS BRETHREN--THE SECOND
JOURNEY TO EGYPT--JOSEPH AND BENJAMIN--THE THIEF CAUGHT--JUDAH PLEADS
AND THREATENS--JOSEPH MAKES HIMSELF KNOWN--JACOB RECEIVES THE GLAD
TIDINGS--JACOB ARRIVES IN EGYPT--JOSEPH'S KINDNESS AND
GENEROSITY--JACOB'S LAST WISH--THE BLESSING OF EPHRAIM AND MANASSEH--THE
BLESSING OF THE TWELVE TRIBES--THE DEATH OF JACOB--THE SONS OF JACOB AT
WAR WITH THE SONS OF ESAU--ZEPHO KING OF KITTIM--THE NATIONS AT
WAR--JOSEPH'S MAGNANIMITY--ASENATH--THE MARRIAGE OF JOSEPH--KIND AND
UNKIND BRETHREN--TREACHERY PUNISHED--THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF JOSEPH

### JOSEPH--THE FAVORITE SON

Jacob was not exempt from the lot that falls to the share of all the
pious. Whenever they expect to enjoy life in tranquillity, Satan hinders
them. He appears before God, and says: "Is it not enough that the future
world is set apart for the pious? What right have they to enjoy this
world, besides?" After the many hardships and conflicts that had beset
the path of Jacob, he thought he would be at rest at last, and then came
the loss of Joseph and inflicted the keenest suffering. Verily, few and
evil had been the days of the years of Jacob's pilgrimage, for the time
spent outside of the Holy Land had seemed joyless to him. Only the
portion of his life passed in the land of his fathers, during which he
was occupied with making proselytes, in accordance with the example set
him by Abraham and Isaac, did he consider worth while having lived, and
this happy time was of short duration. When Joseph was snatched away,
but eight years had elapsed since his return to his father's house.

And yet it was only for the sake of Joseph that Jacob had been willing
to undergo all the troubles and the adversity connected with his sojourn
in the house of Laban. Indeed, Jacob's blessing in having his quiver
full of children was due to the merits of Joseph, and likewise the
dividing of the Red Sea and of the Jordan for the Israelites was the
reward for his son's piety. For among the sons of Jacob Joseph was the
one that resembled his father most closely in appearance, and, also, he
was the one to whom Jacob transmitted the instruction and knowledge he
had received from his teachers Shem and Eber. The whole course of the
son's life is but a repetition of the father's. As the mother of Jacob
remained childless for a long time after her marriage, so also the
mother of Joseph. As Rebekah had undergone severe suffering in giving
birth to Jacob, so Rachel in giving birth to Joseph. As Jacob's mother
bore two sons, so also Joseph's mother. Like Jacob, Joseph was born
circumcised. As the father was a shepherd, so the son. As the father
served for the sake of a woman, so the son served under a woman. Like
the father, the son appropriated his older brother's birthright. The
father was hated by his brother, and the son was hated by his brethren.
The father was the favorite son as compared with his brother, so was the
son as compared with his brethren. Both the father and the son lived in
the land of the stranger. The father became a servant to a master, also
the son. The master whom the father served was blessed by God, so was
the master whom the son served. The father and the son were both
accompanied by angels, and both married their wives outside of the Holy
Land. The father and the son were both blessed with wealth. Great things
were announced to the father in a dream, so also to the son. As the
father went to Egypt and put an end to famine, so the son. As the father
exacted the promise from his sons to bury him in the Holy Land, so also
the son. The father died in Egypt, there died also the son. The body of
the father was embalmed, also the body of the son. As the father's
remains were carried to the Holy Land for interment, so also the remains
of the son. Jacob the father provided for the sustenance of his son
Joseph during a period of seventeen years, so Joseph the son provided
for his father Jacob during a period of seventeen years.

Until he was seventeen years old, Joseph frequented the Bet ha-Midrash,
and he became so learned that he could impart to his brethren the
Halakot he had heard from his father, and in this way he may be regarded
as their teacher. He did not stop at formal instruction, he also tried
to give them good counsel, and he became the favorite of the sons of the
handmaids, who would kiss and embrace him.

In spite of his scholarship there was something boyish about Joseph. He
painted his eyes, dressed his hair carefully, and walked with a mincing
step. These foibles of youth were not so deplorable as his habit of
bringing evil reports of his brethren to his father. He accused them of
treating the beasts under their care with cruelty--he said that they ate
flesh torn from a living animal--and he charged them with casting their
eyes upon the daughters of the Canaanites, and giving contemptuous
treatment to the sons of the handmaids Bilhah and Zilpah, whom they
called slaves.

For these groundless accusations Joseph had to pay dearly. He was
himself sold as a slave, because he had charged his brethren with having
called the sons of the handmaids slaves, and Potiphar's wife cast her
eyes upon Joseph, because he threw the suspicion upon his brethren that
they had cast their eyes upon the Canaanitish women. And how little it
was true that they were guilty of cruelty to animals, appears from the
fact that at the very time when they were contemplating their crime
against Joseph, they yet observed all the rules and prescriptions of the
ritual in slaughtering the kid of the goats with the blood of which they
besmeared his coat of many colors.

### JOSEPH HATED BY HIS BRETHREN

Joseph's talebearing against his brethren made them hate him. Among all
of them Gad was particularly wrathful, and for good reason. Gad was a
very brave man, and when a beast of prey attacked the herd, over which
he kept guard at night, he would seize it by one of its legs, and whirl
it around until it was stunned, and then he would fling it away to a
distance of two stadia, and kill it thus. Once Jacob sent Joseph to tend
the flock, but he remained away only thirty days, for he was a delicate
lad and fell sick with the heat, and he hastened back to his father. On
his return he told Jacob that the sons of the handmaids were in the
habit of slaughtering the choice cattle of the herd and eating it,
without obtaining permission from Judah and Reuben. But his report was
not accurate. What he had seen was Gad slaughtering one lamb, which he
had snatched from the very jaws of a bear, and he killed it because it
could not be kept alive after its fright. Joseph's account sounded as
though the sons of the handmaids were habitually inconsiderate and
careless in wasting their father's substance.

To the resentment of the brethren was added their envy of Joseph,
because their father loved him more than all of them. Joseph's beauty of
person was equal to that of his mother Rachel, and Jacob had but to look
at him to be consoled for the death of his beloved wife. Reason enough
for distinguishing him among his children. As a token of his great love
for him, Jacob gave Joseph a coat of many colors, so light and delicate
that it could be crushed and concealed in the closed palm of one hand.
The Hebrew name of the garment, Passim, conveys the story of the sale of
Joseph. The first letter, Pe, stands for Potiphar, his Egyptian master;
Samek stands for Soharim, the merchantmen that bought Joseph from the
company of Ishmaelites to whom his brethren had sold him; Yod stands for
these same Ishmaelites; and Mem, for the Midianites that obtained him
from the merchantmen, and then disposed of him to Potiphar. But Passim.
has yet another meaning, "clefts." His brethren knew that the Red Sea
would be cleft in twain in days to come for Joseph's sake, and they were
jealous of the glory to be conferred upon him. Although they were filled
with hatred of him, it must be said in their favor that they were not of
a sullen, spiteful nature. They did not hide their feelings, they
proclaimed their enmity openly.

Once Joseph dreamed a dream, and he could not refrain from telling it to
his brethren. He spoke, and said: "Hear, I pray you, this dream which I
have dreamed. Behold, you gathered fruit, and so did I. Your fruit
rotted, but mine remained sound. Your seed will set up dumb images of
idols, but they will vanish at the appearance of my descendant, the
Messiah of Joseph. You will keep the truth as to my fate from the
knowledge of my father, but I will stand fast as a reward for the
self-denial of my mother, and you will prostrate yourselves five times
before me."

The brethren refused at first to listen to the dream, but when Joseph
urged them again and again, they gave heed to him, and they said, "Shalt
thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us?"
God put an interpretation into their mouths that was to be verified in
the posterity of Joseph. Jeroboam and Jehu, two kings, and Joshua and
Gideon, two judges, have been among his descendants, corresponding to
the double and emphatic expressions used by his brethren in interpreting
the dream.

Then Joseph dreamed another dream, how the sun, the moon, and eleven
stars bowed down before him, and Jacob, to whom he told it first, was
rejoiced over it, for he understood its meaning properly. He knew that
he himself was designated by the sun, the name by which God had called
him when he lodged overnight on the holy site of the Temple. He had
heard God say to the angels at that time, "The sun has come." The moon
stood for Joseph's mother, and the stars for his brethren, for the
righteous are as the stars. Jacob was so convinced of the truth of the
dream that he was encouraged to believe that he would live to see the
resurrection of the dead, for Rachel was dead, and her return to earth
was clearly indicated by the dream. He went astray there, for not
Joseph's own mother was referred to, but his foster-mother Bilhah, who
had raised him.

Jacob wrote the dream in a book, recording all the circumstances, the
day, the hour, and the place, for the holy spirit cautioned him, "Take
heed, these things will surely come to pass." But when Joseph repeated
his dream to his brethren, in the presence of his father, Jacob rebuked
him, saying, "I and thy brethren, that has some sense, but I and thy
mother, that is inconceivable, for thy mother is dead." These words of
Jacob called forth a reproof from God. He said, "Thus thy descendants
will in time to come seek to hinder Jeremiah in delivering his
prophecies." Jacob may be excused, he had spoken in this way only in
order to avert the envy and hate of his brethren from Joseph, but they
envied and hated him because they knew that the interpretation put upon
the dream by Jacob would be realized.

### JOSEPH CAST INTO THE PIT

Once the brethren of Joseph led their father's flocks to the pastures of
Shechem, and they intended to take their ease and pleasure there. They
stayed away a long time, and no tidings of them were heard. Jacob began
to be anxious about the fate of his sons. He feared that a war had
broken out between them and the people of Shechem, and he resolved to
send Joseph to them and have him bring word again, whether it was well
with his brethren. Jacob desired to know also about the flocks, for it
is a duty to concern oneself about the welfare of anything from which
one derives profit. Though he knew that the hatred of his brethren might
bring on unpleasant adventures, yet Joseph, in filial reverence,
declared himself ready to go on his father's errand. Later, whenever
Jacob remembered his dear son's willing spirit, the recollection stabbed
him to the heart. He would say to himself, "Thou didst know the hatred
of thy brethren, and yet thou didst say, Here am I."

Jacob dismissed Joseph, with the injunction that he journey only by
daylight, saying furthermore, "Go now, see whether it be well with thy
brethren, and well with the flock; and send me word"--an unconscious
prophecy. He did not say that he expected to see Joseph again, but only
to have word from him. Since the covenant of the pieces, God had
resolved, on account of Abraham's doubting question, that Jacob and his
family should go down into Egypt to dwell there. The preference shown to
Joseph by his father, and the envy it aroused, leading finally to the
sale of Joseph and his establishment in Egypt, were but disguised means
created by God, instead of executing His counsel directly by carrying
Jacob down into Egypt as a captive.

Joseph reached Shechem, where he expected to find his brethren. Shechem
was always a place of ill omen for Jacob and his seed--there Dinah was
dishonored, there the Ten Tribes of Israel rebelled against the house of
David while Rehoboam ruled in Jerusalem, and there Jeroboam was
installed as king. Not finding his brethren and the herd in Shechem,
Joseph continued his journey in the direction of the next pasturing
place, not far from Shechem, but he lost his way in the wilderness.
Gabriel in human shape appeared before him, and asked him, saying, "What
seekest thou?" And he answered, "I seek my brethren." Whereto the angel
replied, "Thy brethren have given up the Divine qualities of love and
mercy. Through a prophetic revelation they learned that the Hivites were
preparing to make war upon them, and therefore they departed hence to go
to Dothan. And they had to leave this place for other reasons, too. I
heard, while I was still standing behind the curtain that veils the
Divine throne, that this day the Egyptian bondage would begin, and thou
wouldst be the first to be subjected to it." Then Gabriel led Joseph to
Dothan.

When his brethren saw him afar off, they conspired against him, to slay
him. Their first plan was to set dogs on him. Simon then spoke to Levi,
"Behold, the master of dreams cometh with a new dream, he whose
descendant Jeroboam will introduce the worship of Baal. Come now,
therefore, and let us slay him, that we may see what will become of his
dreams." But God spoke: "Ye say, We shall see what will become of his
dreams, and I say likewise, We shall see, and the future shall show
whose word will stand, yours or Mine."

Simon and Gad set about slaying Joseph, and he fell upon his face, and
entreated them: "Have mercy with me, my brethren, have pity on the heart
of my father Jacob. Lay not your hands upon me, to spill innocent blood,
for I have done no evil unto you. But if I have done evil unto you, then
chastise me with a chastisement, but your hands lay not upon me, for the
sake of our father Jacob." These words touched Zebulon, and he began to
lament and weep, and the wailing of Joseph rose up together with his
brother's, and when Simon and Gad raised their hands against him to
execute their evil design, Joseph took refuge behind Zebulon, and
supplicated his other brethren to have mercy upon him. Then Reuben
arose, and he said, "Brethren, let us not slay him, but let us cast him
into one of the dry pits, which our fathers dug without finding water."
That was due to the providence of God; He had hindered the water from
rising in them in order that Joseph's rescue might be accomplished, and
the pits remained dry until Joseph was safe in the hands of the
Ishmaelites.

Reuben had several reasons for interceding in behalf of Joseph. He knew
that he as the oldest of the brethren would be held responsible by their
father, if any evil befell him. Besides, Reuben was grateful to Joseph
for having reckoned him among the eleven sons of Jacob in narrating his
dream of the sun, moon, and stars. Since his disrespectful bearing
toward Jacob, he had not thought himself worthy of being considered one
of his sons. First Reuben tried to restrain his brethren from their
purpose, and he addressed them in words full of love and compassion. But
when he saw that neither words nor entreaties would change their
intention, he begged them, saying: "My brethren, at least hearken unto
me in respect of this, that ye be not so wicked and cruel as to slay
him. Lay no hand upon your brother, shed no blood, cast him into this
pit that is in the wilderness, and let him perish thus.

Then Reuben went away from his brethren, and he hid in the mountains, so
that he might be able to hasten back in a favorable moment and draw
Joseph forth from the pit and restore him to his father. He hoped his
reward would be pardon for the transgression he had committed against
Jacob. His good intention was frustrated, yet Reuben was rewarded by
God, for God gives a recompense not only for good deeds, but for good
intentions as well. As he was the first of the brethren of Joseph to
make an attempt to save him, so the city of Bezer in the tribe of Reuben
was the first of the cities of refuge appointed to safeguard the life of
the innocent that seek help. Furthermore God spake to Reuben, saying:
"As thou wast the first to endeavor to restore a child unto his father,
so Hosea, one of thy descendants, shall be the first to endeavor to lead
Israel back to his heavenly Father."

The brethren accepted Reuben's proposition, and Simon seized Joseph, and
cast him into a pit swarming with snakes and scorpions, beside which was
another unused pit, filled with offal. As though this were not enough
torture, Simon bade his brethren fling great stones at Joseph. In his
later dealings with this brother Simon, Joseph showed all the forgiving
charitableness of his nature. When Simon was held in durance in Egypt as
a hostage, Joseph, so far from bearing him a grudge, ordered crammed
poultry to be set before him at all his meals.

Not satisfied with exposing Joseph to the snakes and scorpions, his
brethren had stripped him bare before they flung him into the pit. They
took off his coat of many colors, his upper garment, his breeches, and
his shirt. However, the reptiles could do him no harm. God heard his cry
of distress, and kept them in hiding in the clefts and the holes, and
they could not come near him. From the depths of the pit Joseph appealed
to his brethren, saying: "O my brethren, what have I done unto you, and
what is my transgression? Why are you not afraid before God on account
of your treatment of me? Am I not flesh of your flesh, and bone of your
bone? Jacob your father, is he not also my father? Why do you act thus
toward me? And how will you be able to lift up your countenance before
Jacob? O Judah, Reuben, Simon, Levi, my brethren, deliver me, I pray
you, from the dark place into which you have cast me. Though I committed
a trespass against you, yet are ye children of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, who were compassionate with the orphan, gave food to the hungry,
and clothed the naked. How, then, can ye withhold your pity from your
own brother, your own flesh and bone? And though I sinned against you,
yet you will hearken unto my petition for the sake of my father. O that
my father knew what my brethren are doing unto me, and what they spake
unto me!"

To avoid hearing Joseph's weeping and cries of distress, his brethren
passed on from the pit, and stood at a bow-shot's distance. The only one
among them that manifested pity was Zebulon. For two days and two nights
no food passed his lips on account of his grief over the fate of Joseph,
who had to spend three days and three nights in the pit before he was
sold. During this period Zebulon was charged by his brethren to keep
watch at the pit. He was chosen to stand guard because he took no part
in the meals. Part of the time Judah also refrained from eating with the
rest, and took turns at watching, because he feared Simon and Gad might
jump down into the pit and put an end to Joseph's life.

While Joseph was languishing thus, his brethren determined to kill him.
They would finish their meal first, they said, and then they would fetch
him forth and slay him. When they had done eating, they attempted to say
grace, but Judah remonstrated with them: "We are about to take the life
of a human being, and yet would bless God? That is not a blessing, that
is contemning the Lord. What profit is it if we slay our brother? Rather
will the punishment of God descend upon us. I have good counsel to give
you. Yonder passeth by a travelling company of Ishmaelites on their way
to Egypt. Come and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our
hand be upon him. The Ishmaelites will take him with them upon their
journeyings, and he will be lost among the peoples of the earth. Let us
follow the custom of former days, for Canaan, too, the son of Ham, was
made a slave for his evil deeds, and so will we do with our brother
Joseph."

### THE SALE

While the brethren of Joseph were deliberating upon his fate, seven
Midianitish merchantmen passed near the pit in which he lay. They
noticed that many birds were circling above it, whence they assumed that
there must be water therein, and, being thirsty, they made a halt in
order to refresh themselves. When they came close, they heard Joseph
screaming and wailing, and they looked down into the pit and saw a youth
of beautiful figure and comely appearance. They called to him, saying:
"Who art thou? Who brought thee hither, and who cast thee into this pit
in the wilderness?" They all joined together and dragged him up, and
took him along with them when they continued on their journey. They had
to pass his brethren, who called out to the Midianites: "Why have you
done such a thing, to steal our slave and carry him away with you? We
threw the lad into the pit, because he was disobedient. Now, then,
return our slave to us." The Midianites replied: "What, this lad, you
say, is your slave, your servant? More likely is it that you all are
slaves unto him, for in beauty of form, in pleasant looks, and fair
appearance, he excelleth you all. Why, then, will you speak lies unto
us? We will not give ear unto your words, nor believe you, for we found
the lad in the wilderness, in a pit, and we took him out, and we will
carry him away with us on our journey." But the sons of Jacob insisted,
"Restore our slave to us, lest you meet death at the edge of the sword."

Unaffrighted, the Midianites drew their weapons, and, amid war whoops,
they prepared to enter into a combat with the sons of Jacob. Then Simon
rose up, and with bared sword he sprang upon the Midianites, at the same
time uttering a cry that made the earth reverberate. The Midianites fell
down in great consternation, and he said: "I am Simon, the son of the
Hebrew Jacob, who destroyed the city of Shechem alone and unaided, and
together with my brethren I destroyed the cities of the Amorites. God do
so and more also, if it be not true that all the Midianites, your
brethren, united with all the Canaanite kings to fight with me, cannot
hold out against me. Now restore the boy you took from us, else will I
give your flesh unto the fowls of the air and to the beasts of the
field."

The Midianites were greatly afraid of Simon, and, terrified and abashed,
they spake to the sons of Jacob with little courage: "Said ye not that
ye cast this lad into the pit because he was of a rebellious spirit?
What, now, will ye do with an insubordinate slave? Rather sell him to
us, we are ready to pay any price you desire." This speech was part of
the purpose of God. He had put it into the heart of the Midianites to
insist upon possessing Joseph, that he might not remain with his
brethren, and be slain by them. The brethren assented, and Joseph was
sold as a slave while they sat over their meal. God spake, saying: "Over
a meal did ye sell your brother, and thus shall Ahasuerus sell your
descendants to Haman over a meal, and because ye have sold Joseph to be
a slave, therefore shall ye say year after year, Slaves were we unto
Pharaoh in Egypt."

The price paid for Joseph by the Midianites was twenty pieces of silver,
enough for a pair of shoes for each of his brethren. Thus "they sold the
righteous for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes." For so
handsome a youth as Joseph the sum paid was too low by far, but his
appearance had been greatly changed by the horrible anguish he had
endured in the pit with the snakes and the scorpions. He had lost his
ruddy complexion, and he looked sallow and sickly, and the Midianites
were justified in paying a small sum for him.

The merchantmen had come upon Joseph naked in the pit, for his brethren
had stripped him of all his clothes. That he might not appear before men
in an unseemly condition, God sent Gabriel down to him, and the angel
enlarged the amulet banging from Joseph's neck until it was a garment
that covered him entirely. Joseph's brethren were looking after him as
he departed with the Midianites, and when they saw him with clothes upon
him, they cried after them, "Give us his raiment! We sold him naked,
without clothes." His owners refused to yield to their demand, but they
agreed to reimburse the brethren with four pairs of shoes, and Joseph
kept his garment, the same in which he was arrayed when he arrived in
Egypt and was sold to Potiphar, the same in which he was locked up in
prison and appeared before Pharaoh, and the same he wore when he was
ruler over Egypt.

As an atonement for the twenty pieces of silver taken by his brethren in
exchange for Joseph, God commanded that every first-born son shall be
redeemed by the priest with an equal amount, and, also, every Israelite
must pay annually to the sanctuary as much as fell to each of the
brethren as his share of the price.

The brethren of Joseph bought shoes for the money, for they said: "We
will not eat it, because it is the price for the blood of our brother,
but we will tread upon him, for that he spake, he would have dominion
over us, and we will see what will become of his dreams." And for this
reason the ordinance has been commanded, that he who refuseth to raise
up a name in Israel unto his brother that hath died without having a
son, shall have his shoe loosed from off his foot, and his face shall be
spat upon. Joseph's brethren refused to do aught to preserve his life,
and therefore the Lord loosed their shoes from off their feet, for, when
they went down to Egypt, the slaves of Joseph took their shoes off their
feet as they entered the gates, and they prostrated themselves before
Joseph as before a Pharaoh, and, as they lay prostrate, they were spat
upon, and put to shame before the Egyptians.

The Midianites pursued their journey to Gilead, but they soon regretted
the purchase they had made. They feared that Joseph had been stolen in
the land of the Hebrews, though sold to them as a slave, and if his
kinsmen should find him with them, death would be inflicted upon them
for the abduction of a free man. The high-handed manner of the sons of
Jacob confirmed their suspicion, that they might be capable of man
theft. Their wicked deed would explain, too, why they had accepted so
small a sum in exchange for Joseph. While discussing these points, they
saw, coming their way, the travelling company of Ishmaelites that had
been observed earlier by the sons of Jacob, and they determined to
dispose of Joseph to them, that they might at least not lose the price
they had paid, and might escape the danger at the same time of being
made captives for the crime of kidnapping a man. And the Ishmaelites
bought Joseph from the Midianites, and they paid the same price as his
former owners had given for him.

### JOSEPH'S THREE MASTERS

As a rule the only merchandise with which the Ishmaelites loaded their
camels was pitch and the skins of beasts. By a providential dispensation
they carried bags of perfumery this time, instead of their usual
ill-smelling freight, that sweet fragrance might be wafted to Joseph on
his journey to Egypt. These aromatic substances were well suited to
Joseph, whose body emitted a pleasant smell, so agreeable and pervasive
that the road along which he travelled was redolent thereof, and on his
arrival in Egypt the perfume from his body spread over the whole land,
and the royal princesses, following the sweet scent to trace its source,
reached the place in which Joseph was. Even after his death the same
fragrance was spread abroad by his bones, enabling Moses to distinguish
Joseph's remains from all others, and keep the oath of the children of
Israel, to inter them in the Holy Land.

When Joseph learned that the Ishmaelites were carrying him to Egypt, he
began to weep bitterly at the thought of being removed so far from
Canaan and from his father. One of the Ishmaelites noticed Joseph's
weeping and crying, and thinking that he found riding uncomfortable, he
lifted him from the back of the camel, and permitted him to walk on
foot. But Joseph continued to weep and sob, crying incessantly, "O
father, father!" Another one of the caravan, tired of his lamentations,
beat him, causing only the more tears and wails, until the youth,
exhausted by his grief, was unable to move on. Now all the Ishmaelites
in the company dealt out blows to him. They treated him with relentless
cruelty, and tried to silence him by threats. God saw Joseph's distress,
and He sent darkness and terror upon the Ishmaelites, and their hands
grew rigid when they raised them to inflict a blow. Astonished, they
asked themselves why God did thus unto them upon the road. They did not
know that it was for the sake of Joseph.

The journey was continued until they came to Ephrath, the place of
Rachel's sepulchre. Joseph hastened to his mother's grave, and throwing
himself across it, he groaned and cried, saying: "O mother, mother, that
didst bear me, arise, come forth and see how thy son hath been sold into
slavery, with none to take pity upon him. Arise, see thy son, and weep
with me over my misfortune, and observe the heartlessness of my
brethren. Awake, O mother, rouse thyself from thy sleep, rise up and
prepare for the conflict with my brethren, who stripped me even of my
shirt, and sold me as a slave to merchantmen, who in turn sold me to
others, and without mercy they tore me away from my father. Arise,
accuse my brethren before God, and see whom He will justify in the
judgment, and whom He will find guilty. Arise, O mother, awake from thy
sleep, see how my father is with me in his soul and in his spirit, and
comfort him and ease his heavy heart."

Joseph wept and cried upon the grave of his mother, until, weary from
grief, he lay immovable as a stone. Then he heard a voice heavy with
tears speak to him from the depths, saying: "My son Joseph, my son, I
heard thy complaints and thy groans, I saw thy tears, and I knew thy
misery, my son. I am grieved for thy sake, and thy affliction is added
to the burden of my affliction. But, my son Joseph, put thy trust in
God, and wait upon Him. Fear not, for the Lord is with thee, and He will
deliver thee from all evil. Go down into Egypt with thy masters, my son;
fear naught, for the Lord is with thee, O my son." This and much more
like unto it did the voice utter, and then it was silent. Joseph
listened in great amazement at first, and then he broke out in renewed
tears. Angered thereby, one of the Ishmaelites drove him from his
mother's grave with kicks and curses. Then Joseph entreated his masters
to take him back to his father, who would give them great riches as a
reward. But they said, "Why, thou art a slave! How canst thou know where
thy father is? If thou hadst had a free man as father, thou wouldst not
have been sold twice for a petty sum." And then their fury against him
increased, they beat him and maltreated him, and he wept bitter tears.

Now God looked upon the distress of Joseph, and He sent darkness to
enshroud the land once more. A storm raged, the lightning flashed, and
from the thunderbolts the whole earth trembled, and the Ishmaelites lost
their way in their terror. The beasts and the camels stood still, and,
beat them as their drivers would, they refused to budge from the spot,
but crouched down upon the ground. Then the Ishmaelites spake to one
another, and said: "Why hath God brought this upon us? What are our
sins, what our trespasses, that such things befall us?" One of them said
to the others: "Peradventure this hath come upon us by reason of the sin
which we have committed against this slave. Let us beg him earnestly to
grant us forgiveness, and if then God will take pity, and let these
storms pass away from us, we shall know that we suffered harm on account
of the injury we inflicted upon this slave."

The Ishmaelites did according to these words, and they said unto Joseph:
"We have sinned against God and against thee. Pray to thy God, and
entreat Him to take this death plague from us, for we acknowledge that
we have sinned against Him." Joseph fulfilled their wish, and God
hearkened to his petition, and the storm was assuaged. All around became
calm, the beasts arose from their recumbent position, and the caravan
could proceed upon its way. Now the Ishmaelites saw plainly that all
their trouble had come upon them for the sake of Joseph, and they spoke
one to another, saying: "We know now that all this evil hath happened to
us on account of this poor fellow, and wherefore should we bring death
upon ourselves by our own doings? Let us take counsel together, what is
to be done with the slave." One of them advised that Joseph's wish be
fulfilled, and he be taken back to his father. Then they would be sure
of receiving the money they had paid out for him. This plan was
rejected, because they had accomplished a great part of their journey,
and they were not inclined to retrace their steps. They therefore
resolved upon carrying Joseph to Egypt and selling him there. They would
rid themselves of him in this way, and also receive a great price for
him.

They continued their journey as far as the borders of Egypt, and there
they met four men, descendants of Medan, the son of Abraham, and to
these they sold Joseph for five shekels. The two companies, the
Ishmaelites and the Medanites, arrived in Egypt upon the same day. The
latter, hearing that Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, the captain of the
guard, was seeking a good slave, repaired to him at once, to try to
dispose of Joseph to him. Potiphar was willing to pay as much as four
hundred pieces of silver, for, high as the price was, it did not seem
too great for a slave that pleased him as much as Joseph. However, he
made a condition. He said to the Medanites: "I will pay you the price
demanded, but you must bring me the person that sold the slave to you,
that I may be in a position to find out all about him, for the youth
seems to me to be neither a slave nor the son of a slave. He appears to
be of noble blood. I must convince myself that he was not stolen." The
Medanites brought the Ishmaelites to Potiphar, and they testified that
Joseph was a slave, that they had owned him, and had sold him to the
Medanites. Potiphar rested satisfied with this report, paid the price
asked for Joseph, and the Medanites and the Ishmaelites went their way.

### JOSEPH'S COAT BROUGHT TO HIS FATHER

No sooner was the sale of Joseph an accomplished fact than the sons of
Jacob repented of their deed. They even hastened after the Midianites to
ransom Joseph, but their efforts to overtake them were vain, and they
had to accept the inevitable. Meantime Reuben had rejoined his brethren.
He had been so deeply absorbed in penances, in praying and studying the
Torah, in expiation of his sin against his father, that he had not been
able to remain with his brethren and tend the flocks, and thus it
happened that he was not on the spot when Joseph was sold. His first
errand was to go to the pit, in the hope of finding Joseph there. In
that case he would have carried him off and restored him to his father
clandestinely, without the knowledge of his brethren. He stood at the
opening and called again and again, "Joseph, Joseph!" As he received no
answer, he concluded that Joseph had perished, either by reason of
terror or as the result of a snake bite, and he descended into the pit,
only to find that he was not there, either living or dead. He mounted to
the top again, and rent his clothes, and cried out, "The lad is not
there, and what answer shall I give to my father, if he be dead?" Then
Reuben returned unto his brethren, and told them that Joseph had
vanished from the pit, whereat he was deeply grieved, because he, being
the oldest of the sons, was responsible to their father Jacob. The
brethren made a clean breast of what they had done with Joseph, and they
related to him how they had tried to make good their evil deed, and how
their efforts had been vain.

Now there remained nothing to do but invent a plausible explanation for
their brother's disappearance to give to Jacob. First of all, however,
they took an oath not to betray to his father or any human being what
they had actually done with Joseph. He who violated the oath would be
put to the sword by the rest. Then they took counsel together about what
to say to Jacob. It was Issachar's advice to tear Joseph's coat of many
colors, and dip it in the blood of a little kid of the goats, to make
Jacob believe that his son had been torn by a wild beast. The reason he
suggested a kid was because its blood looks like human blood. In
expiation of this act of deception, it was ordained that a kid be used
as an atonement sacrifice when the Tabernacle was dedicated.

Simon opposed this suggestion. He did not want to relinquish Joseph's
coat, and he threatened to hew down any one that should attempt to wrest
it from him by force. The reason for his vehemence was that he was very
much enraged against his brethren for not having slain Joseph. But they
threatened him in turn, saying, "If thou wilt not give up the coat, we
shall say that thou didst execute the evil deed thyself." At that Simon
surrendered it, and Naphtali brought it to Jacob, handing it to him with
the words: "When we were driving our herds homeward, we found this
garment covered with blood and dust on the highway, a little beyond
Shechem. Know now whether it be thy son's coat or not." Jacob recognized
Joseph's coat, and, overwhelmed by grief, he fell prostrate, and long
lay on the ground motionless, like a stone. Then he arose, and set up a
loud cry, and wept, saying, "It is my son's coat."

In great haste Jacob dispatched a slave to his sons, to bid them come to
him, that he might learn more about what had happened. In the evening
they all came, their garments rent, and dust strewn upon their heads.
When they confirmed all that Naphtali had told him, Jacob broke out in
mourning and lamentation: "It is my son's coat; an evil beast hath
devoured him; Joseph is without doubt torn in pieces. I sent him to you
to see whether it was well with you, and well with the flock. He went to
do my errand, and while I thought him to be with you, the misfortune
befell." Thereto the sons of Jacob made reply: "He came to us not at
all. Since we left thee, we have not set eyes on him."

After these words, Jacob could doubt no longer that Joseph had been torn
by wild beasts, and he mourned for his son, saying: "O my son Joseph, my
son, I sent thee to inquire after the welfare of thy brethren, and now
thou art torn by wild beasts. It is my fault that this evil chance hath
come upon thee. I am distressed for thee, my son, I am sorely
distressed. How sweet was thy life to me, and how bitter is thy death!
Would God I had died for thee, O Joseph, my son, for now I am distressed
on thy account. O my son Joseph, where art thou, and where is thy soul?
Arise, arise from thy place, and look upon my grief for thee. Come and
count the tears that roll down my cheeks, and bring the tale of them
before God, that His wrath be turned away from me. O Joseph, my son, how
painful and appalling was thy death! None hath died a death like thine
since the world doth stand. I know well that it came to pass by reason
of my sins. O that thou wouldst return and see the bitter sorrow thy
misfortune hath brought upon me! But it is true, it was not I that
created thee, and formed thee. I gave thee neither spirit nor soul, but
God created thee. He formed thy bones, covered them with flesh, breathed
the breath of life into thy nostrils, and then gave thee unto me. And
God who gave thee unto me, He hath taken thee from me, and from Him hath
this dispensation come upon me. What the Lord doeth is well done!" In
these words and many others like them Jacob mourned and bewailed his
son, until he fell to the ground prostrate and immovable.

When the sons of Jacob saw the vehemence of their father's grief, they
repented of their deed, and wept bitterly. Especially Judah was
grief-stricken. He laid his father's head upon his knees, and wiped his
tears away as they flowed from his eyes, while he himself broke out in
violent weeping. The sons of Jacob and their wives all sought to comfort
their father. They arranged a great memorial service, and they wept and
mourned over Joseph's death and over their father's sorrow. But Jacob
refused to be comforted.

The tidings of his son's death caused the loss of two members of Jacob's
family. Bilhah and Dinah could not survive their grief. Bilhah passed
away the very day whereon the report reached Jacob, and Dinah died soon
after, and so he had three losses to mourn in one month.

He received the tidings of Joseph's death in the seventh month, Tishri,
and on the tenth day of the month, and therefore the children of Israel
are bidden to weep and afflict their souls on this day. Furthermore, on
this day the sin offering of atonement shall be a kid of the goats,
because the sons of Jacob transgressed with a kid, in the blood of which
they dipped Joseph's coat, and thus they brought sorrow upon Jacob.

When he had recovered somewhat from the stunning blow which the tidings
of his favorite son's death had dealt him, Jacob rose up from the ground
and addressed his sons, tears streaming down his cheeks all the while.
"Up," he said, "take your swords and your bows, go out in the field, and
make search, perhaps you will find the body of my son, and you will
bring it to me, so that I may bury it. Keep a lookout, too, for beasts
of prey, and catch the first you meet. Seize it and bring it to me. It
may be that God will have pity upon my sorrow, and put the beast between
your hands that hath torn my child in pieces, and I will take my revenge
upon it."

The sons of Jacob set out on the morrow to do the bidding of their
father, while he remained at home and wept and lamented for Joseph. In
the wilderness they found a wolf, which they caught and brought to Jacob
alive, saying: "Here is the first wild beast we encountered, and we have
brought it to thee. But of thy son's corpse we saw not a trace." Jacob
seized the wolf, and, amid loud weeping, he addressed these words to
him: "Why didst thou devour my son Joseph, without any fear of the God
of the earth, and without taking any thought of the grief thou wouldst
bring down upon me? Thou didst devour my son without reason, he was
guilty of no manner of transgression, and thou didst roll the
responsibility for his death upon me. But God avengeth him that is
persecuted."

To grant consolation to Jacob, God opened the mouth of the beast, and he
spake: "As the Lord liveth, who hath created me, and as thy soul liveth,
my lord, I have not seen thy son, and I did not rend him in pieces. From
a land afar off I came to seek mine own son, who suffered a like fate
with thine. He hath disappeared, and I know not whether he be dead or
alive, and therefore I came hither ten days ago to find him. This day,
while I was searching for him, thy sons met me, and they seized me, and,
adding more grief to my grief over my lost son, they brought me hither
to thee. This is my story, and now, O son of man, I am in thy hands,
thou canst dispose of me this day as seemeth well in thy sight, but I
swear unto thee by the God that bath created me, I have not seen thy
son, nor have I torn him in pieces, never hath the flesh of man come
into my mouth." Astonished at the speech of the wolf, Jacob let him go,
unhindered, whithersoever he would, but he mourned his son Joseph as
before.

It is a law of nature that however much one may grieve over the death of
a dear one, at the end of a year consolation finds its way to the heart
of the mourner. But the disappearance of a living man can never be wiped
out of one's memory. Therefore the fact that he was inconsolable made
Jacob suspect that Joseph was alive, and he did not give entire credence
to the report of his sons. His vague suspicion was strengthened by
something that happened to him. He went up into the mountains, hewed
twelve stones out of the quarry, and wrote the names of his sons
thereon, their constellations, and the months corresponding to the
constellations, a stone for a son, thus, "Reuben, Ram, Nisan," and so
for each of his twelve sons. Then he addressed the stones and bade them
bow down before the one marked with Reuben's name, constellation, and
month, and they did not move. He gave the same order regarding the stone
marked for Simon, and again the stones stood still. And so he did
respecting all his sons, until he reached the stone for Joseph. When he
spoke concerning this one, "I command you to fall down before Joseph,"
they all prostrated themselves. He tried the same test with other
things, with trees and sheaves, and always the result was the same, and
Jacob could not but feel that his suspicion was true, Joseph was alive.

There was a reason why God did not reveal the real fate of Joseph to
Jacob. When his brethren sold Joseph, their fear that the report of
their iniquity might reach the ears of Jacob led them to pronounce the
ban upon any that should betray the truth without the consent of all the
others. Judah advanced the objection that a ban is invalid unless it is
decreed in the presence of ten persons, and there were but nine of them,
for Reuben and Benjamin were not there when the sale of Joseph was
concluded. To evade the difficulty, the brothers counted God as the
tenth person, and therefore God felt bound to refrain from revealing the
true state of things to Jacob. He had regard, as it were, for the ban
pronounced by the brethren of Joseph. And as God kept the truth a secret
from Jacob, Isaac did not feel justified in acquainting him with his
grandson's fate, which was well known to him, for he was a prophet.
Whenever he was in the company of Jacob, he mourned with him, but as
soon as he quitted him, he left off from manifesting grief, because he
knew that Joseph lived.

Jacob was thus the only one among Joseph's closest kinsmen that remained
in ignorance of his son's real fortunes, and he was the one of them all
that had the greatest reason for regretting his death. He spoke: "The
covenant that God made with me regarding the twelve tribes is null and
void now. I did strive in vain to establish the twelve tribes, seeing
that now the death of Joseph hath destroyed the covenant. All the works
of God were made to correspond to the number of the tribes--twelve are
the signs of the zodiac, twelve the months, twelve hours hath the day,
twelve the night, and twelve stones are set in Aaron's breastplate--and
now that Joseph hath departed, the covenant of the tribes is set at
naught."

He could not replace the lost son by entering into a new marriage, for
he had made the promise to his father-in-law to take none beside his
daughters to wife, and this promise, as he interpreted it, held good
after the death of Laban's daughters as well as while they were alive.

Beside grief over his loss and regret at the breaking of the covenant of
the tribes, Jacob had still another reason for mourning the death of
Joseph. God had said to Jacob, "If none of thy sons dies during thy
lifetime, thou mayest look upon it as a token that thou wilt not be put
in Gehenna after thy death." Thinking Joseph to be dead, Jacob had his
own fate to bewail, too, for he now believed that he was doomed to
Gehenna. His mourning lasted all of twenty-two years, corresponding to
the number of the years he had dwelt apart from his parents, and had not
fulfilled the duty of a son toward them.

In his mourning Jacob put sackcloth upon his loins, and therein be
became a model for the kings and princes in Israel, for David, Ahab,
Joram, and Mordecai did likewise when a great misfortune befell the
nation.

### JUDAH AND HIS SONS

When the sons of Jacob saw how inconsolable their father was, they went
to Judah, and said to him, "This great misfortune is thy fault." Judah
replied: "It was I that asked you, What profit is it if we slay our
brother and conceal his blood? and now you say the sin lies at my door."
The brethren continued to argue: "But it was thou that didst say, Come
and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and we followed thy advice.
Hadst thou said, Let us restore him to his father, we had heeded these
words of thine as well."

The brethren hereupon deprived Judah of his dignity, for hitherto he had
been their king, and they also excluded him from their fellowship, and
he had to seek his fortune alone. Through the mediation of his chief
shepherd Hirah, he became acquainted with the Canaanitish king of
Adullam, Barsan by name. Though he was well aware of the corruption of
the generations of Canaan, he permitted passion to get the better of
him, and took a Canaanite to wife. The Adullamite king gave a banquet in
his honor, at which his daughter Bath-shua poured the wine, and
intoxicated by wine and passion Judah took her and married her. Judah's
action may be compared to that of the lion who passes a carrion and eats
of it, though a cur preceding him on the way had refused to touch it.
Even Esau came in time to acknowledge that the daughters of Canaan were
wicked, and the lion Judah must needs take one of them to wife. The holy
spirit cried out against Judah when he married the Canaanite woman of
Adullam, saying, "The glory of Israel went down in Adullam."

The first-born son of Judah from this marriage was named Er, "the
childless," a suitable name for him that died without begetting any
issue. At Judah's desire, Er married Tamar, a daughter of Aram, the son
of Shem, but because she was not a Canaanitish woman, his mother used
artifices against her, and he did not know her, and an angel of the Lord
killed him on the third day after his wedding. Then Judah gave Tamar to
his second son Onan, the marriage taking place before the week of the
wedding festivities for Er had elapsed. A whole year Onan lived with
Tamar without knowing her, and when, finally, Judah uttered threats
against him on that account, he did, indeed, have intercourse with her,
but, giving heed to the injunctions of his mother, he took care not to
beget any children with her. He, too, died on account of his iniquity,
and his name Onan "mourning," was well chosen, for very soon was his
father called upon to mourn for him. Now Judah conceived the plan of
marrying Tamar to his youngest son Shelah, but his wife would not permit
it. She hated Tamar because she was not of the daughters of Canaan like
herself, and while Judah was away from home, Bath-shua chose a wife for
her son Shelah from the daughters of Canaan. Judah was very angry at
Bath-shua for what she had done, and also God poured out His wrath upon
her, for on account of her wickedness she had to die, and her death
happened a year after that of her two sons.

Now that Bath-shua was dead, Judah might have carried out his wish and
married Tamar to his youngest son. But he waited for Shelah to grow up,
because he feared for his life, seeing that Tamar had brought death to
two husbands before him. So she remained a widow in her father's house
for two years. Endowed with the gift of prophecy, Tamar knew that she
was appointed to be the ancestress of David and of the Messiah, and she
determined to venture upon an extreme measure in order to make sure of
fulfilling her destiny. Accordingly, when the holy spirit revealed to
her that Judah was going up to Timnah, she put off from her the garments
of her widowhood, and sat in the gate of Abraham's tent, and there she
encountered Judah. All the time she lived in the house of her
father-in-law, he had never seen her face, for in her virtue and
chastity she had always kept it covered, and now when Judah met her, he
did not recognize her. It was as a reward for her modesty that God made
her to become the mother of the royal line of David, and the ancestress
of Isaiah, and his father Amoz as well, both of whom were prophets and
of royal blood.

Judah passed Tamar by without paying any attention to her, and she
raised her eyes heavenward, and said, "O Lord of the world, shall I go
forth empty from the house of this pious man?" Then God sent the angel
that is appointed over the passion of love, and he compelled Judah to
turn back. With prophetic caution, Tamar demanded that, as a pledge for
the reward he promised her, he leave with her his signet, his mantle,
and his staff, the symbols of royalty, judgeship, and Messiahship, the
three distinctions of the descendants of Tamar from her union with
Judah. When Judah sent her the promised reward, a kid of the goats, by
the hand of his friend, in order to receive the pledges from her hand,
Tamar could not be found, and he feared to make further search for her,
lest he be put to shame. But Tamar, who soon discerned that she was with
child, felt very happy and proud, for she knew that she would be the
mother of kings and redeemers.

When her state became known, she was forcibly dragged before the court,
in which Isaac, Jacob, and Judah sat as judges. Judah, being the
youngest of the judges and the least considerable in dignity, was the
first to give a decision, for thus it is prescribed in criminal cases,
that the prominent judges overawe not the lesser and influence their
decisions unduly. It was the opinion of Judah that the woman was liable
to the penalty of death by burning, for she was the daughter of the high
priest Shem, and death by fire is the punishment ordained by the law for
a high priest's daughter that leads an unchaste life.

The preparations for her execution were begun. In vain Tamar searched
for the three pledges she had received from Judah, she could not find
them, and almost she lost hope that she would be able to wring a
confession from her father-in-law. She raised her eyes to God, and
prayed: "I supplicate Thy grace, O God, Thou who givest ear to the cry
of the distressed in the hour of his need, answer me, that I may be
spared to bring forth the three holy children, who will be ready to
suffer death by fire, for the sake of the glory of Thy Name." And God
granted her petition, and sent the angel Michael down to succor her. He
put the pledges in a place in which Tamar could not fail to see them,
and she took them, and threw them before the feet of the judges, with
the words: "By the man whose these are am I with child, but though I
perish in the flames, I will not betray him. I hope in the Lord of the
world, that He will turn the heart of the man, so that he will make
confession thereof." Then Judah rose up, and said: "With your
permission, my brethren, and ye men of my father's house, I make it
known that with what measure a man metes, it shall be measured unto him,
be it for good or for evil, but happy the man that acknowledgeth his
sins. Because I took the coat of Joseph, and colored it with the blood
of a kid, and then laid it at the feet of my father, saying, Know now
whether it be thy son's coat or not, therefore must I now confess,
before the court, unto whom belongeth this signet, this mantle, and this
staff. But it is better that I be put to shame in this world than I
should be put to shame in the other world, before the face of my pious
father. It is better that I should perish in a fire that can be
extinguished than I should be cast into hell fire, which devoureth other
fires. Now, then, I acknowledge that Tamar is innocent. By me is she
with child, not because she indulged in illicit passion, but because I
held back her marriage with my son Shelah." Then a heavenly voice was
heard to say: "Ye are both innocent! It was the will of God that it
should happen!"

The open confession of Judah induced his oldest brother Reuben to make
public acknowledgment of the sin he had committed against his father,
for he had kept it a secret until then.

Tamar gave birth to twin sons, Perez and Zerah, both resembling their
father in bravery and piety. She called the first Perez, "mighty,"
because she said, "Thou didst show thyself of great power, and it is
meet and proper that thou shouldst be strong, for thou art destined to
possess the kingdom." The second son was called Zerah, because he
appeared from out of the womb before his brother, but he was forced back
again to make way for Perez. These two, Perez and Zerah. were sent out
as spies by Joshua, and the line that Rahab bound in the window of her
house as a token to the army of the Israelites, she received from Zerah.
It was the scarlet thread that the midwife had bound upon his hand, to
mark him as the child that appeared first and withdrew.

### THE WIVES OF THE SONS OF JACOB

Judah was the first of the sons of Jacob to enter wedlock. After the
sale of Joseph to the Midianites, his brethren had said to Judah, "If
conditions were as before, our father would provide wives for us now. As
it is, he is entirely absorbed by his grief for Joseph, and we must look
about for wives ourselves. Thou art our chief, and thou shouldst marry
first."

Judah's marriage with Alit the daughter of the noble merchant Shua,
which was consummated at Adullam, the residence of his friend Hirah, or,
as he was called later, Hiram, king of Tyre, was not happy. His two
oldest sons died, and shortly thereafter his wife also. It was Judah's
punishment for having begun a good deed and left it unfinished, for "he
who begins a good deed, and does not execute it to the end, brings down
misfortune upon his own head." Judah had rescued Joseph from death, but
it was his suggestion to sell him into slavery. Had he urged them to
restore the lad to his father, his brethren would have obeyed his words.
He was lacking in constancy to persist until he had completed the work
of Joseph's deliverance, which he had begun.

In the same year, the year of Joseph's misfortune, all his other
brethren married, too. Reuben's wife was named Elyoram, the daughter of
the Canaanite Uzzi of Timnah. Simon married his sister Dinah first, and
then a second wife. When Simon and Levi massacred the men of Shechem,
Dinah refused to leave the city and follow her brethren, saying,
"Whither shall I carry my shame?" But Simon swore he would marry her, as
he did later, and when she died in Egypt, he took her body to the Holy
Land and buried it there. Dinah bore her brother a son, and from her
union with Shechem, the son of Hamor, sprang a daughter, Asenath by
name, afterward the wife of Joseph. When this daughter was born to
Dinah, her brethren, the sons of Jacob, wanted to kill her, that the
finger of men might not point at the fruit of sin in their father's
house. But Jacob took a piece of tin, inscribed the Holy Name upon it,
and bound it about the neck of the girl, and he put her under a
thornbush, and abandoned her there. An angel carried the babe down to
Egypt, where Potiphar adopted her as his child, for his wife was barren.
Years thereafter, when Joseph travelled through the land as viceroy, the
maidens threw gifts at him, to make him turn his eyes in their direction
and give them the opportunity of gazing upon his beauty. Asenath
possessed nothing that would do as a present, therefore she took off the
amulet suspended from her neck, and gave it to him. Thus Joseph became
acquainted with her lineage, and he married her, seeing that she was not
an Egyptian, but one connected with the house of Jacob through her
mother.

Beside the son of Dinah, Simon had another son, whose name was Saul, by
Bunah, the damsel he had taken captive in the campaign against Shechem.

Levi and Issachar married two daughters of Jobab, the grandson of Eber;
the wife of the former was named Adinah, the wife of the latter, Aridah.
Dan's wife was Elflalet, a daughter of the Moabite Hamudan. For a long
time their marriage remained childless, finally they had a son, whom
they called Hushim. Gad and Naphtali married women from Haran, two
sisters, daughters of Amoram, a grandson of Nahor. Naphtali's wife,
Merimit, was the older of the two, and the younger, the wife of Gad, was
named Uzit.

Asher's first wife was Adon, the daughter of Ephlal, a grandson of
Ishmael. She died childless, and he married a second wife, Hadorah, a
daughter of Abimael, the grandson of Shem. She had been married before,
her first husband having been Malchiel, also a grandson of Shem, and the
issue of this first marriage was a daughter, Serah by name. When Asher
brought his wife to Canaan, the three year old orphan Serah came with
them. She was raised in the house of Jacob, and she walked in the way of
pious children, and God gave her beauty, wisdom, and sagacity.

Zebulon's wife was Maroshah, the daughter of Molad, a grandson of
Midian, the son of Abraham by Keturah.

For Benjamin, when he was but ten years old, Jacob took Mahlia to wife,
the daughter of Aram, the grandson of Terah, and she bore him five sons.
At the age of eighteen he married a second wife, Arbat, the daughter of
Zimran, a son of Abraham by Keturah, and by her also he had five sons.

### JOSEPH THE SLAVE OF POTIPHAR

When Joseph was sold as a slave to the Ishmaelites, he kept silent out
of respect for his brethren, and did not tell his masters that he was a
son of Jacob, a great and powerful man. Even when he came to the
Midianites with the Ishmaelites, and the former asked after his
parentage, he still said he was a slave, only in order not to put his
brethren to shame. But the most distinguished of the Midianites rebuked
Joseph, saying, "Thou art no slave, thy appearance betrayeth thee," and
he threatened him with death unless he acknowledged the truth. Joseph,
however, was steadfast, he would not act treacherously toward his
brethren.

Arrived in Egypt, the owners of Joseph could come to no agreement
regarding him. Each desired to have sole and exclusive possession of
him. They therefore decided to leave him with a shopkeeper until they
should come back to Egypt again with their merchandise. And God let
Joseph find grace in the sight of the shopkeeper. All that he had, his
whole house, he put into Joseph's hand, and therefore the Lord blessed
him with much silver and gold, and Joseph remained with him for three
months and five days.

At that time there came from Memphis the wife of Potiphar, and she cast
her eyes upon Joseph, of whose comeliness of person she had heard from
the eunuchs. She told her husband how that a certain shopkeeper had
grown rich through a young Hebrew, and she added: "But it is said that
the youth was stolen away out of the land of Canaan. Go, therefore, and
sit in judgment upon his owner, and take the youth unto thy house, that
the God of the Hebrews may bless thee, for the grace of heaven rests
upon the youth."

Potiphar summoned the shopkeeper, and when he appeared before him, he
spoke harshly to him, saying: "What is this I hear? that thou stealest
souls from the land of Canaan, and dost carry on traffic with them?" The
shop-keeper protested his innocence, and he could not be made to recede
from his assertion, that a company of Ishmaelites had left Joseph in his
charge temporarily, until they should return. Potiphar had him stripped
naked and beaten, but he continued to reiterate the same statement.

Then Potiphar summoned Joseph. The youth prostrated himself before this
chief of the eunuchs, for he was third in rank of the officers of
Pharaoh. And he addressed Joseph, and said, "Art thou a slave or a
free-born man?" and Joseph replied, "A slave." Potiphar continued to
question him, "Whose slave art thou?" Joseph: "I belong to the
Ishmaelites." Potiphar: "How wast thou made a slave?" Joseph: "They
bought me in the land of Canaan."

But Potiphar refused to give credence to what he said, and he had also
him stripped and beaten. The wife of Potiphar, standing by the door, saw
how Joseph was abused, and she sent word to her husband, "Thy verdict is
unjust, for thou punishest the free-born youth that was stolen away from
his place as though he were the one that had committed a crime." As
Joseph held firmly to what he had said, Potiphar ordered him to prison,
until his masters should return. In her sinful longing for him, his wife
wanted to have Joseph in her own house, and she remonstrated with her
husband in these words: "Wherefore dost thou keep the captive,
nobly-born slave a prisoner? Thou shouldst rather set him at liberty and
have him serve thee." He answered, "The law of the Egyptians does not
permit us to take what belongs to another before all titles are made
clear," and Joseph stayed in prison for twenty-four days, until the
return of the Ishmaelites to Egypt.

Meanwhile they had heard somewhere that Joseph was the son of Jacob, and
they therefore said to him: "Why didst thou pretend that thou wast a
slave? See, we have information that thou art the son of a powerful man
in Canaan, and thy father mourns for thee in sackcloth." Joseph was on
the point of divulging his secret, but he kept a check upon himself for
the sake of his brethren, and he repeated that he was a slave.

Nevertheless the Ishmaelites decided to sell him, that he be not found
in their hands, for they feared the revenge of Jacob, who, they knew,
was in high favor with the Lord and with men. The shopkeeper begged the
Ishmaelites to rescue him from the legal prosecution of Potiphar, and
clear him of the suspicion of man theft. The Ishmaelites in turn had a
conference with Joseph, and bade him testify before Potiphar that they
had bought him for money. He did so, and then the chief of the eunuchs
liberated him from prison, and dismissed all parties concerned.

With the permission of her husband, Potiphar's wife sent a eunuch to the
Ishmaelites, bidding him to buy Joseph, but he returned and reported
that they demanded an exorbitant price for the slave. She dispatched a
second eunuch, charging him to conclude the bargain, and though they
asked one mina of gold, or even two, he was not to be sparing of money,
he was to be sure to buy the slave and bring him to her. The eunuch gave
the Ishmaelites eighty pieces of gold for Joseph, telling his mistress,
however, that he had paid out a hundred pieces. Joseph noticed the
deception, but he kept silent, that the eunuch might not be put to
shame.

Thus Joseph became the slave of the idolatrous priest Potiphar, or
Poti-phera, as he was sometimes called. He had secured possession of the
handsome youth for a lewd purpose, but the angel Gabriel mutilated him
in such manner that he could not accomplish it. His master soon had
occasion to notice that Joseph was as pious as he was beautiful, for
whenever he was occupied with his ministrations, he would whisper a
prayer: "O Lord of the world, Thou art my trust, Thou art my protection.
Let me find grace and favor in Thy sight and in the sight of all that
see me, and in the sight of my master Potiphar." When Potiphar noticed
the movement of his lips, he said to Joseph, "Dost thou purpose to cast
a spell upon me?" "Nay," replied the youth, "I am beseeching God to let
me find favor in thine eyes."

His prayer was heard. Potiphar convinced himself that God was with
Joseph. Sometimes he would make a test of Joseph's miraculous powers. If
he brought him a glass of hippocras, he would say, "I would rather have
wine mixed with absinthe," and straightway the spiced wine was changed
into bitter wine. Whatever he desired, he could be sure to get from
Joseph, and he saw clearly that God fulfilled the wishes of his slave.
Therefore he put all the keys of his house into his hand, and he knew
not aught that was with him, keeping back nothing from Joseph but his
wife. Seeing that the Shekinah rested upon him, Potiphar treated Joseph
not as a slave, but as a member of his family, for he said, "This youth
is not cut out for a slave's work, he is worthy of a prince's place."
Accordingly, he provided instruction for him in the arts, and ordered
him to have better fare than the other slaves.

Joseph thanked God for his new and happy state. He prayed, "Blessed art
Thou, O Lord, that Thou hast caused me to forget my father's house."
What made his present fortunes so agreeable was that he was removed from
the envy and jealousy of his brethren. He said: "When I was in my
father's house, and he gave me something pretty, my brethren begrudged
me the present, and now, O Lord, I thank Thee that I live amid plenty."
Free from anxieties, he turned his attention to his external appearance.
He painted his eyes, dressed his hair, and aimed to be elegant in his
walk. But God spake to him, saying, "Thy father is mourning in sackcloth
and ashes, while thou dost eat, drink, and dress thy hair. Therefore I
will stir up thy mistress against thee, and thou shalt be embarrassed."
Thus Joseph's secret wish was fulfilled, that he might be permitted to
prove his piety under temptation, as the piety of his fathers had been
tested.

### JOSEPH AND ZULEIKA

"Throw the stick up in the air, it will always return to its original
place." Like Rachel his mother, Joseph was of ravishing beauty, and the
wife of his master was filled with invincible passion for him." Her
feeling was heightened by the astrologic forecast that she was destined
to have descendants through Joseph. This was true, but not in the sense
in which she understood the prophecy. Joseph married her daughter
Asenath later on, and she bore him children, thus fulfilling what had
been read in the stars."

In the beginning she did not confess her love to Joseph. She tried first
to seduce him by artifice. On the pretext of visiting him, she would go
to him at night, and, as she had no sons, she would pretend a desire to
adopt him. Joseph then prayed to God in her behalf, and she bore a son.
However, she continued to embrace him as though he were her own child,
yet he did not notice her evil designs. Finally, when he recognized her
wanton trickery, he mourned many days, and endeavored to turn her away
from her sinful passion by the word of God. She, on her side, often
threatened him with death, and surrendered him to castigations in order
to make him amenable to her will, and when these means had no effect
upon Joseph, she sought to seduce him with enticements. She would say,
"I promise thee, thou shalt rule over me and all I have, if thou wilt
but give thyself up to me. and thou shalt be to me the same as my lawful
husband." But Joseph was mindful of the words of his fathers, and he
went into his chamber, and fasted, and prayed to God, that He would
deliver him from the toils of the Egyptian woman.

In spite of the mortifications he practiced, and though he gave the poor
and the sick the food apportioned to him, his master thought he lived a
luxurious life, for those that fast for the glory of God are made
beautiful of countenance.

The wife of Potiphar would frequently speak to her husband in praise of
Joseph's chastity in order that he might conceive no suspicion of the
state of her feelings. And, again, she would encourage Joseph secretly,
telling him not to fear her husband, that he was convinced of his purity
of life, and though one should carry tales to him about Joseph and
herself, Potiphar would lend them no credence. And when she saw that all
this was ineffectual , she approached him with the request that he teach
her the word of God, saying, "If it be thy wish that I forsake idol
worship, then fulfil my desire, and I will persuade that Egyptian
husband of mine to abjure the idols, and we shall walk in the law of thy
God." Joseph replied, "The Lord desireth not that those who fear Him
shall walk in impurity, nor hath He pleasure in the adulterer."

Another time she came to him, and said, "If thou wilt not do my desire,
I will murder the Egyptian and wed with thee according to the law."
Whereat Joseph rent his garment, and he said, "O woman, fear the Lord,
and do not execute this evil deed, that thou mayest not bring
destruction down upon thyself, for I will proclaim thy impious purposes
to all in public."

Again, she sent him a dish prepared with magic spells, by means of which
she hoped to get him into her power. But when the eunuch set it before
him, he saw the image of a man handing him a sword together with the
dish, and, warned by the vision, he took good care not to taste of the
food. A few days later his mistress came to him, and asked him why he
had not eaten of what she had sent him. He reproached her, saying, "How
couldst thou tell me, I do not come nigh unto the idols, but only unto
the Lord? The God of my fathers hath revealed thy iniquity to me through
an angel, but that thou mayest know that the malice of the wicked has no
power over those who fear God in purity, I shall eat thy food before
thine eyes, and the God of my fathers and the angel of Abraham will be
with me." The wife of Potiphar fell upon her face at the feet of Joseph,
and amid tears she promised not to commit this sin again.

But her unholy passion for Joseph did not depart from her, and her
distress over her unfulfilled wish made her look so ill that her husband
said to her, "Why is thy countenance fallen?" And she replied, "I have a
pain at my heart, and the groanings of my spirit oppress me."

Once when she was alone with Joseph, she rushed toward him, crying, "I
will throttle myself, or I will jump into a well or a pit, if thou wilt
not yield thyself to me." Noticing her extreme agitation, Joseph
endeavored to calm her with these words, "Remember, if thou makest away
with thyself, thy husband's concubine, Asteho, thy rival, will maltreat
thy children, and extirpate thy memory from the earth." These words,
gently spoken, had the opposite effect from that intended. They only
inflamed her passion the more by feeding her hopes. She said: "There,
seest thou, thou dost love me now! It sufficeth for me that thou takest
thought for me and for the safety of my children. I expect now that my
desire will be fulfilled." She did not know that Joseph spoke as he did
for the sake of God, and not for her sake.

His mistress, or, as she was called, Zuleika, pursued him day after day
with her amorous talk and her flattery, saying: "How fair is thy
appearance, how comely thy form! Never have I seen so well-favored a
slave as thou art." Joseph would reply: "God, who formed me in my
mother's womb, hath created all men."

Zuleika: "How beautiful are thine eyes, with which thou hast charmed all
Egyptians, both men and women!"

Joseph: "Beautiful as they may be while I am alive, so ghastly they will
be to look upon in the grave."

Zuleika: "How lovely and pleasant are thy words! I pray thee, take thy
harp, play and also sing, that I may hear thy words."

Joseph: "Lovely and pleasant are my words when I proclaim the praise of
my God."

Zuleika: "How beautiful is thy hair! Take my golden comb, and comb it."

Joseph: "How long wilt thou continue to speak thus to me? Leave off! It
were better for thee to care for thy household."

Zuleika: "There is nothing in my house that I care for, save thee
alone."

But Joseph's virtue was unshaken. While she spoke thus, he did not so
much as raise his eyes to look at his mistress. He remained equally
steadfast when she lavished gifts upon him, for she provided him with
garments of one kind for the morning, another for noon, and a third kind
for the evening. Nor could threats move him. She would say, "I will
bring false accusations against thee before thy master," and Joseph
would reply, "The Lord executeth judgment for the oppressed." Or, "I
will deprive thee of food;" whereupon Joseph, "The Lord giveth food to
the hungry." Or, "I will have thee thrown into prison;" whereupon
Joseph, "The Lord looseth the prisoners." Or, "I will put heavy labor
upon thee that will bend thee double;" whereupon Joseph, "The Lord
raiseth up them that are bowed down." Or, "I will blind thine eyes;"
whereupon Joseph, "The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind."

When she began to exercise her blandishments upon him, he rejected them
with the words, "I fear my master." But Zuleika would say, "I will kill
him." Joseph replied with indignation, "Not enough that thou wouldst
make an adulterer of me, thou wouldst have me be a murderer, besides?"
And he spoke furthermore, saying, "I fear the Lord my God!"

Zuleika: "Nonsense! He is not here to see thee!

Joseph: "Great is the Lord and highly to be praised, and His greatness
is unsearchable."

Thereupon she took Joseph into her chamber, where an idol hung above the
bed. This she covered, that it might not be a witness of what she was
about to do. Joseph said: "Though thou coverest up the eyes of the idol,
remember, the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth.
Yes," continued Joseph, "I have many reasons not to do this thing for
the sake of God. Adam was banished from Paradise on account of violating
a light command; how much more should I have to fear the punishment of
God, were I to commit so grave a sin as adultery! The Lord is in the
habit of choosing a favorite member of our family as a sacrifice unto
Himself. Perhaps He desireth to make choice of me, but if I do thy will,
I make myself unfit to be a sacrifice unto God. Also the Lord is in the
habit of appearing suddenly, in visions of the night, unto those that
love Him. Thus did He appear unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and I fear
that He may appear unto me at the very moment while I am defiling myself
with thee. And as I fear God, so I fear my father, who withdrew the
birthright from his first-born son Reuben, on account of an immoral act,
and gave it to me. Were I to fulfil thy desire, I would share the fate
of my brother Reuben."

With such words, Joseph endeavored to cure the wife of his master of the
wanton passion she had conceived for him, while he took heed to keep far
from a heinous sin, not from fear of the punishment that would follow,
nor out of consideration for the opinion of men, but because he desired
to sanctify the Name of God, blessed be He, before the whole world. It
was this feeling of his that Zuleika could not comprehend, and when,
finally, carried away by passion, she told him in unmistakable language
what she desired, and he recoiled from her, she said to Joseph: "Why
dost thou refuse to fulfil my wish? Am I not a married woman? None will
find out what thou hast done." Joseph replied: "If the unmarried women
of the heathen are prohibited unto us, how much more their married
women? As the Lord liveth, I will not commit the crime thou biddest me
do." In this Joseph followed the example of many pious men, who utter an
oath at the moment when they are in danger of succumbing to temptation,
and seek thus to gather moral courage to control their evil instincts."

When Zuleika could not prevail upon him, to persuade him, her desire
threw her into a grievous sickness, and all the women of Egypt came to
visit her, and they said unto her, "Why art thou so languid and wasted,
thou that lackest nothing? Is not thy husband a prince great and
esteemed in the sight of the king? Is it possible that thou canst want
aught of what thy heart desireth?" Zuleika answered them, saying, "This
day shall it be made known unto you whence cometh the state wherein you
see me."

She commanded her maid-servants to prepare food for all the women, and
she spread a banquet before them in her house. She placed knives upon
the table to peel the oranges, and then ordered Joseph to appear,
arrayed in costly garments, and wait upon her guests. When Joseph came
in, the women could not take their eyes off him, and they all cut their
hands with the knives, and the oranges in their hands were covered with
blood, but they, not knowing what they were doing, continued to look
upon the beauty of Joseph without turning their eyes away from him.

Then Zuleika said unto them: "What have ye done? Behold, I set oranges
before you to eat, and you have cut your hands." All the women looked at
their hands, and, lo, they were full of blood, and it flowed down and
stained their garments. They said to Zuleika, "This slave in thy house
did enchant us, and we could not turn our eyes away from him on account
of his beauty." She then said: "This happened to you that looked upon
him but a moment, and you could not refrain yourselves! How, then, can I
control myself in whose house he abideth continually, who see him go in
and out day after day? How, then, should I not waste away, or keep from
languishing on account of him!" And the women spake, saying: "It is
true, who can look upon this beauty in the house, and refrain her
feelings? But he is thy slave! Why dost thou not disclose to him that
which is in thy heart, rather than suffer thy life to perish through
this thing?" Zuleika answered them: "Daily do I endeavor to persuade
him, but he will not consent to my wishes. I promised him everything
that is fair, yet have I met with no return from him, and therefore I am
sick, as you may see."

Her sickness increased upon her. Her husband and her household suspected
not the cause of her decline, but all the women that were her friends
knew that it was on account of the love she bore Joseph, and they
advised her all the time to try to entice the youth. On a certain day,
while Joseph was doing his master's work in the house, Zuleika came and
fell suddenly upon him, but Joseph was stronger than she, and he pressed
her down to the ground. Zuleika wept, and in a voice of supplication,
and in bitterness of soul, she said to Joseph: "Hast thou ever known,
seen, or heard of a woman my peer in beauty, let alone a woman with
beauty exceeding mine? Yet I try daily to persuade thee, I fall into
decline through love of thee, I confer all this honor upon thee, and
thou wilt not hearken unto my voice! Is it by reason of fear of thy
master, that he punish thee? As the king liveth, no harm shall come upon
thee from thy master on account of this thing. Now, therefore, I pray
thee, listen to me, and consent unto my desire for the sake of the honor
that I have conferred upon thee, and take this death away from me. For
why should I die on account of thee?" Joseph remained as steadfast under
these importunities as before. Zuleika, however, was not discouraged;
she continued her solicitations unremittingly, day after day, month
after month, for a whole year, but always without the least success, for
Joseph in his chastity did not permit himself even to look upon her,
wherefore she resorted to constraint. She had an iron shackle placed
upon his chin, and he was compelled to keep his head up and look her in
the face."

### JOSEPH RESISTS TEMPTATION

Seeing that she could not attain her object by entreaties or tears,
Zuleika finally used force, when she judged that the favorable chance
had come. She did not have long to wait. When the Nile overflowed its
banks, and, according to the annual custom of the Egyptians, all
repaired to the river, men and women, people and princes, accompanied by
music, Zuleika remained at home under pretense of being sick. This was
her long-looked-for opportunity, she thought. She rose up and ascended
to the hall of state, and arrayed herself in princely garments. She
placed precious stones upon her head, onyx stones set in silver and
gold, she beautified her face and her body with all sorts of things for
the purifying of women, she perfumed the hall and the whole house with
cassia and frankincense, spread myrrh and aloes all over, and afterward
sat herself down at the entrance to the hall, in the vestibule leading
to the house, through which Joseph had to pass to his work.

And, behold, Joseph came from the field, and he was on the point of
entering the house to do his master's work, but when he reached the
place where Zuleika sat, and saw all she had done, he turned back. His
mistress, perceiving it, called out to him, "What aileth thee, Joseph?
Go to thy work, I will make room for thee, that thou mayest pass by to
thy seat." Joseph did as she bade him, he entered the house, took his
seat, and set about his master's work as usual. Then Zuleika stood
before him suddenly in all her beauty of person and magnificence of
raiment, and repeated the desire of her heart. It was the first and the
last time that Joseph's steadfastness deserted him, but only for an
instant. When he was on the point of complying with the wish of his
mistress, the image of his mother Rachel appeared before him, and that
of his aunt Leah, and the image of his father Jacob. The last addressed
him thus: "In time to come the names of thy brethren will be graven upon
the breastplate of the high priest. Dost thou desire to have thy name
appear with theirs? Or wilt thou forfeit this honor through sinful
conduct? For know, he that keepeth company with harlots wasteth his
substance." This vision of the dead, and especially the image of his
father, brought Joseph to his senses, and his illicit passion departed
from him.

Astonished at the swift change in his countenance, Zuleika said, "My
friend and true-love, why art thou so affrighted that thou art near to
swooning?

Joseph: "I see my father!"

Zuleika: "Where is he? Why, there is none in the house."

Joseph: "Thou belongest to a people that is like unto the ass, it
perceiveth nothing. But I belong to those who can see things."

Joseph fled forth, away from the house of his mistress, the same house
in which aforetime wonders had been done for Sarah kept a captive there
by Pharaoh. But hardly was he outside when the sinful passion again
overwhelmed him, and he returned to Zuleika's chamber. Then the Lord
appeared unto him, holding the Eben Shetiyah in His hand, and said to
him: "If thou touchest her, I will cast away this stone upon which the
earth is founded, and the world will fall to ruin." Sobered again,
Joseph started to escape from his mistress, but Zuleika caught him by
his garment, and she said: "As the king liveth, if thou wilt not fulfil
my wish, thou must die," and while she spoke thus, she drew a sword with
her free hand from under her dress, and, pressing it against Joseph's
throat, she said, "Do as I bid thee, or thou diest." Joseph ran out,
leaving a piece of his garment in the hands of Zuleika as he wrenched
himself loose from the grasp of the woman with a quick, energetic
motion.

Zuleika's passion for Joseph was so violent that, in lieu of its owner,
whom she could not succeed in subduing to her will, she kissed and
caressed the fragment of cloth left in her hand. At the same time she
was not slow to perceive the danger into which she had put herself, for,
she feared, Joseph might possibly betray her conduct, and she considered
ways and means of obviating the consequences of her folly.

Meanwhile her friends returned from the Nile festival, and they came to
visit her and inquire after her health. They found her looking
wretchedly ill, on account of the excitement she had passed through and
the anxiety she was in. She confessed to the women what had happened
with Joseph, and they advised her to accuse him of immorality before her
husband, and then he would be thrown into prison. Zuleika accepted their
advice, and she begged her visitors to support her charges by also
lodging complaints against Joseph, that he had been annoying them with
improper proposals.

But Zuleika did not depend entirely upon the assistance of her friends.
She planned a ruse, besides, to be sure of convincing her husband of
Joseph's guilt. She laid aside her rich robes of state, put on her
ordinary clothes, and took to her sick-bed, in which she had been lying
when the people left to go to the festival. Also she took Joseph's torn
garment, and laid it out next to her. Then she sent a little boy to
summon some of the men of her house, and to them she told the tale of
Joseph's alleged outrage, saying: "See the Hebrew slave, whom your
master hath brought in unto my house, and who attempted to do violence
to me to-day! You had scarcely gone away to the festival when be entered
the house, and making sure that no one was here he tried to force me to
yield to his lustful desire. But I grasped his clothes, tore them, and
cried with a loud voice. When he heard that I lifted up my voice and
cried, he was seized with fear, and be fled, and got him out, but he
left his garment by me." The men of her house spake not a word, but, in
a rage against Joseph, they went to their master, and reported to him
what had come to pass. In the meantime the husbands of Zuleika's friends
had also spoken to Potiphar, at the instigation of their wives, and
complained of his slave, that he molested them.

Potiphar hastened home, and he found his wife in low spirits, and though
the cause of her dejection was chagrin at not having succeeded in
winning Joseph's love, she pretended that it was anger at the immoral
conduct of the slave. She accused him in the following words: "O
husband, mayest thou not live a day longer, if thou dost not punish the
wicked slave that hath desired to defile thy bed, that hath not kept in
mind who he was when he came to our house, to demean himself with
modesty, nor hath he been mindful of the favors he hath received from
thy bounty. He did lay a privy design to abuse thy wife, and this at the
time of observing a festival, when thou wouldst be absent." These words
she spoke at the moment of conjugal intimacy with Potiphar, when she was
certain of exerting an influence upon her husband.

Potiphar gave credence to her words, and he had Joseph flogged
unmercifully. While the cruel blows fell upon him, he cried to God, "O
Lord, Thou knowest that I am innocent of these things, and why should I
die to-day on account of a false accusation by the hands of these
uncircumcised, impious men?" God opened the mouth of Zuleika's child, a
babe of but eleven months, and he spoke to the men that were beating
Joseph, saying: "What is your quarrel with this man? Why do you inflict
such evil upon him? Lies my mother doth speak, and deceit is what her
mouth uttereth. This is the true tale of that which did happen," and the
child proceeded to tell all that had passed--how Zuleika had tried first
to persuade Joseph to act wickedly, and then had tried to force him to
do her will. The people listened in great amazement. But the report
finished, the child spake no word, as before.

Abashed by the speech of his own infant son, Potiphar commanded his
bailiffs to leave off from chastising Joseph, and the matter was brought
into court, where priests sat as judges. Joseph protested his innocence,
and related all that had happened according to the truth, but Potiphar
repeated the account his wife had given him. The judges ordered the
garment of Joseph to be brought which Zuleika had in her possession, and
they examined the tear therein. It turned out to be on the front part of
the mantle, and they came to the conclusion that Zuleika had tried to
hold him fast, and had been foiled in her attempt by Joseph, against
whom she was now lodging a trumped up charge. They decided that Joseph
had not incurred the death penalty, but they condemned him to
incarceration, because he was the cause of a stain upon Zuleika's fair
name."

Potiphar himself was convinced of Joseph's innocence, and when he cast
him into prison, he said to him, "I know that thou art not guilty of so
vile a crime, but I must put thee in durance, lest a taint cling to my
children."

### JOSEPH IN PRISON

By way of punishment for having traduced his ten brethren before his
father, Joseph had to languish for ten years in the prison to which the
wiles of traducers had in turn condemned him. But, on the other hand, as
he had sanctified the Name of God before the world by his chastity and
his steadfastness, he was rewarded. The letter He, which occurs twice in
the Name of God, was added to his name. He had been called Joseph, but
now he was called also Jehoseph.

Though he was bound in prison, Joseph was not yet safe from the
machinations of his mistress, whose passion for him was in no wise
lessened. In truth it was she that had induced her husband to change his
intention regarding Joseph; she urged him to imprison the slave rather
than kill him, for she hoped that as a prisoner he could be made
amenable to her wishes more easily. She spake to her husband, saying:
"Do not destroy thy property. Cast the slave in prison and keep him
there until thou canst sell him, and receive back the money thou didst
pay out for him." Thus she had the opportunity of visiting Joseph in his
cell and trying to persuade him to do her will. She would say, "This and
that outrage have I executed against thee, but, as thou livest, I will
put yet other outrages upon thee if thou dost not obey me." But Joseph
replied, "The Lord executeth judgment for the oppressed."

Zuleika: "I will push matters so far that all men will hate thee."

Joseph: "The Lord loveth the righteous."

Zuleika: "I will sell thee into a strange land."

Joseph: "The Lord preserveth the strangers."

Then she would resort to enticements in order to obtain her desire. She
would promise to release him from prison, if he would but grant her
wish. But he would say, "Better it is to remain here than be with thee
and commit a trespass against God." These visits to Joseph in prison
Zuleika continued for a long time, but when, finally, she saw that all
her hopes were vain, she let him alone.

As the mistress persisted in her love for Joseph, so his master, her
husband, could not separate himself from his favorite slave. Though a
prisoner, Joseph continued to minister to the needs of Potiphar, and he
received permission from the keeper of the prison to spend some of his
time in his master's house. In many other ways the jailer showed himself
kindly disposed toward Joseph. Seeing the youth's zeal and
conscientiousness in executing the tasks laid upon him, and under the
spell of his enchanting beauty, he made prison life as easy as possible
for his charge. He even ordered better dishes for him than the common
prison fare, and he found it superfluous caution to keep watch over
Joseph, for he could see no wrong in him, and he observed that God was
with him, in good days and in bad. He even appointed him to be the
overseer of the prison, and as Joseph commanded, so the other prisoners
were obliged to do.

For a long time the people talked of nothing but the accusation raised
against Joseph by his mistress. In order to divert the attention of the
public from him, God ordained that two high officers, the chief butler
and the chief baker, should offend their lord, the king of Egypt, and
they were put in ward in the house of the captain of the guard. Now the
people ceased their talk about Joseph, and spoke only of the scandal at
court. The charges laid at the door of the noble prisoners were that
they had attempted to do violence to the daughter of Pharaoh, and they
had conspired to poison the king himself. Besides, they had shown
themselves derelict in their service. In the wine the chief butler had
handed to the king to drink, a fly had been discovered, and the bread
set upon the royal board by the chief baker contained a little pebble."
On account of all these transgressions they were condemned to death by
Pharaoh, but for the sake of Joseph it was ordained by Divine providence
that the king should first detain them in prison before he ordered their
execution. The Lord had enkindled the wrath of the king against his
servants only that the wish of Joseph for liberty might be fulfilled,
for they were the instruments of his deliverance from prison, and though
they were doomed to death, yet in consideration of the exalted office
they had held at court, the keeper of the prison accorded them
privileges, as, for instance, a man was detailed to wait upon them, and
the one appointed thereto was Joseph. 1\]

The chief butler and the chief baker had been confined in prison ten
years, when they dreamed a dream, both of them, but as for the
interpretation, each dreamed only that of the other one's dream. In the
morning when Joseph brought them the water for washing, he found them
sad, depressed in spirits, and, in the manner of the sages, he asked
them why they looked different on that day from other days. They said
unto him, "We have dreamed a dream this night, and our two dreams
resemble each other in certain particulars, and there is none that can
interpret them." And Joseph said unto them: "God granteth understanding
to man to interpret dreams. Tell them me, I pray you." It was as a
reward for ascribing greatness and credit to Him unto whom it belongeth
that Joseph later attained to his lofty position.

The chief butler proceeded to tell his dream: "In my dream, behold, a
vine was before me; and in the vine were three branches; and it was as
though it budded, and its blossoms shot forth, and the clusters thereof
brought forth ripe grapes; and Pharaoh's cup was in my hand; and I took
the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into
Pharaoh's hand." The chief butler was not aware that his dream contained
a prophecy regarding the future of Israel, but Joseph discerned the
recondite meaning, and he interpreted the dream thus: The three branches
are the three Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whose descendants in
Egypt will be redeemed by three leaders, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam; and
the cup given into the hand of Pharaoh is the cup of wrath that he will
have to drain in the end. This interpretation of the dream Joseph kept
for himself, and he told the chief butler nothing thereof, but out of
gratitude for the glad tidings of the deliverance of Israel from the
bondage of Egypt, he gave him a favorable interpretation of his dream,
and begged him to have him in his remembrance, when it should be well
with him, and liberate him from the dungeon in which he was confined.

When the chief baker heard the interpretation of the butler's dream, he
knew that Joseph had divined its meaning correctly, for in his own he
had seen the interpretation of his friend's dream, and he proceeded to
tell Joseph what he had dreamed in the night: "I also was in my dream,
and, behold, three baskets of white bread were on my head; and in the
uppermost basket there was of all manner of bake-meats for Pharaoh; and
the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head." Also this dream
conveyed a prophecy regarding the future of Israel: The three baskets
are the three kingdoms to which Israel will be made subject, Babylon,
Media, and Greece; and the uppermost basket indicates the wicked rule of
Rome, which will extend over all the nations of the world, until the
bird shall come, who is the Messiah, and annihilate Rome. Again Joseph
kept the prophecy a secret. To the chief baker he gave only the
interpretation that had reference to his person, but it was unfavorable
to him, because through his dream Joseph had been made acquainted with
the suffering Israel would have to undergo.

And all came to pass, as Joseph had said, on the third day. The day
whereon he explained the meaning of their dreams to the two
distinguished prisoners, a son was born unto Pharaoh and to celebrate
the joyous event, the king arranged a feast for his princes and servants
that was to last eight days. He invited them and all the people to his
table, and he entertained them with royal splendor. The feast had its
beginning on the third day after the birth of the child, and on that
occasion the chief butler was restored in honor to his butlership, and
the chief baker was hanged, for Pharaoh's counsellors had discovered
that it was not the butler's fault that the fly had dropped into the
king's wine, but the baker had been guilty of carelessness in allowing
the pebble to get into the bread. Likewise it appeared that the butler
had had no part in the conspiracy to poison the king, while the baker
was revealed as one of the plotters, and he had to expiate his crime
with his life.

### PHARAOH'S DREAMS

Properly speaking, Joseph should have gone out free from his dungeon on
the same day as the butler. He had been there ten years by that time,
and had made amends for the slander he had uttered against his ten
brethren. However, he remained in prison two years longer. "Blessed is
the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope is the Lord," but
Joseph had put his confidence in flesh and blood. He had prayed the
chief butler to have him in remembrance when it should be well with him,
and make mention of him unto Pharaoh, and the butler forgot his promise,
and therefore Joseph had to stay in prison two years more than the years
originally allotted to him there. The butler had not forgotten him
intentionally, but it was ordained of God that his memory should fail
him. When he would say to himself, If thus and so happens, I will
remember the case of Joseph, the conditions he had imagined were sure to
be reversed, or if he made a knot as a reminder, an angel came and undid
the knot, and Joseph did not enter his mind.

But "the Lord setteth an end to darkness," and Joseph's liberation was
not delayed by a single moment beyond the time decreed for it. God said,
"Thou, O butler, thou didst forget Joseph, but I did not," and He caused
Pharaoh to dream a dream that was the occasion for Joseph's release.

In his dream Pharaoh saw seven kine, well-favored and fat-fleshed, come
up out of the Nile, and they all together grazed peaceably on the brink
of the river, In years when the harvest is abundant, friendship reigns
among men, and love and brotherly harmony, and these seven fat kine
stood for seven such prosperous years. After the fat kine, seven more
came up out of the river, ill-favored and lean-fleshed, and each had her
back turned to the others, for when distress prevails, one man turns
away from the other. For a brief space Pharaoh awoke, and when he went
to sleep again, he dreamed a second dream, about seven rank and good
ears of corn, and seven ears that were thin and blasted with the east
wind, the withered cars swallowing the full ears. He awoke at once, and
it was morning, and dreams dreamed in the morning are the ones that come
true.

This was not the first time Pharaoh had had these dreams. They had
visited him every night during a period of two years, and he had
forgotten them invariably in the morning. This was the first time he
remembered them, for the day had arrived for Joseph to come forth from
his prison house. Pharaoh's heart beat violently when he called his
dreams to mind on awaking. Especially the second one, about the ears of
corn, disquieted him. He reflected that whatever has a mouth can eat,
and therefore the dream of the seven lean kine that ate up the seven fat
kine did not appear strange to him. But the ears of corn that swallowed
up other ears of corn troubled his spirit. He therefore called for all
the wise men of his land, and they endeavored in vain to find a
satisfactory interpretation. They explained that the seven fat kine
meant seven daughters to be born unto Pharaoh, and the seven lean kine,
that he would bury seven daughters; the rank ears of corn meant that
Pharaoh would conquer seven countries, and the blasted ears, that seven
provinces would rebel against him. About the ears of corn they did not
all agree. Some thought the good ears stood for seven cities to be built
by Pharaoh, and the seven withered ears indicated that these same cities
would be destroyed at the end of his reign.

Sagacious as he was, Pharaoh knew that none of these explanations hit
the nail on the head. He issued a decree summoning all interpreters of
dreams to appear before him on pain of death, and he held out great
rewards and distinctions to the one who should succeed in finding the
true meaning of his dreams. In obedience to his summons, all the wise
men appeared, the magicians and the sacred scribes that were in Mizraim,
the city of Egypt, as well as those from Goshen, Raamses, Zoan, and the
whole country of Egypt, and with them came the princes, officers, and
servants of the king from all the cities of the land.

To all these the king narrated his dreams, but none could interpret them
to his satisfaction. Some said that the seven fat kine were the seven
legitimate kings that would rule over Egypt, and the seven lean kine
betokened seven princes that would rise up against these seven kings and
exterminate them. The seven good ears of corn were the seven superior
princes of Egypt that would engage in a war for their overlord, and
would be defeated by as many insignificant princes, who were betokened
by the seven blasted ears.

Another interpretation was that the seven fat kine were the seven
fortified cities of Egypt, at some future time to fall into the hands of
seven Canaanitish nations, who were foreshadowed in the seven lean kine.
According to this interpretation, the second dream supplemented the
first. It meant that the descendants of Pharaoh would regain sovereign
authority over Egypt at a subsequent period, and would subdue the seven
Canaanitish nations as well.

There was a third interpretation, given by some: The seven fat kine are
seven women whom Pharaoh would take to wife, but they would die during
his lifetime, their loss being indicated by the seven lean kine.
Furthermore, Pharaoh would have fourteen sons, and the seven strong ones
would be conquered by the seven weaklings, as the blasted ears of corn
in his dream had swallowed up the rank ears of corn.

And a fourth: "Thou wilt have seven sons, O Pharaoh, these are the seven
fat kine. These sons of thine will be killed by the seven powerful
rebellious princes. But then seven minor princes will come, and they
will kill the seven rebels, avenge thy descendants, and restore the
dominion to thy family."

The king was as little pleased with these interpretations as with the
others, which he had heard before, and in his wrath he ordered the wise
men, the magicians and the scribes of Egypt, to be killed, and the
hangmen made ready to execute the royal decree.

However, Mirod, Pharaoh's chief butler, took fright, seeing that the
king was so vexed at his failure to secure an interpretation of his
dreams that he was on the point of giving up the ghost. He was alarmed
about the king's death, for it was doubtful whether the successor to the
throne would retain him in office. He resolved to do all in his power to
keep Pharaoh alive. Therefore he stepped before him, and spake, saying,
"I do remember two faults of mine this day, I showed myself ungrateful
to Joseph, in that I did not bring his request before thee, and also I
saw thee in distress by reason of thy dream, without letting thee know
that Joseph can interpret dreams. When it pleased the Lord God to make
Pharaoh wroth with his servants, the king put me in ward in the house of
the captain of the guard, me and the chief baker. And with us there was
a simple young man, one of the despised race of the Hebrews, slave to
the captain of the guard, and he interpreted our dreams to us, and it
came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was. Therefore, O king,
stay the hand of the hangmen, let them not execute the Egyptians. The
slave I speak of is still in the dungeon, and if the king will consent
to summon him hither, he will surely interpret thy dreams."

### JOSEPH BEFORE PHARAOH

"Accursed are the wicked that never do a wholly good deed." The chief
butler described Joseph contemptuously as a "slave" in order that it
might be impossible for him to occupy a distinguished place at court,
for it was a law upon the statute books of Egypt that a slave could
never sit upon the throne as king, nor even put his foot in the stirrup
of a horse.

Pharaoh revoked the edict of death that he had issued against the wise
men of Egypt, and he sent and called Joseph. He impressed care upon his
messengers, they were not to excite and confuse Joseph, and render him
unfit to interpret the king's dream correctly. They brought him hastily
out of the dungeon, but first Joseph, out of respect for the king,
shaved himself, and put on fresh raiment, which an angel brought him
from Paradise, and then he came in unto Pharaoh.

The king was sitting upon the royal throne, arrayed in princely
garments, clad with a golden ephod upon his breast, and the fine gold of
the ephod sparkled, and the carbuncle, the ruby, and the emerald flamed
like a torch, and all the precious stones set upon the king's head
flashed like a blazing fire, and Joseph was greatly amazed at the
appearance of the king. The throne upon which he sat was covered with
gold and silver and with onyx stones, and it had seventy steps. If a
prince or other distinguished person came to have an audience with the
king, it was the custom for him to advance and mount to the thirty-first
step of the throne, and the king would descend thirty-six steps and
speak to him. But if one of the people came to have speech with the
king, he ascended only to the third step, and the king would come down
four steps from his seat, and address him thence. It was also the custom
that one who knew all the seventy languages ascended the seventy steps
of the throne to the top, but if a man knew only some of the seventy
languages, he was permitted to ascend as many steps as he knew
languages, whether they were many or, few. And another custom of the
Egyptians was that none could reign over them unless he was master of
all the seventy languages.

When Joseph came before the king, he bowed down to the ground, and he
ascended to the third step, while the king sat upon the fourth from the
top, and spake with Joseph, saying: "O young man, my servant beareth
witness concerning thee, that thou art the best and most discerning
person I can consult with. I pray thee, vouchsafe unto me the same
favors which thou didst bestow on this servant of mine, and tell me what
events they are which the visions of my dreams foreshow. I desire thee
to suppress naught out of fear, nor shalt thou flatter me with lying
words, or with words that please me. Tell me the truth, though it be sad
and alarming."

Joseph asked the king first whence he knew that the interpretation given
by the wise men of his country was not true, and Pharaoh replied, "I saw
the dream and its interpretation together, and therefore they cannot
make a fool of me." In his modesty Joseph denied that he was an adept at
interpreting dreams. He said, "It is not in me; it is in the hand of
God, and if it be the wish of God, He will permit me to announce tidings
of peace to Pharaoh." And for such modesty he was rewarded by
sovereignty over Egypt, for the Lord doth honor them that honor Him.
Thus was also Daniel rewarded for his speech to Nebuchadnezzar:

"There is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, but as for me, this
secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any
living, but to the intent that the interpretation may be made known to
the king, and that thou mayest know the thoughts of thy heart."

Then Pharaoh began to tell his dream, only he omitted some points and
narrated others inaccurately in order that he might test the vaunted
powers of Joseph. But the youth corrected him, and pieced the dreams
together exactly as they had visited Pharaoh in the night, and the king
was greatly amazed. Joseph was able to accomplish this feat, because he
had dreamed the same dream as Pharaoh, at the same time as he. Thereupon
Pharaoh retold his dreams, with all details and circumstances, and
precisely as he had seen them in his sleep, except that he left out the
word Nile in the description of the seven lean kine, because this river
was worshipped by the Egyptians, and he hesitated to say that aught that
is evil had come from his god.

Now Joseph proceeded to give the king the true interpretation of the two
dreams. They were both a revelation concerning the seven good years
impending and the seven years of famine to follow them. In reality, it
had been the purpose of God to bring a famine of forty-two years'
duration upon Egypt, but only two years of this distressful period were
inflicted upon the land, for the sake of the blessing of Jacob when he
came to Egypt in the second year of the famine. The other forty years
fell upon the land at the time of the prophet Ezekiel.

Joseph did more than merely interpret the dreams. When the king gave
voice to doubts concerning the interpretation, he told him signs and
tokens. He said: "Let this be a sign to thee that my words are true, and
my advice is excellent: Thy wife, who is sitting upon the birthstool at
this moment, will bring forth a son, and thou wilt rejoice over him, but
in the midst of thy joy the sad tidings will be told thee of the death
of thine older son, who was born unto thee but two years ago, and thou
must needs find consolation for the loss of the one in the birth of the
other."

Scarcely had Joseph withdrawn from the presence of the king, when the
report of the birth of a son was brought to Pharaoh, and soon after also
the report of the death of his first-born, who had suddenly dropped to
the floor and passed away. Thereupon he sent for all the grandees of his
realm, and all his servants, and he spake to them, saying: "Ye have
heard the words of the Hebrew, and ye have seen that the signs which he
foretold were accomplished, and I also know that he hath interpreted the
dream truly. Advise me now how the land may be saved from the ravages of
the famine. Look hither and thither whether you can find a man of wisdom
and understanding, whom I may set over the land, for I am convinced that
the land can be saved only if we heed the counsel of the Hebrew." The
grandees and the princes admitted that safety could be secured only by
adhering to the advice given by Joseph, and they proposed that the king,
in his sagacity, choose a man whom he considered equal to the great
task. Thereupon Pharaoh said: "If we traversed and searched the earth
from end to end, we could find none such as Joseph, a man in whom is the
spirit of God. If ye think well thereof, I will set him over the land
which he hath saved by his wisdom."

The astrologers, who were his counsellors, demurred, saying, "A slave,
one whom his present owner hath acquired for twenty pieces of silver,
thou proposest to set over us as master?" But Pharaoh maintained that
Joseph was not only a free-born man beyond the peradventure of a doubt,
but also the scion of a noble family. However, the princes of Pharaoh
were not silenced, they continued to give utterance to their opposition
to Joseph, saying: "Dost thou not remember the immutable law of the
Egyptians, that none may serve as king or as viceroy unless he speaks
all the languages of men? And this Hebrew knows none but his own tongue,
and how were it possible that a man should rule over us who cannot even
speak the language of our land? Send and have him fetched hither, and
examine him in respect to all the things a ruler should know and have,
and then decide as seemeth wise in thy sight."

Pharaoh yielded, he promised to do as they wished, and he appointed the
following day as the time for examining Joseph, who had returned to his
prison in the meantime, for, on account of his wife, his master feared
to have him stay in his house. During the night Gabriel appeared unto
Joseph, and taught him all the seventy languages, and he acquired them
quickly after the angel had changed his name from Joseph to Jehoseph.
The next morning, when he came into the presence of Pharaoh and the
nobles of the kingdom, inasmuch as he knew every one of the seventy
languages, he mounted all the steps of the royal throne, until he
reached the seventieth, the highest, upon which sat the king, and
Pharaoh and his princes rejoiced that Joseph fulfilled all the
requirements needed by one that was to rule over Egypt.

The king said to Joseph: "Thou didst give me the counsel to look out a
man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt, that he may
in his wisdom save the land from the famine. As God hath showed thee all
this, and as thou art master of all the languages of the world, there is
none so discreet and wise as thou. Thou shalt therefore be the second in
the land after Pharaoh, and according unto thy word shall all my people
go in and go out; my princes and my servants shall receive their monthly
appanage from thee; before thee the people shall prostrate themselves,
only in the throne will I be greater than thou."

### THE RULER OF EGYPT

Now Joseph reaped the harvest of his virtues, and according to the
measure of his merits God granted him reward. The mouth that refused the
kiss of unlawful passion and sin received the kiss of homage from the
people; the neck that did not bow itself unto sin was adorned with the
gold chain that Pharaoh put upon it; the hands that did not touch sin
wore the signet ring that Pharaoh took from his own hand and put upon
Joseph's; the body that did not come in contact with sin was arrayed in
vestures of byssus; the feet that made no steps in the direction of sin
reposed in the royal chariot, and the thoughts that kept themselves
undefiled by sin were proclaimed as wisdom.

Joseph was installed in his high position, and invested with the
insignia of his office, with solemn ceremony. The king took off his
signet ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed
him in princely apparel, and set a gold crown upon his head, and laid a
gold chain about his neck. Then he commanded his servants to make Joseph
to ride in his second chariot, which went by the side of the chariot
wherein sat the king, and he also made him to ride upon a great and
strong horse of the king's horses, and his servants conducted him
through the streets of the city of Egypt. Musicians, no less than a
thousand striking cymbals and a thousand blowing flutes, and five
thousand men with drawn swords gleaming in the air formed the vanguard.
Twenty thousand of the king's grandees girt with gold-embroidered
leather belts marched at the right of Joseph, and as many at the left of
him. The women and the maidens of the nobility looked out of the windows
to gaze upon Joseph's beauty, and they poured down chains upon him, and
rings and jewels, that he might but direct his eyes toward them. Yet he
did not look up, and as a reward God made him proof against the evil
eye, nor has it ever had the power of inflicting harm upon any of his
descendants. Servants of the king, preceding him and following him,
burnt incense upon his path, and cassia, and all manner of sweet spices,
and strewed myrrh and aloes wherever he went. Twenty heralds walked
before him, and they proclaimed: "This is the man whom the king bath
chosen to be the second after him. All the affairs of state will be
administered by him, and whoever resisteth his commands, or refuseth to
bow down to the ground before him, he will die the death of the rebel
against the king and the king's deputy."

Without delay the people prostrated themselves, and they cried, "Long
live the king, and long live the deputy of the king!" And Joseph,
looking down from his horse upon the people and their exultation,
exclaimed, his eyes directed heavenward: "The Lord raiseth up the poor
out of the dust, and lifteth up the needy from the dunghill. O Lord of
hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in Thee."

After Joseph, accompanied by Pharaoh's officers and princes, had
journeyed through the whole city of Egypt, and viewed all there was
therein, he returned to the king on the selfsame day, and the king gave
him fields and vineyards as a present, and also three thousand talents
of silver, and a thousand talents of gold, and onyx stones and bdellium,
and many other costly things. The king commanded, moreover, that every
Egyptian give Joseph a gift, else he would be put to death. A platform
was erected in the open street, and there all deposited their presents,
and among the things were many of gold and silver, as well as precious
stones, carried thither by the people and also the grandees, for they
saw that Joseph enjoyed the favor of the king. Furthermore, Joseph
received one hundred slaves from Pharaoh, and they were to do all his
bidding, and he himself acquired many more, for he resided in a spacious
palace. Three years it took to build it. Special magnificence was
lavished upon the hall of state, which was his audience chamber, and
upon the throne fashioned of gold and silver and inlaid with precious
stones, whereon there was a representation of the whole land of Egypt
and of the river Nile. And as Joseph multiplied in riches, so he
increased also in wisdom, for God added to his wisdom that all might
love and honor him. Pharaoh called him Zaphenath-paneah, he who can
reveal secret things with ease, and rejoiceth the heart of man
therewith. Each letter of the name Zaphenath-paneah has a meaning, too.
The first, Zadde, stands for Zofeh, seer; Pe for Podeh, redeemer; Nun
for Nabi, prophet; Taw for Tomek, supporter; Pe for Poter, interpreter
of dreams; Ain for Arum, clever; Nun for Nabon, discreet; and Het for
Hakam, wise.

The name of Joseph's wife pointed to her history in the same way.
Asenath was the daughter of Dinah and Hamor, but she was abandoned at
the borders of Egypt, only, that people might know who she was, Jacob
engraved the story of her parentage and her birth upon a gold plate
fastened around her neck. The day on which Asenath was exposed, Potiphar
went walking with his servants near the city wall, and they heard the
voice of a child. At the captain's bidding they brought the baby to him,
and when he read her history from the gold plate, he determined to adopt
her. He took her home with him, and raised her as his daughter. The Alef
in Asenath stands for On, where Potiphar was priest; the Samek for
Setirah, Hidden, for she was kept concealed on account of her
extraordinary beauty; the Nun for Nohemet, for she wept and entreated
that she might be delivered from the house of the heathen Potiphar; and
the Taw for Tammah, the perfect one, on account of her pious, perfect
deeds.

Asenath had saved Joseph's life while she was still an infant in arms.
When Joseph was accused of immoral conduct by Potiphar's wife and the
other women, and his master was on the point of having him hanged,
Asenath approached her foster-father, and she assured him under oath
that the charge against Joseph was false. Then spake God, "As thou
livest, because thou didst try to defend Joseph, thou shalt be the woman
to bear the tribes that he is appointed to beget.

Asenath bore him two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim, during the seven years
of plenty, for in the time of famine Joseph refrained from all
indulgence in the pleasures of life. They were bred in chastity and fear
of God by their father, and they were wise, and well-instructed in all
knowledge and in the affairs of state, so that they became the favorites
of the court, and were educated with the royal princes.

Before the famine broke over the land, Joseph found an opportunity of
rendering the king a great service. He equipped an army of four thousand
six hundred men, providing all the soldiers with shields and spears and
bucklers and helmets and slings. With this army, and aided by the
servants and officers of the king, and by the people of Egypt, he
carried on a war with Tarshish in the first year after his appointment
as viceroy. The people of Tarshish had invaded the territory of the
Ishmaelites, and the latter, few in number at that time, were sore
pressed, and applied to the king of Egypt for help against their
enemies. At the head of his host of heroes, Joseph marched to the land
of Havilah, where he was joined by the Ishmaelites, and with united
forces they fought against the people of Tarshish, routed them utterly,
settled their land with the Ishmaelites, while the defeated men took
refuge with their brethren in Javan. Joseph and his army returned to
Egypt, and not a man had they lost.

In a little while Joseph's prophecy was confirmed: that year and the six
following years were years of plenty, as he had foretold. The harvest
was so ample that a single ear produced two heaps of grain, and Joseph
made circumspect arrangements to provide abundantly for the years of
famine. He gathered up all the grain, and in the city situated in the
middle of each district he laid up the produce from round about, and had
ashes and earth strewn on the garnered food from the very soil on which
it had been grown; also he preserved the grain in the ear; all these
being precautions taken to guard against rot and mildew. The inhabitants
of Egypt also tried, on their own account, to put aside a portion of the
superabundant harvest of the seven fruitful years against the need of
the future, but when the grievous time of dearth came, and they went to
their storehouses to bring forth the treasured grain, behold, it had
rotted, and become unfit for food. The famine broke in upon the people
with such suddenness that the bread gave out unexpectedly as they sat at
their tables, they had not even a bite of bran bread.

Thus they were driven to apply to Joseph and beseech his help, and he
admonished them, saying, "Give up your allegiance to your deceitful
idols, and say, Blessed is He who giveth bread unto all flesh." But they
refused to deny their lying gods, and they betook themselves to Pharaoh,
only to be told by him, "Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do!" For
this Pharaoh was rewarded. God granted him long life and a long reign,
until he became arrogant, and well-merited punishment overtook him.

When the Egyptians approached Joseph with the petition for bread, he
spoke, saying, "I give no food to the uncircumcised. Go hence, and
circumcise yourselves, and then return hither." They entered the
presence of Pharaoh, and complained to him regarding Joseph, but he said
as before, "Go unto Joseph!" And they replied, "We come from Joseph, and
he hath spoken roughly unto us, saying, Go hence and circumcise
yourselves! We warned thee in the beginning that he is a Hebrew, and
would treat us in such wise." Pharaoh said to them: "O ye fools, did he
not prophesy through the holy spirit and proclaim to the whole world,
that there would come seven years of plenty to be followed by seven
years of dearth? Why did you not save the yield of one or two years
against the day of your need?"

Weeping, they made reply: "The grain that we put aside during the good
years hath rotted."

Pharaoh: "Have ye nothing over of the flour of yesterday?"

The Egyptians: "The very bread in the basket rotted!"

Pharaoh: "Why?"

The Egyptians: "Because Joseph willed thus!"

Pharaoh: "O ye fools, if his word hath power over the grain, making it
to rot when he desireth it to rot, then also must we die, if so be his
wish concerning us. Go, therefore, unto him, and do as he bids you."

### JOSEPH'S BRETHREN IN EGYPT

The famine, which inflicted hardships first upon the wealthy among the
Egyptians, gradually extended its ravages as far as Phoenicia, Arabia,
and Palestine. Though the sons of Jacob, being young men, frequented the
streets and the highways, yet they were ignorant of what their old
home-keeping father Jacob knew, that corn could be procured in Egypt.
Jacob even suspected that Joseph was in Egypt. His prophetic spirit,
which forsook him during the time of his grief for his son, yet
manifested itself now and again in dim visions, and he was resolved to
send his sons down into Egypt. There was another reason. Though he was
not yet in want, he nevertheless had them go thither for food, because
he was averse from arousing the envy of the sons of Esau and Ishmael by
his comfortable state. For the same reason, to avoid friction with the
surrounding peoples, he bade his sons not appear in public with bread in
their hands, or in the accoutrements of war. And as he knew that they
were likely to attract attention, on account of their heroic stature and
handsome appearance, he cautioned them against going to the city all
together through the same gate, or, indeed, showing themselves all
together anywhere in public, that the evil eye be not cast upon them.

The famine in Canaan inspired Joseph with the hope of seeing his
brethren. To make sure of their coming, he issued a decree concerning
the purchase of corn in Egypt, as follows: "By order of the king and his
deputy, and the princes of the realm, be it enacted that he who desireth
to buy grain in Egypt may not send his slave hither to do his bidding,
but he must charge his own sons therewith. An Egyptian or a Canaanite
that hath bought grain and then selleth it again shall be put to death,
for none may buy more than he requireth for the needs of his household.
Also, who cometh with two or three beasts of burden, and loads them up
with grain, shall be put to death."

At the gates of the city of Egypt, Joseph stationed guards, whose office
was to inquire and take down the name of all that should come to buy
corn, and also the name of their father and their grandfather, and every
evening the list of names thus made was handed to Joseph. These
precautions were bound to bring Joseph's brethren down to Egypt, and
also acquaint him with their coming as soon as they entered the land.

On their journey his brethren thought more of Joseph than of their
errand. They said to one another: "We know that Joseph was carried down
into Egypt, and we will make search for him there, and if we should find
him, we will ransom him from his master, and if his master should refuse
to sell him, we will use force, though we perish ourselves."

At the gates of the city of Egypt, the brethren of Joseph were asked
what their names were, and the names of their father and grandfather.
The guard on duty happened to be Manasseh, the son of Joseph. The
brethren submitted to being questioned, saying "Let us go into the town,
and we shall see whether this taking down of our names be a matter of
taxes. If it be so, we shall not demur; but if it be something else, we
shall see to-morrow what can be done in the case."

On the evening of the day they entered Egypt, Joseph discovered their
names in the list, which he was in the habit of examining daily, and he
commanded that all stations for the sale of corn be closed, except one
only. Furthermore, even at this station no sales were to be negotiated
unless the name of the would-be purchaser was first obtained. His
brethren, with whose names Joseph furnished the overseer of the place,
were to be seized and brought to him as soon as they put in appearance.

But the first thought of the brethren was for Joseph, and their first
concern, to seek him. For three days they made search for him
everywhere, even in the most disreputable quarters of the city. Meantime
Joseph was in communication with the overseer of the station kept open
for the sale of corn, and, hearing that his brethren had not appeared
there, he dispatched some of his servants to look for them, but they
found them neither in Mizraim, the city of Egypt, nor in Goshen, nor in
Raamses. Thereupon he sent sixteen servants forth to make a house to
house search for them in the city, and they discovered the brethren of
Joseph in a place of ill-fame and haled them before their master.

### JOSEPH MEETS HIS BRETHREN

A large crown of gold on his head, apparelled in byssus and purple, and
surrounded by his valiant men, Joseph was seated upon his throne in his
palace. His brethren fell down before him in great admiration of his
beauty, his stately appearance, and his majesty. They did not know him,
for when Joseph was sold into slavery, he was a beardless youth. But he
knew his brethren, their appearance had not changed in aught, for they
were bearded men when he was separated from them.

He was inclined to make himself known to them as their brother, but an
angel appeared unto him, the same that had brought him from Shechem to
his brethren at Dothan, and spoke, saying, "These came hither with
intent to kill thee." Later, when the brethren returned home, and gave
an account of their adventures to Jacob, they told him that a man had
accused them falsely before the ruler of Egypt, not knowing that he who
incited Joseph against them was an angel. It was in reference to this
matter, and meaning their accuser, that Jacob, when he dispatched his
sons on their second expedition to Egypt, prayed to God, "God Almighty
give you mercy before the man."

Joseph made himself strange unto his brethren, and he took his cup in
his hand, knocked against it, and said, "By this magic cup I know that
ye are spies." They replied, "Thy servants came from Canaan into Egypt
for to buy corn."

Joseph: "If it be true that ye came hither to buy corn, why is it that
each one of you entered the city by a separate gate?"

The brethren: "We are ALL the sons of one man in the land of Canaan, and
he bade us not enter a city together by the same gate, that we attract
not the attention of the people of the place." Unconsciously they had
spoken as seers, for the word ALL included Joseph as one of their
number.

Joseph: "Verily, ye are spies! All the people that come to buy corn
return home without delay, but ye have lingered here three days, without
making any purchases, and all the time you have been gadding about in
the disreputable parts of the city, and only spies are wont to do thus."

The brethren: "We thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of Jacob,
the son of Isaac, the son of the Hebrew Abraham. The youngest is this
day with our father in Canaan, and one hath disappeared. Him did we look
for in this land, and we looked for him even in the disreputable
houses."

Joseph: "Have ye made search in every other place on earth, and was
Egypt the only land left? And if it be true that he is in Egypt, what
should a brother of yours be doing in a house of ill-fame, if, indeed,
ye are the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?"

The brethren: "We did hear that some Ishmaelites stole our brother, and
sold him into slavery in Egypt, and as our brother was exceeding fair in
form and face, we thought he might have been sold for illicit uses, and
therefore we searched even the disreputable houses to find him."

Joseph: "You speak deceitful words, when you call yourselves sons of
Abraham. By the life of Pharaoh, ye are spies, and you did go from one
disreputable house to another that none might discover you."

The expression "by the life of Pharaoh" might have betrayed Joseph's
real feeling to his brethren, had they but known his habit of taking
this oath only when he meant to avoid keeping his word later.

Joseph continued to speak to his brethren: "Let us suppose you should
discover your brother serving as a slave, and his master should demand a
high sum for his ransom, would you pay it?"

The brethren: "Yes!"

Joseph: "But suppose his master should refuse to surrender him for any
price in the world, what would you do?"

The brethren: "If he yields not our brother to us, we will kill the
master, and carry off our brother."

Joseph: "Now see how true my words were, that ye are spies. By your own
admission ye have come to slay the inhabitants of the land. Report hath
told us that two of you did massacre the people of Shechem on account of
the wrong done to your sister, and now have ye come down into Egypt to
kill the Egyptians for the sake of your brother. I shall be convinced of
your innocence only if you consent to send one of your number home and
fetch your youngest brother hither."

His brethren refused compliance, and Joseph caused them to be put into
prison by seventy of his valiant men, and there they remained for three
days. God never allows the pious to languish in distress longer than
three days, and so it was a Divine dispensation that the brethren of
Joseph were released on the third day, and were permitted by Joseph to
return home, on condition, however, that one of them remain behind as
hostage.

The difference between Joseph and his brethren can be seen here. Though
he retained one of them to be bound in the prison house, he still said,
"I fear God," and dismissed the others, but when he was in their power,
they gave no thought to God. At this time, to be sure, their conduct was
such as is becoming to the pious, who accept their fate with calm
resignation, and acknowledge the righteousness of God, for He metes out
reward and punishment measure for measure. They recognized that their
present punishment was in return for the heartless treatment they had
dealt out to Joseph, paying no heed to his distress, though he fell at
the feet of each of them, weeping, and entreating them not to sell him
into slavery. Reuben reminded the others that they had two wrongs to
expiate, the wrong against their brother and the wrong against their
father, who was so grieved that he exclaimed, "I will go down to the
grave to my son mourning."

The brethren of Joseph knew not that the viceroy of Egypt understood
Hebrew, and could follow their words, for Manasseh stood and was an
interpreter between them and him.

Joseph decided to keep Simon as hostage in Egypt, for he had been one of
the two--Levi was the other--to advise that Joseph be put to death, and
only the intercession of Reuben and Judah had saved him. He did not
detain Levi, too, for he feared, if both remained behind together, Egypt
might suffer the same fate at their hands as the city of Shechem. Also,
he preferred Simon to Levi, because Simon was not a favorite among the
sons of Jacob, and they would not resist his detention in Egypt too
violently, while they might annihilate Egypt, as aforetime Shechem, if
they were deprived of Levi, their wise man and high priest. Besides, it
was Simon that had lowered Joseph into the pit, wherefore he had a
particular grudge against him.

When the brethren yielded to Joseph's demand, and consented to leave
their brother behind as hostage, Simon said to them, "Ye desire to do
with me as ye did with Joseph!" But they replied, in despair: "What can
we do? Our households will perish of hunger." Simon made answer, "Do as
ye will, but as for me, let me see the man that will venture to cast me
into prison." Joseph sent word to Pharaoh to let him have seventy of his
valiant men, to aid him in arresting robbers. But when the seventy
appeared upon the scene, and were about to lay hands on Simon, he
uttered a loud cry, and his assailants fell to the floor and knocked out
their teeth. Pharaoh's valiant men, as well as all the people that stood
about Joseph, fled affrighted, only Joseph and his son Manasseh remained
calm and unmoved. Manasseh rose up, dealt Simon a blow on the back of
his neck, put manacles upon his hands and fetters upon his feet, and
cast him into prison. Joseph's brethren were greatly amazed at the
heroic strength of the youth, and Simon said, "This blow was not dealt
by an Egyptian, but by one belonging to our house."

He was bound and taken to prison before the eyes of the other brethren
of Joseph, but as soon as they were out of sight, Joseph ordered good
fare to be set before him, and he treated him with great kindness.

Joseph permitted his nine other brethren to depart, carrying corn with
them in abundance, but he impressed upon them that they must surely
return and bring their youngest brother with them. On the way, Levi, who
felt lonely without his constant companion Simon, opened his sack, and
he espied the money he had paid for the corn. They all trembled, and
their hearts failed them, and they said, "Where, then, is the
lovingkindness of God toward our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
seeing that He hath delivered us into the hands of the Egyptian king,
that he may raise false accusations against us?" And Judah said,
"Verily, we are guilty concerning our brother, we have sinned against
God, in that we sold our brother, our own flesh, and why do ye ask,
Where, then, is the lovingkindness of God toward our fathers?"

Reuben spoke in the same way: "Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin
against the child, and ye would not hear? And now the Lord doth demand
him of us. How can you say, Where, then, is the lovingkindness of God
toward our fathers, though you have sinned against Him?"

They proceeded on their journey home, and their father met them on the
way. Jacob was astonished not to see Simon with them, and in reply to
his questions, they told him all that had befallen them in Egypt. Then
Jacob cried out: "What have ye done? I sent Joseph to you to see whether
it be well with you, and ye said, An evil beast hath devoured him. Simon
went forth with you for to buy corn, and you say, The king of Egypt hath
cast him into prison. And now ye will take Benjamin away and kill him,
too. Ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave."

The words of Jacob, which he uttered, "Me have ye bereaved of my
children," were meant to intimate to his sons that he suspected them of
the death of Joseph and of Simon's disappearance as well, and their
reports concerning both he regarded as inventions. What made him
inconsolable was that now, having lost two of his sons, he could not
hope to see the Divine promise fulfilled, that he should be the ancestor
of twelve tribes. He was quite resolved in his mind, therefore, not to
let Benjamin go away with his brethren under any condition whatsoever,
and he vouchsafed Reuben no reply when he said, "Slay my two sons, if I
bring him not to thee." He considered it beneath his dignity to give an
answer to such balderdash. "My first-born son," he said to himself, "is
a fool. What will it profit me, if I slay his two sons? Does he not know
that his sons are equally mine?" Judah advised his brethren to desist
from urging their father then; he would consent, he thought, to whatever
expedients were found necessary, as soon as their bread gave out, and a
second journey to Egypt became imperative.

### THE SECOND JOURNEY TO EGYPT

When the supplies bought in Egypt were eaten up, and the family of Jacob
began to suffer with hunger, the little children came to him, and they
said, "Give us bread, that we die not of hunger before thee." The words
of the little ones brought scorching tears to the eyes of Jacob, and he
summoned his sons and bade them go again down into Egypt and buy food.
But Judah spake unto him, "The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying
that we should not see his face, except our brother Benjamin be with us,
and we cannot appear before him with idle pretexts." And Jacob said,
"Wherefore dealt ye so ill with me as to tell the man whether ye had yet
a brother?" It was the first and only time Jacob indulged in empty talk,
and God said, "I made it My business to raise his son to the position of
ruler of Egypt, and he complains, and says, Wherefore dealt ye so ill
with-me?" And Judah protested against the reproach, that he had
initiated the Egyptian viceroy in their family relations, with the
words: "Why, he knew the very wood of which our baby coaches are made!
Father," he continued, "if Benjamin goes with us, he may, indeed, be
taken from us, but also he may not. This is a doubtful matter, but it is
certain that if he does not go with us, we shall all die of hunger. It
is better not to concern thyself about what is doubtful, and guide thy
actions by what is certain. The king of Egypt is a strong and mighty
king, and if we go to him without our brother, we shall all be put to
death. Dost thou not know, and hast thou not heard, that this king is
very powerful and wise, and there is none like unto him in all the
earth? We have seen all the kings of the earth, but none like unto the
king of Egypt. One would surely say that among all the kings of the
earth there is none greater than Abimelech king of the Philistines, yet
the king of Egypt is greater and mightier than he, and Abimelech can
hardly be compared with one of his officers. Father, thou hast not seen
his palace and his throne, and all his servants standing before him.
Thou hast not seen that king upon his throne, in all his magnificence
and with his royal insignia, arrayed in his royal robes, with a large
golden crown upon his head. Thou hast not seen the honor and the glory
that God hath given unto him, for there is none like unto him in all the
earth. Father, thou hast not seen the wisdom, the understanding, and the
knowledge that God has given in his heart. We heard his sweet voice when
he spake unto us. We know not, father, who acquainted him with our
names, and all that befell us. He asked also concerning thee, saying, Is
your father still alive, and is it well with him? Thou hast not seen the
affairs of the government of Egypt regulated by him, for none asketh his
lord Pharaoh about them. Thou hast not seen the awe and the fear that he
imposes upon all the Egyptians. Even we went out from his presence
threatening to do unto Egypt as unto the cities of the Amorites, and
exceedingly wroth by reason of all his words that he spake concerning us
as spies, yet when we came again before him, his terror fell upon us
all, and none of us was able to speak a word to him, great or small.
Now, therefore, father, send the lad with us, and we will arise and go
down into Egypt, and buy food to eat, that we die not of hunger."

Judah offered his portion in the world to come as surety for Benjamin,
and thus solemnly he promised to bring him back safe and sound, and
Jacob granted his request, and permitted Benjamin to go down into Egypt
with his other sons. They also carried with them choice presents from
their father for the ruler of Egypt, things that arouse wonder outside
of Palestine, such as the murex, which is the snail that produces the
Tyrian purple, and various kinds of balm, and almond oil, and pistachio
oil, and honey as hard as stone. Furthermore, Jacob put double money in
their hand to provide against a rise in prices in the meantime. And
after all these matters were attended to, he spake to his sons, saying:
"Here is money, and here is a present, and also your brother. Is there
aught else that you need?" And they replied, Yes, we need this, besides,
that thou shouldst intercede for us with God." Then their father prayed:
"O Lord, Thou who at the time of creation didst call Enough! to heaven
and earth when they stretched themselves out further and further toward
infinity, set a limit to my sufferings, too, say unto them, Enough! God
Almighty give you mercy before the ruler of Egypt, that he may release
unto you Joseph, Simon, and Benjamin."

This prayer was an intercession, not only for the sons of Jacob, but
also for their descendants--that God would deliver the Ten Tribes in
time to come, as He delivered the two, Judah and Benjamin, and after He
permitted the destruction of two Temples, He would grant endless
continuance to the third.

Jacob also put a letter addressed to the viceroy of Egypt into the hands
of his son. The letter ran thus: "From thy servant Jacob, the son of
Isaac, the grandson of Abraham, prince of God, to the mighty and wise
king Zaphenathpaneah, the ruler of Egypt, peace! I make known unto my
lord the king that the famine is sore with us in the land of Canaan, and
I have therefore sent my sons unto thee, to buy us a little food, that
we may live, and not die. My children surrounded me, and begged for
something to eat, but, alas, I am very old, and I cannot see with mine
eyes, for they are heavy with the weight of years, and also on account
of my never-ceasing tears for my son Joseph, who hath been taken from
me. I charged my sons not to pass through the gate all together at the
same time, when they arrived in the city of Egypt, in consideration of
the inhabitants of the land, that they might not take undue notice of
them. Also I bade them go up and down in the land of Egypt and seek my
son Joseph, mayhap they would find him there.

"This did they do, but thou didst therefore account them as spies. We
have heard the report of thy wisdom and sagacity. How, then, canst thou
look upon their countenances, and yet declare them to be spies?
Especially as we have heard thou didst interpret Pharaoh's dream, and
didst foretell the coming of the famine, are we amazed that thou, in thy
discernment, couldst not distinguish whether they be spies or not.

"And, now, O my lord king, I send unto thee my son Benjamin, as thou
didst demand of my other sons. I pray thee, take good care of him until
thou sendest him back to me in peace with his brethren. Hast thou not
heard, and dost thou not know, what our God did unto Pharaoh when he
took our mother Sarah unto himself? Or what happened unto Abimelech on
account of her? And what our father Abraham did unto the nine kings of
Elam, how he killed them and exterminated their armies, though he had
but few men with him? Or hast thou not heard what my two sons Simon and
Levi did to the eight cities of the Amorites, which they destroyed on
account of their sister Dinah? Benjamin consoled them for the loss of
Joseph. What, then, will they do unto him that stretcheth forth the hand
of power to snatch him away from them?

"Knowest thou not, O king of Egypt, that the might of our God is with
us, and that He always hearkens unto our prayers, and never forsakes us?
Had I called upon God to rise up against thee when my sons told me how
thou didst act toward them, thou and thy people, ye all would have been
annihilated ere Benjamin could come down to thee. But I reflected that
Simon my son was abiding in thy house, and perhaps thou wast doing
kindnesses unto him, and therefore I invoked not the punishment of God
upon thee. Now my son Benjamin goeth down unto thee with my other sons.
Take heed unto thyself, keep thy eyes directed upon him, and God will
direct His eye upon all thy kingdom.

"I have said all now that is in my heart. My sons take their youngest
brother down into Egypt with them, and do thou send them all back to me
in peace."

This letter Jacob put into the keeping of Judah, charging him to deliver
it to the ruler of Egypt. His last words to his sons were an admonition
to take good care of Benjamin and not leave him out of their sight,
either on the journey or after their arrival in Egypt. He bade farewell
to them, and then turned in prayer to God, saying: "O Lord of heaven and
earth! Remember Thy covenant with our father Abraham. Remember also my
father Isaac, and grant grace unto my sons, and deliver them not into
the hands of the king of Egypt. O my God, do it for the sake of Thy
mercy, redeem my sons and save them from the hands of the Egyptians, and
restore their two brethren unto them."

Also the women and the children in the house of Jacob prayed to God amid
tears, and entreated Him to redeem their husbands and their fathers out
of the hands of the king of Egypt.

### JOSEPH AND BENJAMIN

Great was the joy of Joseph when his brethren stood before him and
Benjamin was with them. In his youngest brother he saw the true
counterpart of his father. He ordered his son Manasseh, the steward of
his house, to bring the men into the palace, and make ready a meal for
them. But he was to take care to prepare the meat dishes in the presence
of the guests, so that they might see with their own eyes that the
cattle had been slaughtered according to the ritual prescriptions, and
the sinew of the hip which is upon the hollow of the thigh had been
removed.

The dinner to which Joseph invited his brethren was a Sabbath meal, for
he observed the seventh day even before the revelation of the law. The
sons of Jacob refused the invitation of the steward, and a scuffle
ensued. While he tried to force them into the banqueting hall, they
tried to force him out, for they feared it was but a ruse to get
possession of them and their asses, on account of the money they had
found in their sacks on their return from their first journey to Egypt.
In their modesty they put the loss of their beasts upon the same level
as the loss of their personal liberty. To the average man property is as
precious as life itself.

Standing at the door of Joseph's house, they spake to the steward, and
said: "We are in badly reduced circumstances. In our country we
supported others, and now we depend upon thee to support us." After
these introductory words, they offered him the money they had found in
their sacks. The steward reassured them concerning the money, saying,
"However it may be, whether for the sake of your own merits, or for the
sake of the merits of your fathers, God hath caused you to find a
treasure, for the money ye paid for the corn came into my hand." Then he
brought Simon out to them. Their brother looked like a leather bottle,
so fat and rotund had he grown during his sojourn in Egypt. He told his
brethren what kind treatment had been accorded unto him. The very moment
they left the city he had been released from prison, and thereafter he
had been entertained with splendor in the house of the ruler of Egypt.

When Joseph made his appearance, Judah took Benjamin by the hand, and
presented him to the viceroy, and they all bowed down themselves to him
to the earth. Joseph asked them concerning the welfare of their father
and their grandfather, and they made reply, "Thy servant our father is
well; he is yet alive," and Joseph knew from their words that his
grandfather Isaac was no more. He had died at the time when Joseph was
released from prison, and the joy of God in the liberation of Joseph was
overcast by His sorrow for Isaac. Then Judah handed his father's letter
to Joseph, who was so moved at seeing the well-known handwriting that he
had to retire to his chamber and weep. When he came back, he summoned
Benjamin to approach close to him, and he laid his hand upon his
youngest brother's head, and blessed him with the words, "God be
gracious unto thee, my son." His father had once mentioned "the children
which God hath graciously given Thy servant," and as Benjamin was not
among the children thus spoken of, for he was born later, Joseph
compensated him now by blessing him with the grace of God.

The table was set in three divisions, for Joseph, for his brethren, and
for the Egyptians. The sons of Jacob did not venture to eat of the
dishes set before them, they were afraid they might not have been
prepared according to the ritual prescriptions--a punishment upon Joseph
for having slandered his brethren, whom he once charged with not being
punctilious in the observance of the dietary laws. The Egyptians, again,
could not sit at the same table with the sons of Jacob, because the
latter ate the flesh of the animals to which the former paid divine
worship.

When all was ready, and the guests were to be seated, Joseph raised his
cup, and, pretending to inhale his knowledge from it, he said, "Judah is
king, therefore let him sit at the head of the table, and let Reuben the
first-born take the second seat," and thus he assigned places to all his
brethren corresponding to their dignity and their age. Moreover, he
seated the brothers together who were the sons of the same mother, and
when he reached Benjamin, he said, "I know that the youngest among you
has no brother borne by his own mother, next to whom he might be seated,
and also I have none, therefore he may take his place next to me."

The brethren marvelled one with another at all this. During the meal,
Joseph took his portion, and gave it to Benjamin, and his wife Asenath
followed his example, and also Ephraim and Manasseh, so that Benjamin
had four portions in addition to that which he had received like the
other sons of Jacob.

Wine was served at the meal, and it was the first time in twenty-two
years that Joseph and his brethren tasted of it, for they had led the
life of Nazarites, his brethren because they regretted the evil they had
done to Joseph, and Joseph because he grieved over the fate of his
father.

Joseph entered into conversation with his brother Benjamin. He asked him
whether he had a brother borne by his own mother, and Benjamin answered,
"I had one, but I do not know what hath become of him." Joseph continued
his questions: "Hast thou a wife?"

Benjamin: "Yes, I have a wife and ten sons."

Joseph: "And what are their names? "

Benjamin: "Bela, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and
Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard."

Joseph: "Why didst thou give them such peculiar names?"

Benjamin: "In memory of my brother and his sufferings: Bela, because my
brother disappeared among the peoples; Becher, he was the first-born son
of my mother; Ashbel, he was taken away from my father; Gera, he dwells
a stranger in a strange land; Naaman, he was exceedingly lovely; Ehi, he
was my only brother by my father and my mother together; Rosh, he was at
the head of his brethren; Muppim, he was beautiful in every respect;
Huppim, he was slandered; and Ard, because he was as beautiful as a
rose."

Joseph ordered his magic astrolabe to be brought to him, whereby he knew
all things that happen, and he said unto Benjamin, "I have heard that
the Hebrews are acquainted with all wisdom, but dost thou know aught of
this?" Benjamin answered, "Thy servant also is skilled in all wisdom,
which my father hath taught me." He then looked upon the astrolabe, and
to his great astonishment he discovered by the aid of it that he who was
sitting upon the throne before him was his brother Joseph. Noticing
Benjamin's amazement, Joseph asked him, "What hast thou seen, and why
art thou astonished?" Benjamin said, "I can see by this that Joseph my
brother sitteth here before me upon the throne." And Joseph said: "I am
Joseph thy brother! Reveal not the thing unto our brethren. I will send
thee with them when they go away, and I will command them to be brought
back again into the city, and I will take thee away from them. If they
risk their lives and fight for thee, then shall I know that they have
repented of what they did unto me, and I will make myself known unto
them. But if they forsake thee, I will keep thee, that thou shouldst
remain with me. They shall go away, and I will not make myself known
unto them."

Then Joseph inquired of Benjamin what his brethren had told their father
after they had sold him into slavery, and he heard the story of the coat
dipped in the blood of a kid of the goats. "Yes, brother," spoke Joseph,
"when they had stripped me of my coat, they handed me over to the
Ishmaelites, who tied an apron around my waist, scourged me, and bade me
run off. But a lion attacked the one that beat me, and killed him, and
his companions were alarmed, and they sold me to other people."

Dismissed by Joseph with kind words, his brethren started on their
homeward journey as soon as the morning was light, for it is a good rule
to "leave a city after sunrise, and enter a city before sundown."
Besides, Joseph had a specific reason for not letting his brethren
depart from the city during the night. He feared an encounter between
them and his servants, and that his men might get the worst of it, for
the sons of Jacob were like the wild beasts, which have the upper hand
at night.

### THE THIEF CAUGHT

They were not yet far beyond the city gates, when Joseph dispatched
Manasseh, the steward of his house, to follow after them, and look for
the silver cup that he had concealed in Benjamin's sack. He knew his
brethren well, he did not venture to let them get too far from the city
before he should attempt to force their return. He hoped that the
nearness of the city would intimidate them and make them heed his
commands. Manasseh therefore received the order to bring them to a halt,
by mild speech if he could, or by rough speech if he must, and carry
them back to the city. He acted according to his instructions. When the
brethren heard the accusation of theft , they said: "With whomsoever of
thy servants the cup be found, let him die, and we also will be my
lord's bondmen." And Manasseh said, "As you say, so were it proper to
do, for if ten persons are charged with theft, and the stolen object is
found with one of them, all are held responsible. But I will not be so
hard. He with whom the cup is found shall be the bondman, and the rest
shall be blameless."

He searched all the sacks, and in order not to excite the suspicion that
he knew where the cup was, he began at Reuben, the eldest, and left off
at Benjamin, the youngest, and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack. In
a rage, his brethren shouted at Benjamin, "O thou thief and son of a
thief! Thy mother brought shame upon our father by her thievery, and now
thou bringest shame upon us." But he replied, "Is this matter as evil as
the matter of the kid of the goats--as the deed of the brethren that
sold their own brother into slavery?"

In their fury and vexation, the brethren rent their clothes. God paid
them in their own coin. They had caused Jacob to tear his clothes in his
grief over Joseph, and now they were made to do the same on account of
their own troubles. And as they rent their clothes for the sake of their
brother Benjamin, so Mordecai, the descendant of Benjamin, was destined
to rend his on account of his brethren, the people of Israel. But
because mortification was inflicted upon the brethren through Manasseh,
the steward of Joseph, the allotment of territory given to the tribe of
Manasseh was "torn" in two, one-half of the tribe had to live on one
side of the Jordan, the other half on the other side. And Joseph, who
had not shrunk from vexing his brethren so bitterly that they rent their
clothes in their abasement, was punished, in that his descendant Joshua
was driven to such despair after the defeat of Ai that he, too, rent his
clothes.

Convicted of theft beyond the peradventure of a doubt, the brethren of
Joseph had no choice but to comply with the steward's command and return
to the city. They accompanied him without delay. Each of them loaded his
ass himself, raising the burden with one hand from the ground to the
back of the beast, and then they retraced their steps cityward, and as
they walked, they rapped Benjamin roughly on the shoulder, saying, "O
thou thief and son of a thief, thou hast brought the same shame upon us
that thy mother brought upon our father." Benjamin bore the blows and
the abusive words in patient silence, and he was rewarded for his
humility. For submitting to the blows upon his shoulder, God appointed
that His Shekinah should "dwell between his shoulders," and He also
called him "the beloved of the Lord."

Joseph's brethren returned to the city without fear. Though it was a
great metropolis, in their eyes it appeared but as a hamlet of ten
persons, which they could wipe out with a turn of the hand. They were
led into the presence of Joseph, who, contrary to his usual habit, was
not holding a session of the court in the forum on that day. He remained
at home, that his brethren might not be exposed to shame in public. They
fell to the earth before him, and thus came true his dream of the eleven
stars that made obeisance to him. But even while paying homage to
Joseph, Judah was boiling inwardly with suppressed rage, and he said to
his brethren, "Verily, this man hath forced me to come back hither only
that I should destroy the city on this day."

Guarded by his valiant men on the right and on the left, Joseph
addressed his brethren, snarling, "What deed is this that ye have done,
to steal away my cup? I know well, ye took it in order to discover with
its help the whereabouts of your brother that hath disappeared." Judah
was spokesman, and he replied: "What shall we say unto my lord
concerning the first money that he found in the mouth of our sacks? What
shall we speak concerning the second money that also was in our sacks?
And how shall we clear ourselves concerning the cup? We cannot
acknowledge ourselves guilty, for we know ourselves to be innocent in
all these matters. Yet we cannot avow ourselves innocent, because God
hath found out the iniquity of thy servants, like a creditor that goes
about and tries to collect a debt owing to him. Two brothers take care
not to enter a house of mirth and festivity together, that they be not
exposed to the evil eye, but we all were caught together in one place,
by reason of the sin which we committed in company."

Joseph: "But if your punishment is for selling Joseph, why should this
brother of yours suffer, the youngest, he that had no part in your
crime.

Judah: "A thief and his companions are taken together."

Joseph: "If you could prevail upon yourselves to report to your father
concerning a brother that had not stolen, and had brought no manner of
shame upon you, that a wild beast had torn him, you will easily persuade
yourselves to say it concerning a brother that hath stolen, and hath
brought shame upon you. Go hence, and tell your father, 'The rope
follows after the water bucket.' But," continued Joseph, shaking his
purple mantle, "God forbid that I should accuse you all of theft. Only
the youth that stole the cup in order to divine his brother's
whereabouts shall remain with me as my bondman; but as for you, get you
up in peace unto your father."

The holy spirit called out, "Great peace have they which love thy law!"

The brethren all consented to yield Benjamin to the ruler of Egypt, only
Judah demurred, and he cried out, "Now it is all over with peace!" and
he prepared to use force, if need be, to rescue Benjamin from slavery.

### JUDAH PLEADS AND THREATENS.

Joseph dismissed his brethren, and carried Benjamin off by main force,
and locked him up in a chamber. But Judah broke the door open and stood
before Joseph with his brethren. He determined to use in turn the three
means of liberating Benjamin at his disposal. He was prepared to
convince Joseph by argument, or move him by entreaties, or resort to
force, in order to accomplish his end.

He spake: "Thou doest a wrong unto us. Thou who didst say, 'I fear God,'
thou showest thyself to be like unto Pharaoh, who hath no fear of God.
The judgments which thou dost pronounce are not in accordance with our
laws, nor are they in accordance with the laws of the nations. According
to our law, a thief must pay double the value of what he hath stolen.
Only, if he hath no money, he is sold into slavery, but if he hath the
money, he maketh double restitution. And according to the law of the
nations, the thief is deprived of all he owns. Do so, but let him go
free. If a man buys a slave, and then discovers him to be a thief, the
transaction is void. Yet thou desirest to make one a slave whom thou
chargest with being a thief. I suspect thee of wanting to keep him in
thy power for illicit purposes, and in this lustfulness thou resemblest
Pharaoh. Also thou art like Pharaoh in that thou makest a promise and
keepest it not. Thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring thy youngest
brother down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him. Dost thou call
this setting thine eyes upon him? If thou didst desire nothing beside a
slave, then wouldst thou surely accept our offer to serve thee as
bondmen instead of Benjamin. Reuben is older than he, and I exceed him
in strength. It cannot but be as I say, thou hast a lustful purpose in
mind with our brother.

"Therefore let these words of mine which I am about to speak find
entrance into thy heart: For the sake of the grandmother of this lad
were Pharaoh and his house stricken with sore plagues, because he
detained her in his palace a single night against her will. His mother
died a premature death, by reason of a curse which his father uttered in
inconsiderate haste. Take heed, then, that this man's curse strike thee
not and slay thee. Two of us destroyed the whole of a city on account of
one woman, how much more would we do it for the sake of a man, and that
man the beloved of the Lord, in whose allotment it is appointed that God
shall dwell!

"If I but utter a sound, death-dealing pestilence will stalk through the
land as far as No. In this land Pharaoh is the first, and thou art the
second after him, but in our land my father is the first, and I am the
second. If thou wilt not comply with our demand, I will draw my sword,
and hew thee down first, and then Pharaoh."

When Judah gave utterance to this threat, Joseph made a sign, and
Manasseh stamped his foot on the ground so that the whole palace shook.
Judah said, "Only one belonging to our family can stamp thus!" and
intimidated by this display of great strength, he moderated his tone and
manner. "From the very beginning," he continued to speak, "thou didst
resort to all sorts of pretexts in order to embarrass us. The
inhabitants of many countries came down into Egypt to buy corn, but none
of them didst thou ask questions about their family relations. In sooth,
we did not come hither to seek thy daughter in marriage, or peradventure
thou desirest an alliance with our sister? Nevertheless we gave thee an
answer unto all thy questions."

Joseph replied: "Verily, thou canst talk glibly! Is there another
babbler like thee among thy brethren? Why dost thou speak so much, while
thy brethren that are older than thou, Reuben, Simon, and Levi, stand by
silent?"

Judah: "None of my brethren has so much at stake as I have, if Benjamin
returns not to his father. I was a surety to my father for him, saying,
If I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear
the blame forever, in this world and in the world to come.

The other brethren withheld themselves intentionally from taking part in
the dispute between Judah and Joseph, saying, "Kings are carrying on a
dispute, and it is not seemly for us to interfere between them." Even
the angels descended from heaven to earth to be spectators of the combat
between Joseph the bull and Judah the lion, and they said, "It lies in
the natural course of things that the bull should fear the lion, but
here the two are engaged in equal, furious combat."

In reply to Judah, when he explained that his great interest in
Benjamin's safety was due to the pledge he had given to his father,
Joseph spoke: "Why wast thou not a surety for thy other brother, when ye
sold him for twenty pieces of silver? Then thou didst not regard the
sorrow thou wast inflicting upon thy father, but thou didst say, A wild
beast hath devoured Joseph. And yet Joseph had done no evil, while this
Benjamin has committed theft. Therefore, go up and say unto thy father,
The rope hath followed after the water bucket."

These words had such an effect upon Judah that he broke out in sobs, and
cried aloud, "How shall I go up to my father, and the lad be not with
me?" His outcry reached to a distance of four hundred parasangs, and
when Hushim the son of Dan heard it in Canaan, he jumped into Egypt with
a single leap and joined his voice with Judah's, and the whole land was
on the point of collapsing from the great noise they produced. Joseph's
valiant men lost their teeth, and the cities of Pithom and Raamses were
destroyed, and they remained in ruins until the Israelites built them up
again under taskmasters. Also Judah's brethren, who had kept quiet up to
that moment, fell into a rage, and stamped on the ground with their feet
until it looked as though deep furrows had been torn in it by a
ploughshare. And Judah addressed his brethren, "Be brave, demean
yourselves as men, and let each one of you show his heroism, for the
circumstances demand that we do our best."

Then they resolved to destroy Mizraim, the city of Egypt, and Judah
said, "I will raise my voice, and with it destroy Egypt."

Reuben: "I will raise my arm, and crush it out of existence."

Simon: "I will raise my hand, and lay waste its palaces."

Levi: "I will draw my sword, and slay the inhabitants of Egypt."

Issachar: "I will make the land like unto Sodom."

Zebulon: "Like unto Gomorrah will I render it."

Dan: "I will reduce it to a desert."

Then Judah's towering rage began to show signs of breaking out: his
right eye shed tears of blood; the hair above his heart grew so stiff
that it pierced and rent the five garments in which he was clothed; and
he took brass rods, bit them with his teeth, and spat them out as fine
powder. When Joseph observed these signs, fear befell him, and in order
to show that he, too, was a man of extraordinary strength, he pushed
with his foot against the marble pedestal upon which he sat, and it
broke into splinters. Judah exclaimed, "This one is a hero equal to
myself!" Then he tried to draw his sword from its scabbard in order to
slay Joseph, but the weapon could not be made to budge, and Judah was
convinced thereby that his adversary was a God-fearing man, and he
addressed himself to the task of begging him to let Benjamin go free,
but he remained inexorable.

Judah then said: "What shall we say unto our father, when he seeth that
our brother is not with us, and he will grieve over him?"

Joseph: "Say that the rope hath followed after the water bucket."

Judah: "Thou art a king, why dost thou speak in this wise, counselling a
falsehood? Woe unto the king that is like thee!"

Joseph: "Is there a greater falsehood than that ye spake concerning your
brother Joseph, whom you sold to the Midianites for twenty pieces of
silver, telling your father, An evil beast bath devoured him?"

Judah: "The fire of Shechem burneth in my heart, now will I burn all thy
land with fire."

Joseph: "Surely, the fire kindled to burn Tamar, thy daughter-in-law,
who did kill thy sons, will extinguish the fire of Shechem."

Judah: "If I pluck out a single hair from my body, I will fill the whole
of Egypt with its blood."

Joseph: "Such is it your custom to do; thus ye did unto your brother
whom you sold, and then you dipped his coat in blood, brought it to your
father, and said, An evil beast hath devoured him, and here is his
blood."

When Judah heard this, he was exceedingly wroth, and he took a stone
weighing four hundred shekels that was before him, cast it toward heaven
with one hand, caught it with his left hand, then sat upon it, and the
stone turned into dust. At the command of Joseph, Manasseh did likewise
with another stone, and Joseph said to Judah: "Strength hath not been
given to you alone, we also are powerful men. Why, then, will ye all
boast before us?" Then Judah sent Naphtali forth, saying, "Go and count
all the streets of the city of Egypt and come and tell me the number,"
but Simon interposed, saying, "Let not this thing trouble you, I will go
to the mount, and take up one huge stone from the mount, throw it over
the whole of Mizraim, the city of Egypt, and kill all therein."

Hearing all these words, which they spake aloud, because they did not
know that he understood Hebrew, Joseph bade his son Manasseh make haste
and gather together all the inhabitants of Egypt, and all the valiant
men, and let them come to him on horseback and afoot. Meantime Naphtali
had gone quickly to execute Judah's bidding, for he was as swift as the
nimble hart, he could run across a field of corn without breaking an
ear. And he returned and reported that the city of Egypt was divided
into twelve quarters. Judah bade his brethren destroy the city; he
himself undertook to raze three quarters, and he assigned the nine
remaining quarters to the others, one quarter to each.

In the meantime Manasseh had assembled a great army, five hundred
mounted men and ten thousand on foot, among them four hundred valiant
heroes, who could fight without spear or sword, using only their strong,
unarmed hands. To inspire his brethren with more terror, Joseph ordered
them to make a loud noise with all sorts of instruments, and their
appearance and the hubbub they produced did, indeed, cause fear to fall
upon some of the brethren of Joseph. Judah, however, called to them,
"Why are you terrified, seeing that God grants us His mercy?" He drew
his sword, and uttered a wild cry, which threw all the people into
consternation, and in their disordered flight many fell over each other
and perished, and Judah and his brethren followed after the fleeing
people as far as the house of Pharaoh. Returning to Joseph, Judah again
broke out in loud roars, and the reverberations caused by his cries were
so mighty that all the city walls in Egypt and in Goshen fell in ruins,
the pregnant women brought forth untimely births, and Pharaoh was flung
from his throne. Judah's cries were heard at a great distance, as far
off as Succoth.

When Pharaoh learnt the reason of the mighty uproar, he sent word to
Joseph that he would have to concede the demands of the Hebrews, else
the land would suffer destruction. "Thou canst take thy choice," were
the words of Pharaoh, "between me and the Hebrews, between Egypt and the
land of the Hebrews. If thou wilt not heed my command, then leave me and
go with them into their land."

### JOSEPH MAKES HIMSELF KNOWN

Seeing that his brethren were, indeed, on the point of destroying Egypt,
Joseph resolved to make himself known to them, and he cast around for a
proper opening, which would lead naturally to his announcement. At his
behest, Manasseh laid his hand upon Judah's shoulder, and his touch
allayed Judah's fury, for he noticed that he was in contact with a
kinsman of his, because such strength existed in no other family. Then
Joseph addressed Judah gently, saying: "I should like to know who
advised him to steal the cup. Could it have been one of you?" Benjamin
replied: "Neither did they counsel theft, nor did I touch the cup."
"Take an oath upon it," demanded Joseph, and Benjamin complied with his
brother's request: "I swear that I did not touch the cup! As true as my
brother Joseph is separated from me; as true as I had nothing to do with
the darts that my brethren threw at him; as true as I was not one of
those to take off his coat; as true as I had no part in the transaction
by which he was given over to the Ishmaelites; as true as I did not help
the others dip his coat in blood; so true is my oath, that they did not
counsel theft, and that I did not commit theft."

Joseph: "How can I know that this oath of thine taken upon thy brother's
fate is true?"

Benjamin: "From the names of my ten sons, which I gave them in memory of
my brother's life and trials, thou canst see how dearly I loved him. I
pray thee, therefore, do not bring down my father with sorrow to the
grave."

Hearing these words of abiding love, Joseph could refrain himself no
longer. He could not but make himself known unto his brethren. He spake
these words to them: "Ye said the brother of this lad was dead. Did you
yourselves see him dead before you?" They answered, "Yes!"

Joseph: "Did you stand beside his grave?"

The brethren: "Yes!"

Joseph: "Did you throw clods of earth upon his corpse?"

The brethren: "No."

Then Joseph reflected, saying to himself: "My brethren are as pious as
aforetime, and they speak no lies. They said I was dead, because when
they abandoned me, I was poor, and 'a poor man is like unto a dead man;'
they stood beside my grave, that is the pit into which they cast me; but
they did not say that they had shovelled earth upon me, for that would
have been a falsehood."

Turning to his brethren, he said: "Ye lie when ye say that your brother
is dead. He is not dead. You sold him, and I did buy him. I shall call
him, and set him before your eyes," and he began to call, "Joseph, son
of Jacob, come hither! Joseph, son of Jacob, come hither! Speak to thy
brethren who did sell thee." The others turned their eyes hither and
thither, to the four corners of the house, until Joseph called to them:
"Why look ye here and there? Behold, I am Joseph your brother! "Their
souls fled away from them, and they could make no answer, but God
permitted a miracle to happen, and their souls came back to them.

Joseph continued, "Ye see it with your own eyes, and also my brother
Benjamin seeth it with his eyes, that I speak with you in Hebrew, and I
am truly your brother." But they would not believe him. Not only had he
been transformed from a smooth-faced youth into a bearded man since they
had abandoned him, but also the forsaken youth now stood before them the
ruler of Egypt. Therefore Joseph bared his body and showed them that he
belonged to the descendants of Abraham.

Abashed they stood there, and in their rage they desired to slay Joseph
as the author of their shame and their suffering. But an angel appeared
and flung them to the four corners of the house. Judah raised so loud an
outcry that the walls of the city of Egypt tumbled down, the women
brought forth untimely births, Joseph and Pharaoh both rolled down off
their thrones, and Joseph's three hundred heroes lost their teeth, and
their heads remained forever immobile, facing backward, as they had
turned them to discover the cause of the tumult. Yet the brethren did
not venture to approach close to Joseph, they were too greatly ashamed
of their behavior toward their brother. He sought to calm them, saying,
"Now be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither,
for God did send me before you to preserve life."

Even such kind words of exhortation did not banish their fear, and
Joseph continued to speak, "As little as I harbor vengeful thoughts in
my heart against Benjamin, so little do I harbor them against you."And
still his brethren were ill at case, and Joseph went on, "Think you that
it is possible for me to inflict harm upon you? If the smoke of ten
candles could not extinguish one, how can one extinguish ten?"

At last the brethren were soothed, and they went up to Joseph, who knew
each by name, and, weeping, he embraced and kissed them all in turn. The
reason why he wept was that his prophetic spirit showed him the
descendants of his brethren enslaved by the nations. Especially did he
weep upon Benjamin's neck, because he foresaw the destruction decreed
for the two Temples to be situated in the allotment of Benjamin. And
Benjamin also wept upon Joseph's neck, for the sanctuary at Shiloh, in
the territory of Joseph which was likewise doomed to destruction.

Pharaoh was well pleased with the report of the reconciliation between
Joseph and the Hebrews, for he had feared that their dissensions might
cause the ruin of Egypt, and he sent his servants to Joseph, that they
take part in his joy. Also he sent word to Joseph that it would please
him well if his brethren took up their abode in Egypt, and he promised
to assign the best parts of the land to them for their dwelling-place.

Not all the servants of Pharaoh were in agreement with their master
concerning this invitation to the Hebrews. Many among them were
disquieted, saying, "If one of the sons of Jacob came hither, and he was
advanced to a high position over our heads, what evil will happen to us
when ten more come hither?"

Joseph gave all his brethren two changes of raiment, one for use on the
ordinary days of the week and one for use on the Sabbath, for, when the
cup was found with Benjamin, they had rent their clothes, and Joseph
would not have his brethren go about in torn garments. But to Benjamin
he gave five changes of raiment, though not in order to distinguish him
above his brethren. Joseph remembered only too well what mischief his
father had caused by giving him the coat of many colors, thereby
arousing the envy of his brethren. He desired only to intimate that
Mordecai, a descendant of Benjamin, would once be arrayed in five royal
garments.

Joseph presented his brethren, apparelled in their gold and silver
embroidered clothes, before Pharaoh, who was well pleased to become
acquainted with them when he saw that they were men of heroic stature
and handsome appearance. He gave them wagons, to bring their families
down into Egypt, but as they were ornamented with images of idols, Judah
burnt them, and Joseph replaced them with eleven other wagons, among
them the one he had ridden in at his accession to office, to view the
land of Egypt. This was to be used by his father on his journey to
Egypt. For each of his brothers' children, he sent raiments, and also
one hundred pieces of silver for each, but for each of the children of
Benjamin he sent ten changes of raiment. And for the wives of his
brethren he gave them rich garments of state, such as were worn by the
wives of the Pharaohs, and also ointments and aromatic spices. To his
sister Dinah he sent silver and gold embroidered clothes, and myrrh,
aloes, and other perfumes, and such presents he gave also to the wife
and the daughters-in-law of Benjamin. For themselves and for their wives
the brethren received all sorts of precious stones and jewelled
ornaments, like those that are worn by the Egyptian nobility.

Joseph accompanied his eleven brethren to the frontier, and there he
took leave of them with the wish that they and all their families come
down to Egypt, and he enjoined upon them, besides, three maxims to be
observed by travellers: Do not take too large steps; do not discuss
Halakic subjects, that you lose not your way; and enter the city at the
latest with the going down of the sun.

### JACOB RECEIVES THE GLAD TIDINGS

In blithe spirits the sons of Jacob journeyed up to the land of Canaan,
but when they reached the boundary line, they said to one another, "How
shall we do? If we appear before our father and tell him that Joseph is
alive, he will be greatly frightened, and he will not be inclined to
believe us." Besides, Joseph's last injunction to them had been to take
heed and not startle their father with the tidings of joy.

On coming close to their habitation, they caught sight of Serah, the
daughter of Asher, a very beautiful maiden, and very wise, who was
skilled in playing upon the harp. They summoned her unto them and gave
her a harp, and bade her play before Jacob and sing that which they
should tell her. She sat down before Jacob, and, with an agreeable
melody, she sang the following words, accompanying herself upon the
harp: "Joseph, my uncle, liveth, he ruleth over the whole of Egypt, he
is not dead!" She repeated these words several times, and Jacob grew
more and more pleasurably excited. His joy awakened the holy spirit in
him, and he knew that she spoke the truth. The spirit of prophecy never
visits a seer when he is in a state of lassitude or in a state of grief;
it comes only together with joy. All the years of Joseph's separation
from him Jacob had had no prophetic visions, because he was always sad,
and only when Serah's words reawakened the feeling of happiness in his
heart, the prophetic spirit again took possession of him. Jacob rewarded
her therefor with the words, "My daughter, may death never have power
over thee, for thou didst revive my spirit." And so it was. Serah did
not die, she entered Paradise alive. At his bidding, she repeated the
words she had sung again and again, and they gave Jacob great joy and
delight, so that the holy spirit waxed stronger and stronger within him.

While he was sitting thus in converse with Serah, his sons appeared
arrayed in all their magnificence, and with all the presents that Joseph
had given them, and they spake to Jacob, saying: "Glad tidings! Joseph
our brother liveth! He is ruler over the whole land of Egypt, and he
sends thee a message of joy." At first Jacob would not believe them, but
when they opened their packs, and showed him the presents Joseph had
sent to all, he could not doubt the truth of their words any longer.

Joseph had had a premonition that his father would refuse to give his
brethren credence, because they had tried to deceive him before, and "it
is the punishment of the liar that his words are not believed even when
he speaks the truth." He had therefore said to them, "If my father will
not believe your words, tell him that when I took leave of him, to see
whether it was well with you, he had been teaching me the law of the
heifer whose neck is broken in the valley." When they repeated this,
every last vestige of Jacob's doubt disappeared, and he said: "Great is
the steadfastness of my son Joseph. In spite of all his sufferings he
has remained constant in his piety. Yea, great are the benefits that the
Lord hath conferred upon me. He saved me from the hands of Esau, and
from the hands of Laban, and from the Canaanites who pursued after me. I
have tasted many joys, and I hope to see more, but never did I hope to
set eyes upon Joseph again, and now I shall go down to him and behold
him before my death."

Then Jacob and the members of his family put on the clothes Joseph had
sent, among them a turban for Jacob, and they made all preparations to
journey down into Egypt and dwell there with Joseph and his family.
Hearing of his good fortune, the kings and the grandees of Canaan came
to wait upon Jacob and express sympathy with him in his joy, and he
prepared a three days' banquet for them.

Jacob, however, would not go down into Egypt without first inquiring
whether it was the will of God that he should leave the Holy Land. He
said, "How can I leave the land of my fathers, the land of my birth, the
land in which the Shekinah dwells, and go into an unclean land,
inhabited by slaves of the sons of Ham, a land wherein there is no fear
of God?" Then he brought sacrifices in honor of God, in the expectation
that a Divine vision would descend upon him and instruct him whether to
go down into Egypt or have Joseph come up to Canaan. He feared the
sojourn in Egypt, for he remembered the vision he had had at Beth-el on
leaving his father's house, and he said to God: "I resemble my father.
As he was greedy in filling his maw, so am I, and therefore I would go
down into Egypt in consequence of the famine. As my father preferred one
son to the other, so had I a favorite son, and therefore I would go down
into Egypt to see Joseph. But in this I do not resemble my father, he
had only himself to provide for, and my house consists of seventy souls,
and therefore am I compelled to go down into Egypt. The blessing which
my father gave me was not fulfilled in me, but in my son Joseph, whom
peoples serve, and before whom nations bow down."

Then the Shekinah addressed Jacob, calling his name twice in token of
love, and bidding him not to fear the Egyptian slavery foretold for the
descendants of Abraham, for God would have pity upon the suffering of
his children and deliver them from bondage. God furthermore said, "I
will go down into Egypt with thee," and the Shekinah accompanied Jacob
thither, bringing the number of the company with which he entered Egypt
up to seventy. But as Jacob entertained fears that his descendants would
stay there forever, God gave him the assurance that He would lead him
forth together with all the pious that were like unto him. And God also
told Jacob that Joseph had remained steadfast in his piety even in
Egypt, and he might dismiss all doubts from his mind on this score, for
it was his anxiety on this account that had induced Jacob to consider
going down into Egypt; he wanted only to make sure of Joseph's
faithfulness, and then return home, but God commanded him to go thither
and remain there.

Before Jacob left Canaan, he went to Beer-sheba, to hew down the cedars
that Abraham had planted there, and take them with him to Egypt. For
centuries these cedar trees remained in the possession of his
descendants; they carried them with them when they left Egypt, and they
used them in building the Tabernacle.

Although Joseph had put wagons at the disposal of his brethren for the
removal of his family from Canaan to Egypt, they yet carried Jacob upon
their arms, for which purpose they divided themselves into three
divisions, one division after the other assuming the burden. As a reward
for their filial devotion, God redeemed their descendants from Egypt.

Judah was sent on ahead by his father, to erect a dwelling in Goshen,
and also a Bet ha-Midrash, that Jacob might set about instructing his
sons at once after his arrival. He charged Judah with this honorable
task in order to compensate him for a wrong he had done him. All the
years of Joseph's absence he had suspected Judah of having made away
with Rachel's son. How little the suspicion was justified he realized
now when Judah in particular had been assiduous in securing the safety
of Benjamin, the other son of Rachel. Jacob therefore said to Judah:
"Thou hast done a pious, God-bidden deed, and hast shown thyself to be a
man capable of carrying on negotiations with Joseph. Complete the work
thou hast begun! Go to Goshen, and together with Joseph prepare all
things for our coming. Indeed," continued Jacob, "thou wast the cause of
our going down into Egypt, for it was at thy suggestion that Joseph was
sold as a slave, and, also, through thy descendants Israel will be led
forth out of Egypt."

When Joseph was informed of the approach of his father, he rejoiced
exceedingly, chiefly because his coming would stop the talk of the
Egyptians, who were constantly referring to him as the slave that had
dominion over them. "Now," thought Joseph, "they will see my father and
my brethren, and they will be convinced that I am a free-born man, of
noble stock."

In his joy in anticipation of seeing his father, Joseph made ready his
chariot with his own hands, without waiting for his servants to minister
to him, and this loving action redounded later to the benefit of the
Israelites, for it rendered of none effect Pharaoh's zeal in making
ready his chariot himself, with his own hands, to pursue after the
Israelites.

### JACOB ARRIVES IN EGYPT

When the Egyptian nobles observed their viceroy completing his
preparations to meet his father, they did the same. Indeed, Joseph had
issued a proclamation throughout the land, threatening with death all
that did not go forth to meet Jacob. The procession that accompanied him
was composed of countless men, arrayed in byssus and purple, and
marching to the sound of all sorts of musical instruments. Even the
women of Egypt had a part in the reception ceremonies. They ascended to
the roofs of the houses and the walls of the cities, ready to greet
Jacob with the music of cymbals and timbrels.

Joseph wore the royal crown upon his head, Pharaoh had yielded it to him
for the occasion. He descended from his chariot when he was at a
distance of about fifty ells from his father, and walked the rest of the
way on foot, and his example was followed by the princes and nobles of
Egypt. When Jacob caught sight of the approaching procession, he was
rejoiced, and even before he recognized Joseph, he bowed down before
him, but for permitting his father to show him this mark of honor,
punishment was visited upon Joseph. He died an untimely death, before
the years of life assigned to him had elapsed.

That no harm befall Jacob from a too sudden meeting with him, Joseph
sent his oldest son ahead with five horses, the second son following
close after him in the same way. As each son approached, Jacob thought
he beheld Joseph, and so he was prepared gradually to see him face to
face.

Meantime Jacob had espied, from where he was seated, a man in royal
robes among the Egyptians, a crown upon his head, and a purple mantle
over his shoulders, and he asked Judah who it might be. When he was told
that it was Joseph, his joy was great over the high dignity attained by
his son.

By this time Joseph had come close to his father, and he bowed himself
before him down to the earth, and all the people with him likewise
prostrated themselves. Then Joseph fell upon his father's neck, and he
wept bitterly. He was particularly grieved that he had permitted his
father to bow down before him but a little while before without
hindering it. At the very moment when Joseph embraced his father, Jacob
was reciting the Shema', and he did not allow himself to be interrupted
in his prayer, but then he said, "When they brought me the report of the
death of Joseph, I thought I was doomed to double death--that I should
lose this world and the world to come as well. The Lord had promised to
make me the ancestor of twelve tribes, and as the death of my son
rendered it impossible that this promise should be realized, I feared I
had incurred the doom by my own sins, and as a sinner I could not but
expect to forfeit the future world, too. But now that I have beheld thee
alive, I know that my death will be only for the world here below."

Such was the manner of Jacob's arrival in Egypt. He came with his whole
family, sixty-nine persons they were in all, but the number was raised
to seventy by the birth of Jochebed, afterward the mother of Moses,
which took place when the cavalcade had advanced to the space between
the one and the other city wall. All the males in his family were
married men; even Pallu and Hezron, the latter of whom was but one year
old at the time of their migration, and the former but two years, had
the wives with them that had been chosen for them by their parents. In
general, all the sons and grandsons of Jacob had married young, some of
them had been fathers at the age of seven.

Joseph took some from among his brethren, and presented them to Pharaoh.
He chose the weakest of them, that the king might not be tempted to
retain them in his service as warriors. And as he did not desire his
family to live at close quarters with the Egyptians and perhaps
amalgamate with them, he introduced them as shepherds. The Egyptians
worshipped the constellation of the rain, and paid divine honors to
animals, and they kept aloof from shepherds. Pharaoh therefore was
inclined to grant Joseph's wish, to give them the pasture land of Goshen
for their sojourning place, the land that was theirs by right, for the
Pharaoh that took Sarah away from Abraham by force had given it to her
as her irrevocable possession.

In their conversation with Pharaoh the brethren of Joseph made it plain
to the Egyptian king that it was not their intention to remain in Egypt
forever, it was to be only a temporary dwelling-place.

Then Joseph set Jacob his father before Pharaoh, and when the king saw
him, he said to Og, who happened to be with him at that moment, "Seest
thou! Thou wast wont to call Abraham a sterile mule, and here is his
grandson with a family of seventy persons!" Og would not believe his own
eyes, he thought Abraham was standing before him, so close was the
resemblance between Jacob and his progenitor. Then Pharaoh asked about
Jacob's age, to find out whether he actually was Jacob, and not Abraham.
And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, "The days of the years of my pilgrimage are
an hundred and thirty years," using the word pilgrimage in reference to
life on earth, which the pious regard as a temporary sojourn in alien
lands. "Few and evil," he continued, "have been the days of the years of
my life. In my youth I had to flee to a strange land on account of my
brother Esau, and now, in my old age, I must again go to a strange land,
and my days have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of
my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage." These words sufficed to
convince Pharaoh and Og that the man standing before them was not
Abraham, but his grandson.

When Jacob uttered the words, "The days of the years of my pilgrimage
have been few and evil," God said to him: "Jacob, I saved thee out of
the hands of Esau and Laban, I restored Joseph unto thee, and made him
to be a king and a ruler, and yet thou speakest of few and evil days.
Because of thy ingratitude, thou wilt not attain unto the days of the
years of the life of thy fathers," and Jacob died at an age thirty-three
years less than his father Isaac's.

On going out from the presence of Pharaoh, Jacob blessed the king with
the words, "May the years still in store for me be given unto thee, and
may the Nile overflow its banks henceforth again and water the land."
His words were fulfilled. In order to show that the pious are a blessing
for the world, God caused the Nile to rise above its bed and fructify
the land of Egypt.

### JOSEPH'S KINDNESS AND GENEROSITY

Jacob and his family now settled in the land of Goshen, and Joseph
provided them with all things needful, not only with food and drink, but
also with clothing, and in his love and kindness he entertained his
father and his brethren daily at his own table. He banished the wrong
done to him by his brethren from his mind, and he besought his father to
pray to God for them, that He should forgive their great transgression.
Touched by this noble sign of love, Jacob cried out, "O Joseph, my
child, thou hast conquered the heart of thy father Jacob."

Joseph had other virtues, besides. The title "the God-fearing one,"
borne only by him, Abraham, Job, and Obadiah, he gained by reason of his
kindness of heart and his generosity. Whatever he gave his brethren, he
gave with a "good eye," a liberal spirit. If it was bread for food, it
was sure to be abundant enough, not only to satisfy the hunger of all,
but also for the children to crumble, as is their habit.

But Joseph was more than a helper to his family. As a shepherd pastures
his flock, so he provided for the whole world during the years of
famine. The people cursed Pharaoh, who kept the stores of corn in his
treasure chambers for his own use, and they blessed Joseph, who took
thought for the famishing, and sold grain to all that came. The wealth
which he acquired by these sales was lawful gain, for the prices were
raised, not by him, but by the Egyptians themselves. One part of his
possessions, consisting of gold and silver and precious stones, Joseph
buried in four different places, in the desert near the Red Sea, on the
banks of the Euphrates, and in two spots in the desert in the vicinity
of Persia and Media. Korah discovered one of the hiding-places, and the
Roman emperor Antoninus, the son of Severus, another. The other two will
never be found, because God has reserved the riches they hold for the
pious, to be enjoyed by them in the latter days, the days of the
Messiah. The remainder of Joseph's possessions he gave away, partly to
his brethren and their families, and partly to Pharaoh, who put them
into his treasury.

The wealth of the whole world flowed into Egypt at that time, and it
remained there until the exodus of the Israelites. They took it along,
leaving Egypt like a net without fish. The Israelites kept the treasure
until the time of Rehoboam, who was deprived of it by the Egyptian king
Shishak, and he in turn had to yield it to Zerah, the king of Ethiopia.
Once more it came into possession of the Jews when King Asa conquered
Zerah, but this time they held it for only a short while, for Asa
surrendered it to the Aramean king Ben-hadad, to induce him to break his
league with Baasha, the king of the Ten Tribes. The Ammonites, in turn,
captured it from Ben-hadad, only to lose it in their war with the Jews
under Jehoshaphat. Again it remained with the Jews, until the time of
King Ahaz, who sent it to Sennacherib as tribute money. Hezekiah won it
back, but Zedekiah, the last king of the Jews, lost it to the Chaldeans,
from whom it came to Persia, thence to the Greeks, and finally to the
Romans, and with the last it remained for all time.

The people were soon left without means to purchase the corn they
needed. In a short time they had to part with their cattle, and when the
money thus secured was spent, they sold their land to Joseph, and even
their persons. Many of them would cover themselves with clay and appear
before Joseph, and say to him, "O lord king, see me and see my
possessions!" And so Joseph bought all the land of Egypt, and the
inhabitants became his tenants, and they gave a fifth of their
ingatherings unto joseph.

The only class of the people permitted to remain in possession of their
land were the priests. Joseph owed them gratitude, for they had made it
possible for him to become the ruler over Egypt. The Egyptians had
hesitated to make him their viceroy, because they shrank from choosing a
man accused of adultery for so high an office. It was the priests that
made the suggestion to examine Joseph's torn garment, which his mistress
had submitted as evidence of his guilt, and see whether the rent was in
front or in back. If it was in back, it would show his innocence--he had
turned to flee, and his temptress had clutched him so that the garment
tore. But if the tear was in front, then it would be a proof of his
guilt--he had used violence with the woman, and she had torn the mantle
in her efforts to defend her honor. The angel Gabriel came and
transferred the rent from the fore part to the back, and the Egyptians
were convinced of Joseph's innocence, and their scruples about raising
him to the kingship were removed.

As soon as the Egyptians learnt of the advantageous position of the
priests, they all tried to prove themselves members of the caste. But
Joseph investigated the lists in the archives, and determined the estate
of every citizen.

The priests were favored in another way. Beside remaining in possession
of their land, they received daily portions from Pharaoh, wherefore God
said, "The priests that serve idols receive all they need every day, how
much more do the sons of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who are My priests,
deserve that I should give them what they need every day."

The rest of the inhabitants of Egypt, who had to part with their land,
were not permitted to remain in their native provinces. Joseph removed
them from their own cities, and settled them in others. His purpose
herein was to prevent the Egyptians from speaking of his brethren
derogatorily as "exiles the sons of exiles"; he made them all equally
aliens. For the same reason, God later, at the time of the going forth
of the Israelites from Egypt, caused all nations to change their
dwelling-places about, so that the Israelites could not be reproached
with having had to leave their home. And, finally, when Sermacherib
carried the Jews away from their land into exile, it also happened that
this king first mixed up the inhabitants of all the countries of the
world.

### JACOB'S LAST WISH

In return for the seventeen years that Jacob had devoted to the bringing
up of Joseph, he was granted seventeen years of sojourn with his
favorite son in peace and happiness. The wicked experience sorrow after
joy; the pious must suffer first, and then they are happy, for all's
well that ends well, and God permits the pious to spend the last years
of their lives in felicity.

When Jacob felt his end approach, he summoned Joseph to his bedside, and
he told him all there was in his heart. He called for Joseph rather than
one of his other sons, because he was the only one in a position to
execute his wishes.

Jacob said to Joseph: "If I have found grace in thy sight, bury me not,
I pray thee, in Egypt. Only for thy sake did I come down into Egypt, and
for thy sake I spoke, Now I can die. Do this for me as a true service of
love, and not because thou art afraid, or because decency demands it.
And when I sleep with my fathers, thou shalt bury me in their
burying-place. Carry me out of the land of idolatry, and bury me in the
land where God hath caused His Name to dwell, and put me to rest in the
place in which four husbands and wives are to be buried, I the last of
them."

Jacob desired not to be buried in Egypt for several reasons. He knew
that the soil of Egypt would once swarm with vermin, and it revolted him
to think of his corpse exposed to such uncleanness. He feared, moreover,
that his descendants might say, "Were Egypt not a holy land, our father
Jacob had never permitted himself to be buried there," and they might
encourage themselves with this argument to make choice of Egypt as a
permanent dwelling-place. Also, if his grave were there, the Egyptians
might resort to it when the ten plagues came upon them, and if he were
induced to pray for them to God, he would be advocating the cause of the
Lord's enemies. If, on the other hand, he did not intercede for them,
the Name of God would be profaned among the heathen, who would say,
"Jacob is a useless saint!" Besides, it was possible that God might
consider him, the "scattered sheep" of Israel, as a sacrifice for the
Egyptians, and remit their punishment. From his knowledge of the people,
another fear was justified, that his grave would become an object of
idolatrous veneration, and the same punishment is appointed by God for
the idols worshipped as for the idolaters that worship them.

If Jacob had good reasons for not wanting his body to rest in the soil
of Egypt, he had equally good reasons for wanting it to rest in the Holy
Land. In the Messianic time, when the dead will rise, those buried in
Palestine will awaken to new life without delay, while those buried
elsewhere will first have to roll from land to land through the earth,
hollowed out for the purpose, until they reach the Holy Land, and only
then will their resurrection take place. But over and beyond this, Jacob
had an especial reason for desiring to have his body interred in
Palestine. God had said to him at Beth-el, "The land whereon thou liest,
to thee will I give it, and to thy seed," and hence he made every
endeavor to "lie" in the Holy Land, to make sure it would belong to him
and his descendants. Nevertheless he bade Joseph strew some Egyptian
earth over his dead body.

Jacob expressed these his last wishes three times. Such is the
requirement of good breeding in preferring a request.

In the last period of Jacob's life, one can see how true it is that
"even a king depends upon favors in a strange land." Jacob, the man for
the sake of whose merits the whole world was created, for the sake of
whom Abraham was delivered from the fiery furnace, had to ask services
of others while he was among strangers, and when Joseph promised to do
his bidding, he bowed himself before his own son, for it is a true
saying, "Bow before the fox in his day," the day of his power.

He was not satisfied with a simple promise from Joseph, that he would do
his wish; he insisted upon his taking an oath by the sign of the
covenant of Abraham, putting a hand under his thigh in accordance with
the ceremony customary among the Patriarchs! But Joseph said: "Thou
treatest me like a slave. With me thou hast no need to require an oath.
Thy command sufficeth." Jacob, however, urged him, saying: "I fear
Pharaoh may command thee to bury me in the sepulchre with the kings of
Egypt. I insist that thou takest an oath, and then I will be at peace."
Joseph gave in, though he would not submit to the ceremony that Eliezer
had used to confirm the oath he took at the request of his master
Abraham. The slave acted in accordance with the rules of slavery, the
free man acted in accordance with the dictates of freedom. And in a son
that thing would have been unseemly which was becoming in a slave.

When Joseph swore to bury his father in Palestine, he added the words,
"As thou commandest me to do, so also will I beg my brethren, on my
death-bed, to fulfil my last wish and carry my body from Egypt to
Palestine."

Jacob, noticing the Shekinah over the bed's head, where she always rests
in a sick room, bowed himself upon the bed's head, saying, "I thank
thee, O Lord my God, that none who is unfit came forth from my bed, but
my bed was perfect." He was particularly grateful for the revelation God
had vouchsafed him concerning his first-born son Reuben, that he had
repented of his trespass against his father, and atoned for it by
penance. He was thus assured that all his sons were men worthy of being
the progenitors of the twelve tribes, and he was blessed with happiness
such as neither Abraham nor Isaac had known, for both of them had had
unworthy as well as worthy sons.

Until the time of Jacob death had always come upon men suddenly, and
snatched them away before they were warned of the imminent end by
sickness. Once Jacob spoke to God, saying, "O Lord of the world, a man
dies suddenly, and he is not laid low first by sickness, and he cannot
acquaint his children with his wishes regarding all he leaves behind.
But if a man first fell sick, and felt that his end were drawing nigh,
he would have time to set his house in order." And God said, "Verily,
thy request is sensible, and thou shalt be the first to profit by the
new dispensation," and so it happened that Jacob fell sick a little
while before his death.

His sickness troubled him grievously, for he had undergone much during
his life. He had worked day and night while he was with Laban, and his
conflicts with the angel and with Esau, though he came off victor from
both, had weakened him, and he was not in a condition to endure the
hardships of disease.

### THE BLESSING OF EPHRAIM AND MANASSEH

All the years of Jacob's sojourn in Egypt, Asenath, the wife of Joseph,
was his constant nurse. When she saw his end drawing nigh, she spoke to
Joseph: "I have heard that one who is blessed by a righteous man is as
though he had been blessed by the Shekinah. Therefore, bring thy sons
hither, that Jacob give them his blessing."

Though Joseph was a devoted and loving son to his father, he was not in
constant attendance upon him, because he wanted to avoid giving him the
opportunity of inquiring into the circumstances of his coming to Egypt.
He was apprehensive that Jacob might curse his sons and bring death upon
them, if he discovered the facts connected with their treacherous
dealings with Joseph. He took good care therefore never to be alone with
his father. But as he desired to be kept informed of his welfare, he
arranged a courier service between himself and Jacob.

Now when Joseph received the news of his father's having fallen sick,
through his messenger, as well as through Ephraim, whom Jacob was
instructing in the Torah, he hastened to the land of Goshen, taking his
two sons with him. He desired to have certainty upon five points: Would
his father bless his two sons, who were born in Egypt, and, if so, would
he appoint them to be heads of tribes? Would he assign the rights of the
first-born unto himself, and, if so, would he divest Reuben of such
rights altogether? And why had his father buried his mother Rachel by
the wayside, and not carried her body to the family tomb at Machpelah?

Jacob had also entertained doubts on five points, when he was about to
emigrate from Canaan to Egypt: He did not know whether his descendants
would lose themselves among the people of Egypt; whether he would die
there and be buried there; and whether he would be permitted to see
Joseph and see the sons of Joseph. God gave him the assurance, saying,
"I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will surely bring thee up
again after thy death, and thy descendants also, and Joseph shall put
his hand upon thine eyes." When the time approached for the fulfilment
of the Divine promise, God appeared unto Jacob, and He said, "I promised
to fulfil thy wish, and the time of fulfilment hath come."

The holy spirit made known to Jacob that Joseph was coming to him, and
he strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed in order to pay due
respect to the representative of the government. Though Joseph was his
son, he was also viceroy, and entitled to special marks of honor.
Besides, Jacob desired to make the impression of being a man in good
health. He wanted to avoid the possibility of having his blessing of
Joseph and Joseph's sons questioned as the act of an irresponsible
person.

He strengthened himself spiritually as well as physically, by prayer to
God, in which he besought Him to let the holy spirit descend upon him at
the time of his giving the blessing to the sons of Joseph.

When Joseph appeared in the company of his two sons, his father said to
him: "In all the seventeen years thou hast been visiting me, thou didst
never bring thy sons with thee, but now they have come, and I know the
reason. If I bless them, I shall act in opposition to the word of God,
who promised to make me the progenitor of twelve tribes, for if I adopt
them as my sons, there will be fourteen tribes. But if I do not bless
them, it will plunge thee in sorrow. So be it, I will bless them. But
think not I do it because thou didst support me all these years. There
is quite another reason. When I left my father's house to go to Haran, I
offered up a prayer at Beth-el, and I promised to give unto God the
tenth of all I owned. So far as my material possessions are concerned, I
kept my vow, but I could not give the tithe of my sons, because
according to the law I had to withdraw from the reckoning the four sons,
Reuben, Joseph, Dan, and Gad, that are the first-born children of their
mothers. When I returned, God again appeared unto me in Beth-el, and He
said, Be fruitful and multiply. But after this blessing no son was born
unto me except Benjamin alone, and it cannot be but that God meant
Manasseh and Ephraim when He spoke of 'a nation and a company of
nations.' If now I have found favor in thy sight, thy two sons Ephraim
and Manasseh, even as Reuben and Simon, shall be mine, and then I shall
be able to give a tenth part of my ten sons unto the Lord, and I shall
leave this world free from the sin of not keeping my vow to the Lord
concerning the tithe-giving."

Joseph consented to do his father's will, and Jacob tithed his sons,
consecrating Levi to the Holy One, and appointing him to be the chief of
his brethren. He enjoined his sons to have a care that there should
never fail them a son of Levi in the priestly succession. And it
happened that. of all the tribes Levi was the only one that never proved
faithless to the covenant of the fathers.

Thus Jacob adopted Manasseh and Ephraim to be his own sons, even as
Reuben and Simon were his sons. They were entitled like the others to a
portion in the Holy Land, and like the others they were to bear
standards on their journey through the desert.

Satisfied as to Jacob's intentions concerning his sons, Joseph asked his
father about his mother's burial-place, and Jacob spoke, saying: "As
thou livest, thy wish to see thy mother lying by my side in the grave
doth not exceed mine own. I had joy in life only as long as she was
alive, and her death was the heaviest blow that ever fell upon me."
Joseph questioned him: "Perhaps thou didst have to bury her in the way,
because she died during the rainy season, and thou couldst not carry her
body through the rain to our family sepulchre?" "No," replied Jacob,
"she died in the spring time, when the highways are clean and firm."
Joseph: "Grant me permission to take up her body now and place it in our
family burial-place." Jacob: "No, my son, that thou mayest not do. I was
unwilling to bury her in the way, but the Lord commanded it." The reason
of the command was that God knew that the Temple would be destroyed, and
Israel would be carried away into banishment, and the exiles would ask
the Patriarchs to intercede for them with God, but God would not hearken
unto them. On their way to the land of the stranger they would pass the
grave of Rachel, and they would throw themselves upon it, and beseech
their mother to make intercession for them with God. And Rachel would
pray to God in their behalf: "O Lord of the world, look upon my tears,
and have compassion upon my children. But if Thou wilt not take pity on
them, then indemnify me for the wrong done to me." Unto her prayer God
will hearken, and He will have mercy upon Israel. Therefore was Rachel
buried in the way.

Now Jacob desired to bless the sons of Joseph, but the holy spirit made
him to see Jeroboam, the descendant of Ephraim, and Jehu, the descendant
of Manasseh, how they would seduce Israel to idolatry, and the Shekinah
forsook him as he was about to lay his hands upon the heads of his
grandsons. He said to Joseph, "Is it possible that thou didst not marry
the mother of thy children according to the law?" Joseph thereupon
brought his wife Asenath to his father, and pointing to her marriage
contract, he said, "This one is my wife, whom I married as is proper,
with a marriage contract and due ceremony. I pray thee, my father, bless
my sons if only for the sake of this pious woman."

Jacob bade his grandsons approach close to him, and he kissed and
embraced them, in the hope that his joy in them would lure back the holy
spirit, but his hope was vain. Joseph concluded that the time was not
favorable for blessing, and he decided to go away until a more
propitious opportunity presented itself, first, however, proving to his
father that his sons had been initiated in the covenant of Abraham.

Outside of his father's chamber, alone with his sons, he threw himself
down before God and besought Him to show him mercy, and he bade his sons
do likewise, saying, "Be not content with your high station, for worldly
honors are but for a time. Entreat God to be merciful and let the
Shekinah descend upon my father, that he bless you both." Then spake God
to the holy spirit: "How long yet shall Joseph suffer? Reveal thyself
quickly, and enter into Jacob, that he may be able to bestow blessings."

In the words of Jacob, "Ephraim and Manasseh, even as Reuben and Simon,
shall be mine," Joseph had noticed his father's preference for his
younger son Ephraim. It made him very anxious about his older son's
birthright, and he was careful to put the two lads before his father in
such wise that Manasseh should stand opposite Jacob's right hand, and
Ephraim opposite his left hand. But Ephraim, on account of his modesty,
was destined for greater things than his older brother Manasseh, and God
bade the holy spirit prompt Jacob to give the birthright to Ephraim. Now
when Joseph observed his father put his right hand upon Ephraim's head,
he made an attempt to remove it unto Manasseh's head. But Jacob warded
him off, saying: "What, thou wouldst displace my hand against my will,
the hand that overcame the prince of the angel hosts, who is as large as
one-third of the world! I know things not known to thee--I know what
Reuben did to Bilhah, and what Judah did to Tamar. How much more do I
know things known to thee! Thinkest thou I know not what thy brethren
did to thee, because thou wouldst betray nothing whenever I asked thee?
I know it, Manasseh also shall become great, the judge Gideon shall
descend from him, but his younger brother will be the ancestor of
Joshua, who will bring the sun and the moon to a standstill, though they
have dominion over the whole earth from end to end." Thus did Jacob set
Ephraim the younger above Manasseh the older, and thus did it remain
unto all times. In the list of the generations, Manasseh comes after
Ephraim, and so it was in the allotment of the portions in the Holy
Land, and so it was in the placing of the camps and the standards of the
tribes, and in the dedication of the Tabernacle--everywhere Ephraim
preceded Manasseh.

The blessing bestowed upon his grandchildren by Jacob was as follows: "O
that it be the will of God that ye walk in the ways of the Lord like
unto my fathers Abraham and Isaac, and may the angel that hath redeemed
me from all evil give his aid unto Joshua and Gideon, and reveal himself
unto them. May your names be named on Israel, and like unto fishes may
you grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth, and as fishes are
protected by the water, so may you be protected by the merits of
Joseph."

The words "like unto fishes" were used by Jacob for the purpose of
intimating the manner of death awaiting the Ephraimites, the descendants
of Joseph. As fish are caught by their mouth, so the Ephraimites were in
later days to invite their doom by their peculiar lisp. At the same
time, Jacob's words contained the prophecy that Joshua the son of the
man Nun, the "fish," would lead Israel into the Holy Land. And in his
words lay still another prophecy, with reference to the sixty thousand
men children begot in the same night as Moses, all cast into the river
with him, and saved for the sake of his merits. The number of boys
thrown to the fishes in the river that night was equal to the number of
men in Israel upon the earth.

Ephraim received a special and separate blessing from his grandfather.
Jacob said to him, "Ephraim, my son, thou art the head of the Academy,
and in the days to come my most excellent and celebrated descendants
will be called Ephrati after thee."

Joseph received two gifts from his father. The first was Shechem, the
city that Jacob had defended, with sword and bow, against the
depredations of the Amorite kings when they tried to take revenge upon
his sons for the outrage committed there. And the second gift was the
garments made by God for Adam and passed from hand to hand, until they
came into the possession of Jacob. Shechem was his reward, because, with
his chastity, he stemmed the tide of immorality that burst loose in
Shechem first of all. Besides, he had a prior claim upon the city.
Shechem, son of Hamor, the master of the city, had given it to Dinah as
a present, and the wife of Joseph, Asenath, being the daughter of Dinah,
the city belonged to him by right.

Adam's clothes Jacob had received from Esau. He had not taken them from
his brother by force, but God had caused them to be given to him as a
reward for his good deeds. They had belonged to Nimrod. Once when the
mighty hunter caught Esau in his preserves, and forbade him to go on the
chase, they agreed to determine by combat what their privileges were.
Esau had taken counsel with Jacob, and he had advised him never to fight
with Nimrod while he was clothed in Adam's garments. The two now
wrestled with each other, and at the time Nimrod was not dressed in
Adam's clothes. The end was that he was slain by Esau. Thus the garments
worn by Adam fell into the hands of Esau, from him they passed into
Jacob's, and he bequeathed them to Joseph.

Jacob also taught Joseph three signs whereby to distinguish the true
redeemer, who should deliver Israel from the bondage of Egypt. He would
proclaim the Ineffable Name, appoint elders, and use the word Pakod in
addressing the people.

### THE BLESSING OF THE TWELVE TRIBES

When Joseph and his two sons left Jacob, his brethren, envious of the
bountiful blessings bestowed upon the three, said, "The whole world
loveth a favorite of fortune, and our father hath blessed Joseph thus
because he is a ruler of men." Then spoke Jacob: "They that seek the
Lord shall not want any good thing. I have blessings enough for all."

Jacob summoned his sons from the land of Egypt, and bade them come to
him at Raamses, first, however, commanding them to make themselves
clean, that the blessing he was about to bestow might attach itself to
them. Another one of his commands was that they were to establish an
Academy, by the members of which they were to be governed.

When his sons were brought into his presence by the angels, Jacob spoke,
saying, "Take heed that no dissensions spring up among you, for union is
the first condition of Israel's redemption," and he was on the point of
revealing the great secret to them concerning the end of time, but while
they were standing around the golden bed whereon their father lay, the
Shekinah visited him for a moment and departed as quickly, and with her
departed also all trace of the knowledge of the great mystery from the
mind of Jacob. He had the same experience as his own father Isaac, who
also had loss of memory inflicted upon him by God, to prevent him from
revealing the secret at the end of time to Esau, when he summoned him to
receive his blessing.

The accident made Jacob apprehensive that his sons were not pious enough
to be considered worthy of the revelation concerning the Messianic era,
and he said to them, "Ishmael and the sons of Keturah were the blemished
among the issue of my grandfather Abraham; my father Isaac begot a
blemished issue in Esau, and I fear now that among you, too, there is
one that harbors the intention to serve idols." The twelve men spake,
and said: "Hear, O Israel, our father, the Eternal our God is the One
Only God. As thy heart is one and united in avouching the Holy One,
blessed be He, to be thy God, so also are our hearts one and united in
avouching Him." Whereto Jacob responded, "Praised be the Name of the
glory of His majesty forever and ever!" And although the whole mystery
of the Messianic time was not communicated to the sons of Jacob, yet the
blessing of each contained some reference to the events of the future.

These were the words addressed by Jacob to his oldest son: "Reuben, thou
art my first-born, my might, and the beginning of my strength! Thy
portion should have been three crowns. Thou shouldst have had the double
heritage of thy primogeniture, and the priestly dignity, and the royal
power. But by reason of thy sin, the birthright is conferred upon
Joseph, kingship upon Judah, and the priesthood upon Levi. My son, I
know no healing remedy for thee, but the man Moses, who will ascend to
God, he will make thee whole, and God will forgive thy sin. I bless
thee--may thy descendants be heroes in the Torah and heroes in war.
Though thou must lose thy birthright, yet wilt thou be the first to
enter into possession of thy allotment in the Holy Land, and in thy
territory shall be the first of the cities of refuge, and always shall
thy name stand first in the list of the families of the tribes. Yea,
thou shalt also be the first whose heritage will be seized by the enemy,
and the first to be carried away into the lands of exile."

After Reuben had had his "ears pulled" thus, he retired, and Jacob
called his sons Simon and Levi to his side, and he addressed them in
these words: "Brethren ye were of Dinah, but not of Joseph, whom you
sold into slavery. The weapons of violence wherewith ye smote Shechem
were stolen weapons, for it was not seemly for you to draw the sword.
That was Esau's portion. To him was it said, By thy sword shalt thou
live. Into the council of the tribe of Simon my soul will not come when
they foregather at Shittim to do vicious deeds, and my glory will not be
united unto the assembly of Korah, the descendants of Levi. In their
anger Simon and Levi slew the prince of Shechem, and in their self-will
they sold Joseph the bull into slavery. Accursed was the city of Shechem
when they entered to destroy it. If they remain united, no ruler will be
able to stand up before them, no war will prosper against them.
Therefore will I divide and scatter their possession among the
possessions of the other tribes. The descendants of Simon will many of
them be poor men, who will wander from tribe to tribe and beg for bread,
and also Levi's tribe will gather its tithes and gifts from all the
others."

The words of Jacob, "I will divide them in Jacob," spoken of Simon and
Levi, were fulfilled on Simon in particular. When twenty-four thousand
of Simon fell at Shittim, the widows they left behind married husbands
of all the other tribes. Nevertheless Jacob did not dismiss Simon and
Levi without blessing them; the tribe of Simon was to bring forth the
teachers and the beadles needed by all Israel, and Levi, the scholars
that would expound the Torah and render decisions according to its
teachings.

When the remaining sons of Jacob heard the rebukes dealt out by their
father to these three, they feared to hear like reproaches, and they
tried to slip away from his presence. Especially Judah was alarmed, that
his father might taunt him with his trespass touching Tamar. But Jacob
spoke thus to him: "Judah, thou dost deserve thy name. Thy mother called
thee Jehudah, because she gave praise to God at thy birth, and so shall
thy brethren praise thee, and they all will call themselves by thy name.
And as thou didst confess thy sin openly, so also thy descendants,
Achan, David, and Manasseh, will make public avowal of their sins, and
the Lord will hear their prayer. Thy hands will send darts after the
fleeing foe, and thy father's sons shall pay thee respect. Thou hast the
impudence of a dog and the bravery of a lion. Thou didst save Joseph
from death, and Tamar and her two sons from the flames. No people and no
kingdom will be able to stand up against thee. Rulers shall not cease
from the house of Judah, nor teachers of the law from his posterity,
until his descendant Messiah come, and the obedience of all peoples be
unto him. How glorious is Messiah of the House of Judah! His loins
girded, he will go out to do battle with his enemies. No king and no
ruler will prevail against him. The mountains will be dyed red with
their blood, and the garments of Messiah will be like the garments of
him that presseth wine. The eyes of Messiah will be clearer than pure
wine, for they will never behold unchastity and bloodshed; and his teeth
will be whiter than milk, for never will they bite aught that is taken
by violence."

Though Issachar was the older, Zebulon came next to be blessed, as a
reward for the sacrifice he had made for his brother's sake, for when
Issachar chose the study of the Torah as his vocation, Zebulon decided
to devote himself to business and support his brother with the profits
of his trade, that he might give himself up to the law undisturbed. His
blessing was that he would conquer the seacoast as far as Zidon.

"Issachar," said Jacob, "will take upon himself the burden of the study
of the Torah, and all the other tribes will come to him and ask him to
decide their doubts on legal questions, and his descendants will be the
members of the Sanhedrin and the scholars that will occupy themselves
with fixing the calendar." Jacob blessed Issachar also with the
blessing, that the fruits of his land should be exceedingly large, and
this brought a heavenly as well as an earthly profit in its train, for
when the heathen to whom the fruits were sold marvelled thereat, the
Jewish merchants explained that their extraordinary size was due to the
merits of the tribe of Issachar, whom God rewarded for their devotion to
the Torah, and thus many of the heathen were induced to convert to
Judaism.

In blessing Dan, Jacob's thoughts were occupied chiefly with his
descendant Samson, who, like unto God, without any manner of assistance,
conferred victory upon his people. Jacob even believed the strong,
heroic man to be the Messiah, but when Samson's death was revealed to
him, he exclaimed, "I wait for Thy salvation, O Lord, for Thy help is
unto all eternity, while Samson's help is only for a time. The
redemption" continued Jacob, "will not be accomplished by Samson the
Danite, but by Elijah the Gadite, who will appear at the end of time."

Asher's blessing was the beauty of his women, who would be sought in
marriage by kings and high priests.

In Naphtali's land all fruits would ripen quickly, and they would be
brought as presents to kings, and gain royal favor for the givers. This
blessing was fulfilled in the plain of Gennesaret. At the same time
Naphtali's blessing was a prophecy concerning his descendant Deborah,
who was like a hind let loose against Sisera to conquer him, and she
gave goodly words in her song of Israel's victory. Naphtali himself
deserved the description applied to Deborah, for he was swift as a hart
to do the will of God, and he was a fleet messenger unto his father and
the tribes. They sent him whithersoever they would, and he executed
their errands with dispatch. He served the brethren of Joseph as herald,
to announce unto Jacob the glad tidings, "Joseph is yet alive," and when
the stricken father saw him approach, he said, "Lo, here cometh Naphtali
the lovable, who proclaimeth peace."

Joseph's blessing exceeded the blessing of all his brethren. Jacob
spoke: "O son whom I bred up, Joseph, whom I raised, and who wast strong
to resist the enticements of sin, thou didst conquer all the magicians
and the wise men of Egypt by thy wisdom and thy pious deeds. The
daughters of princes cast their jewels before thee, to draw thine eyes
upon them when thou didst pass through the land of Egypt, but thou didst
not look their way, and therefore wast thou made the father of two
tribes. The magicians and the wise men of Egypt sought to defame thee
before Pharaoh and slander thee, but thou didst set thy hope in the
Almighty. Therefore may He who appeared unto me as El Shaddai bless thee
and grant thee fertile soil and much cattle. May the blessing thy father
giveth thee now, and the blessing that his fathers Abraham and Isaac
gave him, and that called forth the envy of the great of the world,
Ishmael, Esau, and the sons of Keturah--may all these blessings be a
crown upon the head of Joseph, and a chain upon the neck of him that was
the ruler of Egypt, and yet diminished not the honor due to his
brethren."

The slander of which Jacob spoke referred to what Potiphar had said of
Joseph before Pharaoh. He had complained, saying, "Why didst thou
appoint my slave, whom I did buy for twenty pieces of silver, to be
ruler over the Egyptians?" Joseph had then taken up his own defense,
saying: "When thou didst buy me as a slave, thou didst commit a capital
crime. Only a descendant of Canaan may be sold as a slave, and I am a
descendant of Shem, and a prince besides. If thou wilt convince thyself
of the truth of my words, do but compare me with the likeness of my
mother Sarah that Pharaoh had made of her!" They brought Sarah's
likeness, and, verily, it appeared that Joseph resembled his ancestress,
and all were convinced of his noble lineage.

The blessing that Jacob bestowed upon Benjamin contains the prophecy
that his tribe would provide Israel with his first ruler and his last
ruler, and so it was, for Saul and Esther both belonged to the tribe of
Benjamin. Likewise Benjamin's heritage in the Holy Land harbors two
extremes: Jericho ripens its fruits earlier than any other region in
Palestine, while Beth-el ripens them latest. In Benjamin's blessing,
Jacob referred also to the service in the Temple, because the Holy Place
was situated in the territory of Benjamin. And when Jacob called his
youngest son a wolf that ravineth, he was thinking of the judge Ehud,
the great scholar, a Benjamite, who conquered Eglon king of Moab, and
also he had in mind the Benjamites that captured their wives by cunning
and force.

Again, if he called Benjamin a wolf, Judah a lion, and Joseph a bull, he
wanted to point to the three kingdoms known as wolf, lion, and bull, the
doom of which was and will be sealed by the descendants of his three
sons: Babylon, the kingdom of the lion, fell through the hands of Daniel
of the tribe of Judah; Media, the wolf, found its master in the
Benjamite Mordecai; and the bull Joseph will subdue the horned beast,
the kingdom of wickedness, before the Messianic time.

### THE DEATH OF JACOB

After Jacob had blessed each of his sons separately, he addressed
himself to all of them together, saying: "According to my power did I
bless you, but in future days a prophet will arise, and this man Moses
will bless you, too, and he will continue my blessings where I left
off." He added, besides, that the blessing of each tribe should redound
to the good of all the other tribes: the tribe of Judah should have a
share in the fine wheat of the tribe of Benjamin, and Benjamin should
enjoy the goodly barley of Judah. The tribes should be mutually helpful,
one to another.

Moreover, he charged them not to be guilty of idolatry in any form or
shape and not to let blasphemous speech pass their lips, and he taught
them the order of transporting his bier, thus: "Joseph, being king,
shall not help to bear it, nor shall Levi, who is destined to carry the
Ark of the Shekinah. Judah, Issachar, and Zebulon shall grasp its front
end, Reuben, Simon, and Gad its right side, Ephraim, Manasseh, and
Benjamin the hindmost end, and Dan, Asher, and Naphtali its left side."
And this was the order in which the tribes, bearing each its standard,
were to march through the desert, the Shekinah dwelling in the midst of
them.

Jacob then spake to Joseph, saying: "And thou, my son Joseph, forgive
thy brethren for their trespass against thee, forsake them not, and
grieve them not, for the Lord hath put them into thine hands, that thou
shouldst protect them all thy days against the Egyptians."

Also he admonished his sons, saying that the Lord would be with them if
they walked in His ways, and He would redeem them from the hands of the
Egyptians. "I know," he continued, "great suffering will befall your
sons and your grandsons in this land, but if you will obey God, and
teach your sons to know Him, then He will send you a redeemer, who will
bring you forth out of Egypt and lead you into the land of your
fathers."

In resignation to the will of God, Jacob awaited his end, and death
enveloped him gently. Not the Angel of Death ended his life, but the
Shekinah took his soul with a kiss. Beside the three Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, only Moses, Aaron, and Miriam breathed their
last in this manner, through the kiss of the Shekinah. And these six,
together with Benjamin, are the only ones whose corpses are not exposed
to the ravages of the worms, and they neither corrupt nor decay.

Thus Jacob departed this world, and entered the world to come, a
foretaste of which he had enjoyed here below, like the other two
Patriarchs, and none beside among men. In another respect their life in
this world resembled their life in the world to come, the evil
inclination had no power over them, either here or there, wherein David
resembled them.

Joseph ordered his father's body to be placed upon a couch of ivory,
covered with gold, studded with gems, and hung with drapery of byssus
and purple. Fragrant wine was poured out at its side, and aromatic
spices burnt next to it. Heroes of the house of Esau, princes of the
family of Ishmael, and the lion Judah, the bravest of his sons,
surrounded the sumptuous bier of Jacob. "Come," said Judah to his
brethren, "let us plant a high cedar tree at the head of our father's
grave, its top shall reach up to the skies, its branches shall shade all
the inhabitants of the earth, and its roots shall grow down deep into
the earth, unto the abyss. For from him are sprung twelve tribes, and
from him will arise kings and rulers, chapters of priests prepared to
perform the service of the sacrifices, and companies of Levites ready to
sing psalms and play upon sweet instruments."

The sons of Jacob tore their garments and girded their loins with
sackcloth, threw themselves upon the ground, and strewed earth upon
their heads until the dust rose in a high cloud. And when Asenath, the
wife of Joseph, heard the tidings of Jacob's death, she came, and with
her came the women of Egypt, to weep and mourn over him. And the men of
Egypt that had known Jacob repaired thither, and they mourned day after
day, and also many journeyed down into Egypt from Canaan, to take part
in the seventy days' mourning made for him.

The Egyptians spake to one another, saying, "Let us lament for the pious
man Jacob, because the affliction of the famine was averted from our
land on account of his merits," for instead of ravaging the land for
forty-two years according to the decree of God, the famine had lasted
but two years, and that was due to the virtues of Jacob.

Joseph ordered the physicians to embalm the corpse. This he should have
refrained from doing, for it was displeasing to God, who spoke, saying:
"Have I not the power to preserve the corpse of this pious man from
corruption? Was it not I that spoke the reassuring words, Fear not the
worm, O Jacob, thou dead Israel?" Joseph's punishment for this useless
precaution was that he was the first of the sons of Jacob to suffer
death. The Egyptians, on the other hand, who devoted forty days to
embalming the corpse and preparing it for burial, were rewarded for the
veneration they showed. Before He destroyed their city, God gave the
Ninevites a forty days' respite on account of their king, who was the
Pharaoh of Egypt. And for the three score and ten days of mourning that
the heathen made for Jacob, they were recompensed at the time of
Ahasuerus. During seventy days, from the thirteenth of Nisan, the date
of Haman's edict ordering the extermination of the Jews, until the
twenty-third of Siwan, when Mordecai recalled it, they were permitted to
enjoy absolute power over the Jews.

When all preparations for the burial of Jacob had been completed, Joseph
asked permission of Pharaoh to carry the body up into Canaan. But he did
not himself go to put his petition before Pharaoh, for he could not well
appear before the king in the garb of a mourner, nor was he willing to
interrupt his lamentation over his father for even a brief space and
stand before Pharaoh and prefer his petition. He requested the family of
Pharaoh to intercede for him with the king for the additional reason
that he was desirous of enlisting the favor of the king's relations,
lest they advise Pharaoh not to fulfil his wish. He acted according to
the maxim, "Seek to win over the accuser, that he cause thee no
annoyance."

Joseph applied first to the queen's hairdresser, and she influenced the
queen to favor him, and then the queen put in a good word for him with
the king. At first Pharaoh refused the permission craved by Joseph, who,
however, urged him to consider the solemn oath he had given his dying
father, to bury him in Canaan. Pharaoh desired him to seek absolution
from the oath. But Joseph rejoined, "Then will I apply also for
absolution from the oath I gave thee," referring to an incident in his
earlier history. The grandees of Egypt had advised Pharaoh against
appointing Joseph as viceroy, and they did not recede from this counsel
until Joseph, in his conversation with the Egyptian king, proved himself
to be master of the seventy languages of the world, the necessary
condition to be fulfilled before one could become ruler over Egypt. But
the conversation proved something else, that Pharaoh himself was not
entitled to Egyptian kingship, because he lacked knowledge of Hebrew. He
feared, if the truth became known, Joseph would be raised to his own
place, for he knew Hebrew beside all the other tongues. In his anxiety
and distress, Pharaoh made Joseph swear an oath never to betray the
king's ignorance of Hebrew. Now when Joseph threatened to have himself
absolved from this oath as well as the one to his dying father, great
terror overwhelmed him, and he speedily granted Joseph permission to go
up to Canaan and bury his father there.

Moreover, Pharaoh issued a decree in all parts of the land menacing
those with death who would not accompany Joseph and his brethren upon
their journey to Canaan with their father's remains, and accordingly the
procession that followed the bier of Jacob was made up of the princes
and nobles of Egypt as well as the common people. The bier was borne by
the sons of Jacob. In obedience to his wish not even their children were
allowed to touch it. It was fashioned of pure gold, the border thereof
inlaid with onyx stones and bdellium, and the cover was gold woven work
joined to the bier with threads that were held together with hooks of
onyx stones and bdellium. Joseph placed a large golden crown upon the
head of his father, and a golden sceptre he put in his hand, arraying
him like a living king.

The funeral cortege was arranged in this order: First came the valiant
men of Pharaoh and the valiant men of Joseph, and then the rest of the
inhabitants of Egypt. All were girt with swords and clothed in coats of
mail, and the trappings of war were upon them. The weepers and mourners
walked, crying and lamenting, at some distance from the bier, and the
rest of the people went behind it, while Joseph and his household
followed together after it, with bare feet and in tears, and Joseph's
servants were close to him, each man with his accoutrements and weapons
of war. Fifty of Jacob's servants preceded the bier, strewing myrrh upon
the road in passing, and all manner of perfumes, so that the sons of
Jacob trod upon the aromatic spices as they carried the body forward.

Thus the procession moved on until it reached Canaan. It halted at the
threshing-floor of Atad, and there they lamented with a very great and
sore lamentation. But the greatest honor conferred upon Jacob was the
presence of the Shekinah, who accompanied the cortege.

The Canaanites had no intention at first to take part in the mourning
made for Jacob, but when they saw the honors shown him, they joined the
procession of the Egyptians, loosing the girdles of their garments as a
sign of grief. Also the sons of Esau, Ishmael, and Keturah appeared,
though their design in coming was to seize the opportunity and make war
upon the sons of Jacob, but when they saw Joseph's crown suspended from
the bier, the Edomite and Ishmaelite kings and princes followed his
example, and attached theirs to it, too, and it was ornamented with
thirty-six crowns.

Nevertheless the conflict was not averted; it broke out in the end
between the sons of Jacob and Esau and his followers. When the former
were about to lower the body of their father into the Cave of Machpelah,
Esau attempted to prevent it, saying that Jacob had used his allotted
portion of the tomb for Leah, and the only space left for a grave
belonged to himself. For, continued Esau, "though I sold my birthright
unto Jacob, I yet have a portion in the tomb as a son of Isaac." The
sons of Jacob, however, were well aware of the fact that their father
had acquired Esau's share in the Cave, and they even knew that a bill of
sale existed, but Esau, assuming properly that the document was left
behind in Egypt, denied that any such had ever been made out, and the
sons of Jacob sent Naphtali, the fleet runner, back to Egypt to fetch
the bill. Meantime, while this altercation was going on between Esau and
the others, Hushim the son of Dan arose and inquired in astonishment why
they did not proceed with the burial of Jacob, for he was deaf and had
not understood the words that had passed between the disputants. When he
heard what it was all about, and that the ceremonies were interrupted
until Naphtali should return from Egypt with the bill of sale, he
exclaimed, with indignation, "My grandfather shall lie here unburied
until Naphtali comes back!" and he seized a club and dealt Esau a
vigorous blow, so that he died, and his eyes fell out of their sockets
and dropped upon Jacob's knees, and Jacob opened his own eyes and
smiled. Esau being dead, his brother's burial could proceed without
hindrance, and Joseph interred him in the Cave of Machpelah in
accordance with his wish.

His other children had left all arrangements connected with the burial
of their father's body to their brother Joseph, for they reflected that
it was a greater honor for Jacob if a king concerned himself about his
remains rather than simple private individuals.

The head of Esau, as he lay slain by the side of Jacob's grave, rolled
down into the Cave, and fell into the lap of Isaac, who prayed to God to
have mercy upon his son, but his supplications were in vain. God spoke,
saying, "As I live, he shall not behold the majesty of the Lord."

### THE SONS OF JACOB AT WAR WITH THE SONS OF ESAU

Jacob having been interred with royal pomp, and the seven days' period
of mourning over, the conflict between the sons of Jacob and the sons of
Esau broke out anew. In the skirmish that had ensued when Esau advanced
a claim upon a place in the Cave of Machpelah, while his brother's
remains still lay unburied, he lost forty of his men, and after his
death fortune favored his sons as little. Eighty of their followers were
slain, while of the sons of Jacob not one was lost. Joseph succeeded in
capturing Zepho the son of Eliphaz and fifty of his men, and he clapped
them in chains and carried them off to Egypt. Thereupon the rest of the
attacking army led by Eliphaz fled to Mount Seir, taking with them the
headless corpse of Esau, to bury it in his own territory. The sons of
Jacob pursued after them, but they slew none, out of respect for the
remains of Esau.

On the third day a great army gathered together, consisting of the
inhabitants of Seir and the children of the East, and they marched down
into Egypt with the purpose of making war upon Joseph and his brethren.
In the battle that came off, this army was almost totally destroyed, not
less than six hundred thousand men were mowed down by Joseph and his
warriors, and the small remnant fled precipitately. Returned to their
own country after this fatal campaign, the sons of Esau and the sons of
Seir fell to quarrelling among themselves, and the sons of Seir demanded
that their former allies leave the place, because it was they that had
brought misfortune upon the country.

The sons of Esau thereupon dispatched a messenger in secret to their
friend Agnias, king of Africa, begging his aid against the sons of Seir.
He granted their request, and sent them troops consisting of
foot-soldiers and mounted men. The sons of Seir, on their part, also
sought allies, and they secured the help of the children of the East,
and of the Midianites, who put warriors at their disposal. In the
encounters that ensued between the hostile forces, the sons of Esau were
defeated again and again, partly on account of treachery in their own
ranks, for their men sometimes deserted to the enemy while the combat
was on. At last, however, in the battle that took place in the desert of
Paran, the sons of Esau gained a decisive victory. They massacred all
the warriors of the sons of Seir, and the Midianites and the children of
the East were put to flight.

Thereafter the sons of Esau returned to Seir, and they slew all the
inhabitants of the place, men, women, and children, sparing only fifty
lads and maidens. The former they used as slaves, and the latter they
took to wife. They also enriched themselves with the spoils, seizing all
the possessions of the sons of Seir, and the whole land was divided
among the five sons of Esau. Now these descendants of Esau determined to
put a king over themselves, but in consequence of the treachery
committed during the war there prevailed such hatred and bitterness
among them that they decided never to appoint a ruler from their own
people. Their choice fell upon Bela, the son of Beor, one of the
warriors sent to them by King Agnias. His peer could not be found among
the allied troops for bravery, wisdom, and handsome appearance. They set
the royal crown upon his head, built a palace for him, and gave him
gifts of silver, gold, and gems, until he lived in great opulence. He
reigned happily for thirty years, and met his death then in a war
against Joseph and his brethren.

This war came about because the sons of Esau could not banish from their
memory the disgrace of the defeat inflicted upon them by Joseph and his
people. Having enlisted the aid of Agnias, and of the Ishmaelites and
other nations of the East, they set forth on a second campaign against
Egypt, in the hope of delivering Zepho and his followers from the hands
of Joseph. In spite of their enormous host--they had no less than eight
hundred thousand men of infantry and cavalry--they were defeated at
Raamses by Joseph and his brethren and their little company of six
hundred men. Beside their king Bela, they left one-fourth of their army
upon the field. The loss of their king discouraged them grievously, and
they took to flight, hard pressed by Joseph, who cut down many of the
fugitives.

When he returned from the battle, Joseph ordered manacles and fetters to
be put upon Zepho and his followers, and their captivity was made more
bitter unto them than it had been before.

The sons of Esau appointed Jobab of Bozrah to succeed their dead king
Bela. His reign lasted ten years, but they desisted from all further
attempts at waging war with the sons of Jacob. Their last experience
with them had been too painful, but the enmity they cherished against
them was all the fiercer, and their hatred never abated.

Their third king was Husham, and he ruled over them for twenty years.
During his reign Zepho succeeded in making good his escape from Egypt.
He was received kindly by Agnias, king of Africa, and appointed
commander-in-chief of his troops. He used every means of persuasion to
induce his sovereign lord to enter into a war with Egypt, but in vain,
for Agnias was only too well acquainted with the strength and heroism of
the sons of Jacob. For many years he resisted Zepho's arguments and
blandishments. Indeed, as it was, Agnias had his hands full with other
warlike enterprises. It had happened about this time that a man of the
land of Kittim, 'Uzi by name, whom his countrymen venerated as a god,
died in the city of Pozimana, and he left behind a fair and clever
daughter. Agnias heard of Yaniah's beauty and wisdom, and he sued for
her hand, and his request was granted him by the people of Kittim.

The messengers of Agnias were hastening away from Kittim, bearing to
their master the promise of the inhabitants that Yaniah should become
his wife, when Turnus, king of Benevento, arrived on the same errand.
His suit was rejected, for the people of Kittim were afraid-to break the
promise given to Agnias. In his anger, Turnus went to Sardinia to make
war upon King Lucus, a brother of Agnias, intending to deal with the
latter as soon as the other was rendered harmless. Hearing of the design
hatched by Turnus, Agnias hastened to Sardinia to the assistance of his
brother, and a battle took place in the Valley of Campania. Against
Turnus were arrayed Agnias, his brother Lucus, and the son of the
latter, Niblos, whom his father had appointed commander-in-chief of the
Sardinian troops. In the first encounter, Turnus was the victor, and the
Sardinians lost their general Niblos. But in the second engagement the
army of Turnus was routed completely, and he himself was left dead on
the field. His army fled, pursued closely by Agnias as far as the
cross-road between Rome and Albano. Niblos' body was put inside of a
golden statue, and his father erected a high tower over his grave, and
another over the grave of Turnus, and these two buildings, connected by
a marble pavement, stand opposite to each other, on the cross-road at
which Agnias left off from following after the fugitive army.

The king of Africa went on to the city of Benevento, but he took no
harsh measures against it and its inhabitants, because it belonged to
the land of Kittim at that time. Thenceforth, however, bands of soldiers
from Africa made incursions, now and again, into the land of Kittim,
under the lead of Zepho, the captain of the African army. Agnias
meantime went to Pozimana, to solemnize his marriage with Yaniah, and he
returned with her to his capital in Africa.

### ZEPHO KING OF KITTIM

All this time Zepho did not leave off urging Agnias to invade Egypt, and
he succeeded finally in persuading the king to consider his wish, and a
great army was equipped against Egypt and the sons of Jacob. Among the
shield-bearers was Balaam, the fifteen year old son of Beor, a wise
youth and an adept in magic, and the king bade him acquaint him with the
issue of the war upon which they were entering. Balaam took wax and
moulded the figures of men, to represent the army of Agnias and the army
of the Egyptians, and he plunged them into magic water and let them
swim, and it appeared that the African army was subdued by the
Egyptians. Agnias accordingly gave up the campaign, and Zepho, seeing
that his sovereign could not be persuaded into war with the sons of
Jacob, fled the country and betook himself to Kittim.

The people of Kittim received him with great honors, and they offered
him much money to stay with them and conduct their wars. It happened
once while Zepho was in the mountains of Koptiziah, where the
inhabitants of Kittim had taken refuge before the troops of the African
king, that he had to go on a search for an ox that had strayed away, and
he discovered a cave the opening of which was barred by a great stone.
He shivered the stone in pieces, and entering the cave he saw an animal
formed like a man above and a he-goat below, and he killed the strange
beast, which was in the very act of devouring his lost ox. There was
great rejoicing among the people of Kittim, for the monster had long
been doing havoc among their cattle, and in gratitude they set aside one
day of the year, which they called by Zepho's name, in honor of their
liberator, and all the people brought him presents and offered
sacrifices to him.

At this time it came to pass that Yaniah, the wife of King Agnias, fell
into a grievous sickness, and the physicians ascribed her illness to the
climate, and to the water of Africa, to which she, a native of the land
of Kittim, could not get accustomed, because she had been in the habit
of using the water of the river Forma, which her forefathers had drawn
to her house through a conduit. Agnias sent to the land of Kittim and
had some of the water of the Forma brought to Africa. Finding it much
lighter than the water of his own country, he built a huge canal from
the land of Kittim. to Africa, and the queen henceforth had all the
Forma water she needed. Besides, he took earth and stone from Kittim,
and built a palace for Yaniah, and she recovered from her illness.

Meantime Zepho had won a decisive victory over the African troops that
had made an incursion into the land of Kittim, and the people chose him
as king. His first undertaking was a campaign against the sons of Tubal
and the Islands of the Sea, and again he was successful, he subdued them
completely. On his return, the people built a great palace for Zepho,
and they renewed his kingship, and he continued until his death to reign
as king of Kittim and of Italy.

During the first thirteen years of his reign, the Africans made no
attempt to disturb the peace of Kittim, but then they invaded the land,
only to be severely repulsed by Zepho, who pursued the troops up to the
very borders of Africa, and Agnias the king was in such consternation
that he did not venture to make reprisals for some time. When he finally
made a second attempt, his troops were annihilated by Zepho down to the
very last man. Now Agnias, in despair, assembled all the inhabitants of
Africa, as numerous as the sand on the sea-shore, and he united his
great host with the army of his brother Lucus, and thus he made his
third attempt upon Zepho and the people of the land of Kittim.

Alarmed, Zepho wrote to his brethren in Seir, and entreated their king
Hadad to send him aid. But the people of Seir had concluded an alliance
with Agnias as far back as under their first king Bela, and they refused
Zepho's request, and the king of Kittim had to face the host of eight
hundred thousand men mustered by Agnias with his little band of three
thousand. Then the people of Kittim spake to their king Zepho, saying:
"Pray for us unto the God of thy ancestors. Peradventure He may deliver
us from the hand of Agnias and his army, for we have heard that He is a
great God, and He delivers all that trust in Him." Zepho prayed unto the
Lord, saying: "O Lord, God of Abraham and Isaac, my fathers, this day
may it be made known that Thou art a true God, and all the gods of the
nations are vain and useless. Remember now this day unto me Thy covenant
with Abraham our father, which our ancestors related unto us, and do
graciously with me this day for the sake of Abraham and Isaac, our
fathers, and save me and the sons of Kittim from the hand of the king of
Africa, who hath come against us for battle."

God gave ear unto Zepho's prayer, and in the first day's battle one-half
of the African army fell. Agnias forthwith dispatched a decree to his
country, ordering, on penalty of death and confiscation of property,
that all the males of the land, including boys that had passed their
tenth year, were to join the army and fight against the people of
Kittim. In spite of these new accessions, three hundred thousand strong,
Agnias was beaten again by Zepho in the second battle. The African
general Sosipater having fallen slain, the troops broke into flight, at
their head Agnias with Lucus the brother and Asdrubal the son of Agnias.
After this dire defeat the Africans made no further attempt to disturb
the peace of Kittim, and their incursions ceased forever.

In spite of the great victory that Zepho had won with the help of God,
the king of Kittim walked in the idolatrous ways of the people whom he
ruled, and in the ways of the sons of Esau, for, as saith the proverb of
the ancients, "Out of the wicked cometh forth wickedness," and Zepho was
not other than the rest of the sons of Esau.

The severe defeat inflicted upon Agnias drove Balaam from Africa to
Kittim, and he was received with great honors by Zepho, who welcomed him
on account of his deep wisdom.

Now Zepho thought the time had arrived for him to carry out his plan of
vengeance against the posterity of Jacob, all the more as in the
meantime Joseph had died, and also his brethren and the valiant men of
Pharaoh had passed away. He was joined in the enterprise by Hadad, the
king of Edom, and by the nations of the East and the Ishmaelites. The
allied army was so vast that the space it covered as it stood in rank
and file was equal to a three days' journey. It formed in battle array
in the Valley of Pathros, and it was met by three hundred thousand
Egyptians and one hundred and fifty Israelites from Goshen. But the
Egyptians did not trust the Israelites, they feared their defection to
the sons of Esau and Ishmael. They therefore made an agreement with them
that the Israelites were not to come to the help of the Egyptians until
it appeared that the enemy were getting the upper hand.

Zepho, who had a high opinion of Balaam's ability, desired him to use
his magic arts and find out what would be the outcome of the war, but
Balaam's knowledge failed him, he could not satisfy the king's wish. The
Egyptians got the worst of the first encounter between the two hostile
armies, but the aspect of things changed as soon as they summoned the
Israelites to aid them. The Israelites prayed to God to support them
with His help, and the Lord heard their prayer. Then they threw
themselves upon Zepho and his allies, and after they had cut down
several thousand men, such dismay and confusion took hold of the enemy
that they fled hastily, pursued by the Israelites as far as the boundary
of the country. The Egyptians, instead of coming to the assistance of
the Israelites, had taken to flight, leaving the small band of their
allies to dispose of the huge host of their adversaries. Embittered by
such treatment, the Israelites slew as many as two hundred Egyptians,
under the pretext that they thought they belonged to the enemy.

### THE NATIONS AT WAR

Hadad, the king of Edom, who had failed to gain fame and honor in the
Egyptian campaign, was favored by fortune in another war, a war against
Moab. The Moabites shrank from meeting Hadad alone, and they made an
alliance with the Midianites. In the thick of the fight the Moabites
fled from the field of battle, leaving the Midianites to their fate, and
these deserted allies of theirs were cut down to a man by Hadad and his
Edomites. The Moabites saved their skins, and suffered only the
inconvenience of having to pay tribute. To avenge the faithlessness
practiced against them, the Midianites, supported by their kinsmen, the
sons of Keturah, gathered a mighty army, and attacked the Moabites the
following year. But Hadad came to their assistance, and again he
inflicted a severe defeat upon the Midianites, who had to give up their
plan of revenge against Moab. This is the beginning of the inveterate
enmity between the Moabites and the Midianites. If a single Moabite is
caught in the land of Midian, he is killed without mercy, and a
Midianite in Moab fares no better.

After the death of Hadad, the Edomites installed Samlah of Masrekah as
their king, and he reigned eighteen years. It was his desire to take up
the cause of Agnias, the old ally of the Edomites, and chastise Zepho
for having gone to war with him, but his people, the Edomites, would not
permit him to undertake aught that was inimical to their kinsman, and
Samlah had to abandon the plan. In the fourteenth year of Samlah's
reign, Zepho died, having been king of Kittim for fifty years. His
successor was Janus, one of the people of Kittim, who enjoyed an equally
long reign.

Balaam had made his escape to Egypt after the death of Zepho, and he was
received there with great demonstrations of honor by the king and all
the nobles, and Pharaoh appointed him to be royal counsellor, for he had
heard much about his exceeding great wisdom.

In the Edomite kingdom, Samlah was succeeded by Saul of Pethor, a youth
of surpassing beauty, whose reign lasted forty years. His successor upon
the throne was Baal Hamon, king for thirty-eight years, during which
period the Moabites rose up against the Edomites, to whom they had been
paying tribute since the time of Hadad, and they succeeded in throwing
off the yoke of the stranger.

The times were troubled everywhere. Agnias, the king of Africa, died,
and also the death of Janus occurred, the king of Kittim. The successors
to these two rulers, Asdrubal, the son of Agnias, and Latinus, the king
of Kittim, then entered upon a long drawn out war of many years. At
first the fortune of war favored Latinus. He sailed to Africa in ships,
and inflicted one defeat after another upon Asdrubal, and finally this
king of Africa lost his life upon the battlefield. After destroying the
canal from Kittim to Africa built many years before by Agnias, Latinus
returned to his own country, taking with him as his wife Ushpiziwnah,
the daughter of Asdrubal, who was so wondrously beautiful that her
countrymen wore her likeness upon their garments.

Latinus did not enjoy the fruits of his victory long. Anibal, the
younger brother of Asdrubal and his successor in the royal power, went
to Kittim in ships and carried on a series of wars lasting eighteen
years, in the course of which he killed off eighty thousand of the
people of Kittim, not sparing the princes and the nobles. At the end of
this protracted period he went back to Africa, and reigned over his
people in quiet and peace.

The Edomites, during the forty-eight years of the reign of Hadad, the
successor of Baal Hamon, fared no better than the people of Kittim.
Hadad's first undertaking was to reduce the Moabites again under the
sovereignty of Edom, but he had to desist, because he could not offer
successful resistance to a newly chosen king of theirs, one of their own
people, who enlisted the aid of their kinsmen the Ammonites. The allies
commanded a great host, and Hadad was overwhelmed. These wars were
followed by others between Hadad of Edom. and Abimenos of Kittim. The
latter was the attacking party, and he invaded Seir with a mighty army.
The sons of Seir were defeated abjectly, their king Hadad was taken
captive, and then executed by Abimenos, and Seir was made a province
subject to Kittim and ruled by a governor.

Thus ended the independence of the sons of Esau. Henceforth they had to
pay tribute to Kittim, over which Abimenos ruled until his death, in the
thirty-eighth year of his reign.

### JOSEPH'S MAGNANIMITY

As Joseph was returning from the burial of his father in the Cave of
Machpelah, he passed the pit into which his brethren had once cast him,
and he looked into it, and said, "Blessed be God who permitted a miracle
to come to pass for me here!" The brethren inferred from these words of
gratitude, which Joseph but uttered in compliance with the injunctions
of the law, that he cherished the recollection of the evil they had done
him, and they feared, that now their father was dead, their brother
would requite them in accordance with their deeds. They observed,
moreover, that since their father was no more, Joseph had given up the
habit of entertaining them at his table, and they interpreted this as a
sign of his hatred of them. In reality, it was due to Joseph's respect
and esteem for his brethren. "So long as my father was alive," Joseph
said to himself, "he bade me sit at the head of the table, though Judah
is king, and Reuben is the first-born. It was my father's wish, and I
complied with it. But now it is not seemly that I should have the first
seat in their presence, and yet, being ruler of Egypt, I cannot yield my
place to any other." He thought it best therefore not to have the
company of his brethren at his meals.

But they, not fathoming his motives, sent Bilhah to him with the dying
message of their father, that he was to forgive the transgression and
the sin of his brethren. For the sake of the ways of peace they had
invented the message; Jacob had said nothing like it. Joseph, on his
part, realized that his brethren spoke thus only because they feared he
might do harm unto them, and he wept that they should put so little
trust in his affection. When they appeared, and fell down before his
face, and said, "Thou didst desire to make one of us a slave unto
thyself. Behold, we all are ready to be thy servants," he spoke to them
gently, and tried to convince them that he harbored no evil design
against them. He said: "Be not afraid, I will do you no harm, for I fear
God, and if ye think I failed to have you sit at my table because of
enmity toward you, God knows the intentions of my heart, He knows that I
acted thus out of consideration for the respect I owe to you."

Furthermore he said: "Ye are like unto the dust of the earth, the sand
on the sea-shore, and the stars in the heavens. Can I do aught to put
these out of the world? Ten stars could effect nothing against one star,
how much less can one star effect anything against ten? Do you believe
that I have the power of acting contrary to the laws of nature? Twelve
hours hath the day, twelve hours the night, twelve months the year,
twelve constellations are in the heavens, and also there are twelve
tribes! You are the trunk and I am the head--of what use the head
without the trunk? It is to my own good that I should treat you with
fraternal affection. Before your advent, I was looked upon as a slave in
this country--you proved me a man of noble birth. Now, if I should kill
you, my claims upon an aristocratic lineage would be shown to be a lie.
The Egyptians would say, He was not their brother, they were strangers
to him, he but called them his brethren to serve his purpose, and now he
hath found a pretext to put them out of the way. Or they would hold me
to be a man of no probity. Who plays false with his own kith and kin,
how can he keep faith with others? And, in sooth, how can I venture to
lay hand upon those whom God and my father both have blessed?"

As Joseph's dealings were kind and gentle with his brethren, so he was
the helper and counsellor of the Egyptians, and when Pharaoh departed
this life, Joseph being then a man of seventy-one years of age, the
king's last wish was that he might be a father unto his son and
successor Magron, and administer the affairs of state for him. Some of
the Egyptians desired to make Joseph king after the death of Pharaoh,
but this plan met with opposition on the part of others. They objected
to an alien on the throne, and so the royal title was left to Magron,
called Pharaoh, according to the established custom the name given to
all the Egyptian kings. But Joseph was made the actual ruler of the
land, and though he was only viceroy in Egypt, he reigned as king over
the lands outside of Egypt as far as the Euphrates, parts of which
Joseph had acquired by conquest. The inhabitants of these countries
brought their yearly tribute to him and other presents besides, and thus
did Joseph rule for forty years, beloved of all, and respected by the
Egyptians and the other nations, and during all that time his brethren
dwelt in Goshen, happy and blithe in the service of God. And in his own
family circle Joseph was happy also; he lived to act as godfather at the
circumcision of the sons of his grandson Machir.

His end was premature as compared with that of his brethren; at his
death he was younger than any of them at their death. It is true,
"Dominion buries him that exercises it." He died ten years before his
allotted time, because, without taking umbrage, he had permitted his
brethren to call his father his "servant" in his presence.

### ASENATH

God gives every man the wife he deserves, and so Asenath was worthy of
being the helpmeet of Joseph the pious. Her father was Potiphar, one of
Pharaoh's magnates, ranking among the most distinguished of them by
reason of wisdom, wealth, and station. His daughter was slender like
unto Sarah, beautiful like Rebekah, and radiant in appearance like
Rachel. Noblemen and princes sued for her hand when she was eighteen
years of age. Even Pharaoh's appointed successor, his first-born son,
demanded her in marriage, but his father refused to comply with his
wish, because he did not consider her a proper wife for one destined to
sit upon the throne. The daughter of the Moabite king, he insisted, was
a more suitable match for him. But Asenath rejected every proposal of
marriage, and avoided all intercourse with men. With seven maidens born
the same day as herself, she lived in retirement in a magnificent palace
adjoining that of her parents.

It happened in the first of the seven years of plenty that Joseph
planned to visit the place in which Potiphar resided, and he sent word
to him that he would put up with him, at his house. Potiphar was
enchanted with the honor in prospect for him, and also with the
opportunity it would afford him of bringing about a marriage between
Asenath and Joseph. But when he disclosed his plan to his daughter, she
rejected it with indignation. "Why shouldst thou desire to see me united
with a vagabond, a slave," she cried out, "one that does not even belong
to our nation, but is the son of a Canaanitish herdsman, a fellow that
attempted to violate the honor of his mistress, and in punishment for
this misdemeanor was thrown into prison, to be liberated thence by
Pharaoh for interpreting his dream? Nay, father, never will I become his
wife. I am willing to marry the son of Pharaoh, the future ruler and
king of Egypt."

Potiphar promised his daughter not to speak of the plan again. At that
moment Joseph's arrival was announced, and Asenath left the presence of
her parents and withdrew to her own apartments. Standing by the window,
she saw Joseph pass, and she was so transported with his divine beauty
and his indescribably noble carriage that she burst into tears, and
said: "Poor, foolish me, what shall I do? I permitted myself to be
misled by friends, who told me that Joseph was the son of a Canaanitish
shepherd. Now I behold the splendor that emanates from him like unto the
splendor of the sun, illuminating our house with his rays. In my
audacity and folly I had looked down upon him, and had spoken absurd
nonsense against him. I knew not that he was a son of God, as he must
be, for among men such beauty as his does not exist. I pray Thee, O God
of Joseph, grant me pardon! It was my ignorance that made me speak like
a fool. If my father will give me in marriage to Joseph, I will be his
forever."

Meantime Joseph had taken his seat at Potiphar's table, and he observed
a maiden looking at him from one of the palace windows. He commanded
that she be ordered away, for he never permitted women to gaze at him or
come near to him. His supernatural beauty always fascinated the noble
Egyptian ladies, and they were untiring in the efforts they made to
approach him. But their attempts were vain. He cherished the words of
his father Jacob, who had admonished his son to keep aloof from the
women of the Gentiles.

Potiphar explained to Joseph that the maiden at the window was his
virgin daughter, who never permitted men to abide near her; he was the
first man she had ever looked upon. The father continued and made the
request of Joseph, to allow his daughter to pay him her respects. Joseph
granted the favor he desired, and Asenath appeared and greeted him with
the words, "Peace be with thee, thou blessed of God Most High,"
whereunto Joseph returned the salutation, "Be thou blessed of the Lord,
from whom flow all blessings."

Asenath desired also to kiss Joseph, but he warded off the intimate
greeting with the words: "It is not meet that a God-fearing man, who
blesses the living God, and eats the blessed bread of life, who drinks
of the blessed cup of immortality and incorruptibility, and anoints
himself with the fragrant oil of holiness, should kiss a woman of a
strange people, who blesses dead and unprofitable idols, and eats the
putrid bread of idolatry, which chokes the soul of man, who drinks the
libations of deceit, and anoints herself with the oil of destruction."

These words uttered by Joseph touched Asenath unto tears. Out of
compassion with her, he bestowed his blessing upon her, calling upon God
to pour out His spirit over her and make her to become a member of His
people and His inheritance, and grant her a portion in the life eternal.

### THE MARRIAGE OF JOSEPH

The appearance and the speech of Joseph made so deep an impression upon
Asenath that no sooner had she reached her apartment than she divested
herself of her robes of state and took off her jewels, and put on
sackcloth instead, strewed ashes upon her head, and supplicated God amid
tears to grant her pardon for her sins. In this manner she spent seven
days and seven nights in her chamber. Not even her seven attendants were
permitted to enter her presence during the time of her penance. The
morning of the eighth day an angel appeared unto her, and bade her put
away her sackcloth and ashes and array herself in state, for this day
she had been born anew, he said, to eat the blessed bread of life, to
drink of the cup of life immortal, and anoint herself with the oil of
life eternal. Asenath was about to set food and drink before her guest,
when she perceived a honeycomb of wondrous form and fragrance. The angel
explained to her that it had been produced by the bees of Paradise, to
serve as food for the angels and the elect of God. He took a small
portion of it for himself, and the rest he put into Asenath's mouth,
saying: "From this day forth thy body shall bloom like the eternal
flowers in Paradise, thy bones shall wax fat like the cedars thereof,
strength inexhaustible shall be thine, thy youth shall never fade, and
thy beauty never perish, and thou shalt be like unto a metropolis
surrounded by a wall." At the request of Asenath, the angel blessed also
her seven attendants, with the words, "May the Lord bless you and make
you to be seven pillars in the City of Refuge."

Thereupon the angel left her, and she saw him ascend heavenward in a
chariot of fire drawn by four steeds of fire. Now she knew that she had
not been entertaining a human being, but an angel.

The celestial messenger had scarcely departed, when a visit from Joseph
was announced, and she hastened to array and adorn herself for his
reception. When she washed her face, she caught sight of it in the
water, and saw it to be of such beauty as never before, so great had
been the transformation wrought by the angel. When Joseph came, he did
not recognize her. He asked her who she was, whereto she replied, "I am
thy maid-servant Asenath! I have cast away my idols, and this day a
visitant came to me from heaven. He gave me to eat of the bread of life
and to drink of the blessed cup, and he spake these words unto me, 'I
give thee unto Joseph as his affianced wife, that he may be thy
affianced husband forever.' And furthermore he said, 'Thy name shall not
any more be called Asenath, but thy name shall be City of Refuge,
whither the nations shall flee for safety.' And he added, 'I go to
Joseph, to tell him all these things that have reference to thee.' Now,
my lord, thou knowest whether the man was with thee and spoke to thee in
my behalf."

Joseph confirmed all she had said, and they embraced and kissed each
other in token of their betrothal, which they celebrated by a banquet
with Potiphar and his wife. The wedding took place later in the presence
of Pharaoh, who set a golden crown upon the head of the bridegroom and
the bride, gave them his blessing, and made a seven days' feast in their
honor, to which he invited the magnates and princes of Egypt and of
other countries. And during the seven days of the wedding festivities
the people were prohibited, under penalty of death, from doing any
manner of work; they all were to join in the celebration of Joseph's
marriage.

### KIND AND UNKIND BRETHREN

On the twenty-first day of the second month in the second of the seven
years of famine, Jacob came down to Egypt, and his daughter-in-law
Asenath visited him. She marvelled not a little at his beauty and
strength. His shoulders and his arms were like an angel's, and his loins
like a giant's. Jacob gave her his blessing, and with her husband she
returned home, accompanied by the sons of Leah, while the sons of the
handmaids, remembering the evil they had once done unto Joseph, kept
aloof. Levi in particular had conceived a fondness for Asenath. He was
especially close to the Living God, for he was a prophet and a sage, his
eyes were open, and he knew how to read the celestial books written by
the finger of God. He revealed to Asenath that he had seen her future
resting-place in heaven, and it was built upon a rock and encompassed by
a diamond wall.

On their journey they met the son of Pharaoh, his successor to the
throne, and he was so transported with Asenath's beauty, that he made
the plan of murdering Joseph in order to secure possession of his wife.
He summoned Simon and Levi, and by blandishments and promises sought to
induce them to put Joseph out of the way. Simon was so enraged that he
would have felled him at once, had not his brother Levi, who was endowed
with the gift of prophecy, divined his purpose, and frustrated it by
stepping upon his foot, while whispering: "Why art thou so angry, and so
wroth with the man? We that fear God may not repay evil with evil."
Turning to the son of Pharaoh, he told him that nothing would induce
them to execute the wickedness he had proposed; rather he advised him
not to undertake aught against Joseph, else he would kill him with the
sword that had served him in his slaughter of the inhabitants of
Shechem. The culprit was seized with frantic alarm, and fell down before
Simon and Levi to entreat their mercy. Levi raised him tip, saying,
"Fear not, but abandon thy wicked plan, and harbor no evil design
against Joseph."

Nevertheless the son of Pharaoh did not give up his criminal purpose. He
approached the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, and sought to accomplish
through them what had failed with Simon and Levi. He called them into
his presence, and told them of a conversation between Joseph and Pharaoh
that he had overheard. The former had said that he waited but to learn
of the death of his father Jacob in order to do away with the sons of
the handmaids, because they had been the ones to sell him into slavery.
Their wrath excited against Joseph by these words, the sons of Bilhah
and Zilpah assented to the proposition of the son of Pharaoh. It was
arranged that the latter should kill Pharaoh, the friend of Joseph,
while they would fall upon their brother, and put him out of the way.
They were furnished with six hundred able warriors and fifty spearmen
for the purpose. The first part of the plan, the murder of Pharaoh,
failed. The palace guard would not allow even the successor to the
throne to enter his father's bedchamber, and he had to depart without
having effected his object.

Now Dan and Gad gave him the advice to take up his station with fifty
archers in a secret place that Asenath had to pass on her homeward
journey. Thence he could make a successful attack upon her suite, and
gain possession of her. Naphtali and Asher did not care to have anything
to do with this hostile enterprise against Joseph, but Dan and Gad
forced them into it, insisting that all the sons of the handmaids must
stand together as men and repel the danger that threatened them.

### TREACHERY PUNISHED

From their ambush the forces of the son of Pharaoh fell upon Asenath and
her six hundred attendants. They succeeded in hewing down the vanguard,
and Asenath had to take to flight. To her alarm she encountered the son
of Pharaoh with fifty mounted men. Benjamin, seated in the same chariot
with her, came to her rescue, for in spite of his youth he was
exceedingly courageous. He descended from the chariot, gathered pebbles,
and, throwing them at the son of Pharaoh, struck him on his forehead and
inflicted a severe wound. The charioteer aided him by keeping him
supplied with pebbles, which he cast at the fifty riders with such
expert skill that he slew forty-eight of them with as many missiles.
Meantime the sons of Leah arrived on the spot and came to Asenath's aid,
for Levi, with his prophetic spirit, had seen what was happening, and
summoning his five brothers he had hastened thither. These six attacked
the troops in ambush and cut them down. But the danger to Asenath was by
no means removed. At this moment the sons of the handmaids threw
themselves upon her and Benjamin with drawn swords. It was their
intention to kill them both, and flee to cover in the depths of the
woods. But as soon as Asenath supplicated God for aid, the swords
dropped from the hands of her assailants, and they saw that the Lord was
on the side of Asenath. They fell at her feet and entreated her grace.
She allayed their anxiety with the words: "Be courageous and have no
fear of your brethren, the sons of Leah. They are God-fearing men. Do
but keep yourselves in hiding until their wrath is appeased."

When the sons of Leah appeared, Asenath fell down before them, and amid
tears she adjured them to spare the sons of the handmaids and not repay
with evil the evil they had meditated. Simon would not hear of making
concessions. He insisted that the measure of their sins was full, and
they must pay for them with their lives, for they had been the ones that
had sold Joseph into slavery, and brought down untold misfortune upon
Jacob and his sons. But Asenath did not leave off, and her urgent
petitions won the day. She succeeded in calming the anger of Simon, and
in Levi she had a secret ally, for this prophet knew the hiding-place of
the sons of the handmaids, and he did not betray it to Simon, lest his
wrath be increased at the sight of them. It was also Levi that
restrained Benjamin from giving the death blow to the heavily wounded
son of Pharaoh. So far from permitting harm to be done to him, he washed
his wounds, put him into a chariot, and took him to Pharaoh, who thanked
Levi from his heart for his services of loving-kindness. Levi's efforts
were vain, three days later the son of Pharaoh died of the wounds
inflicted by Benjamin, and from grief over the loss of his first-born
Pharaoh followed him soon after, departing this life at the age of one
hundred and seventy-seven years. His crown he left to Joseph, who ruled
over Egypt for forty-eight years thereafter. He in turn handed the crown
on to the grandchild of Pharaoh, an infant in arms at the time of his
grandfather's death, toward whom Joseph had acted in a father's stead
all his life.

### THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF JOSEPH

On his death-bed Joseph took an oath of his brethren, and he bade them
on their death-bed likewise take an oath of their sons, to carry his
bones to Palestine, when God should visit them and bring them up out of
the land of Egypt. He said: "I that am a ruler could take my father's
body up to the Holy Land while it was still intact. Of you I do but make
the request that ye carry my bones from hence, and you may inter them in
any spot in Palestine, for I know that the burial-place of the fathers
was appointed to be the tomb only of the three Patriarchs and their
three wives."

Joseph took the oath, to carry his remains along with them when they
left Egypt, from his brethren, and not from his sons, to bury him at
once in Palestine, for he feared the Egyptians would not give the latter
permission to transport his bones even if they recalled what Joseph had
been allowed to do with his father's body. They would object that Joseph
had been the viceroy, and a wish preferred by one of so high an estate
could not be denied. Furthermore, he adjured his brethren not to leave
Egypt until a redeemer should appear and announce his message with the
words, "Pakod--I have surely visited you"--a tradition which Joseph had
received from his father, who had it from Isaac, and Isaac in turn had
beard it from Abraham. And he told them that God would redeem Israel
through Moses as through the Messiah, in this world as in the world to
come, and the Egyptian redemption would begin in Tishri, when Israel
would be freed from slave labor, and would be completed in the following
Nisan, when they would leave Egypt.

Joseph also admonished his brethren to walk in the ways of the Lord, so
that they might become worthy of His grace and help. Especially he
impressed upon his brethren and his sons the virtue of chastity and a
steadfast moral life. He told them all that had happened to him, the
hatred of his brethren, the persecutions of the wife of Potiphar, the
slander, envy, and malice of the Egyptians, to show how that those who
fear the Lord are not forsaken by Him in darkness, or bondage, or
tribulation, or distress. "I was sold into slavery," he said, "but the
Lord delivered me; I was thrown into prison, but His strong hand helped
me. I was tortured by hunger, but the Lord Himself gave me sustenance. I
was alone, and God comforted me. And as for you, if ye will walk in the
ways of chastity and purity in patience and humility of heart, the Lord
will dwell among you, for He loveth a chaste life, and if you, my
children, will observe the commandments of the Lord, He will raise you
up here, in this world, and bless you there, in the world to come. If
men seek to do evil unto you, pray for them, and you will be delivered
from all evil by the Lord. On account of my forbearing patience I
received the daughter of my master to wife, and her dowry was a hundred
talents of gold, and God gave me also beauty like the beauty of a
flower, more than all the children of Jacob, and He preserved me unto
mine old age in vigor and beauty, for in all things did I resemble
Jacob."

Joseph continued and told them the visions he had had, in which the
future of Israel was revealed to him, and then he closed with the words:
"I know that the Egyptians will oppress you after my death, but God will
execute vengeance for your sakes, and He will lead you to the land of
promise of your fathers. But ye shall surely carry my bones with you
from hence, for if my remains are taken to Canaan, the Lord will be with
you in the light, and Behar will be with the Egyptians in the darkness.
Also take with you the bones of your mother Zilpah, and bury them near
the sepulchre of Bilhah and Rachel."

These words ended, he stretched out his feet, and slept his last eternal
sleep, and the whole of Israel mourned him, and the whole of Egypt was
in great grief, for he had been a compassionate friend to the Egyptians,
too, and he had done good unto them, and given them wise counsel and
assistance in all their undertakings.

Joseph's wish, that his bones should rest in the Holy Land, was
fulfilled when the Israelites went forth from Egypt, and no less a
personage than Moses applied himself to its execution. Such was Joseph's
reward for the devotion he had displayed in the interment of his
father's body, for he had done all things needful himself, leaving
naught to others. Therefore so great a man as Moses busied himself with
the realization of Joseph's wish.

For three days and three nights preceding the exodus Moses hunted up and
down through the land of Egypt for Joseph's coffin, because he knew that
Israel could not leave Egypt without heeding the oath given to Joseph.
But his trouble was in vain; the coffin was nowhere to be found. Serah,
the daughter of Asher, met Moses, tired and exhausted, and in answer to
her question about the cause of his weariness, he told her of his
fruitless search. Serah took him to the Nile river, and told him that
the leaden coffin made for Joseph by the Egyptians had been sunk there
after having been scaled up on all sides. The Egyptians had done this at
the instigation and with the help of the magicians, who, knowing that
Israel could not leave the country without the coffin, had used their
arts to put it in a place whence it could not be removed.

Moses now took Joseph's cup, and he cut four flat pieces from it, and
engraved a lion on one of them, an eagle on the second, a bull on the
third, and a human figure on the fourth. He threw the first, with the
lion, into the river, saying at the same time, "Joseph, Joseph, the hour
for the redemption of Israel hath arrived, the Shekinah lingers here
only for thy sake, the clouds of glory await thy coming. If thou wilt
show thyself, well and good; if not, then we are clear from our oath."
But the coffin did not appear.

Then Moses threw the second plate into the water, that with the figure
of the eagle, repeating the same words, but again the coffin did not
rise from the bed of the Nile, and there it remained, too, when he threw
in the third plate bearing the figure of the bull, and called upon
Joseph a third time to come forth. But the fourth plate with the human
figure and the fourth invocation to Joseph brought the coffin to the
surface of the water. Moses seized it, and in joy he bore it off. While
Israel had been busy gathering gold and silver from the Egyptians, Moses
had been thinking of nothing but Joseph's coffin, and his happiness was
great that he had been permitted to fulfil the wish of Joseph.

During the forty years of wandering through the desert, the coffin was
in the midst of Israel, as a reward for Joseph's promise to his
brethren, "I will nourish you and take care of you." God had said, "As
thou livest, for forty years they will take care of thy bones."

All this time in the desert Israel carried two shrines with them, the
one the coffin containing the bones of the dead man Joseph, the other
the Ark containing the covenant of the Living God. The wayfarers who saw
the two receptacles wondered, and they would ask, "How doth the ark of
the dead come next to the ark of the Ever-living?" The answer was, "The
dead man enshrined in the one fulfilled the commandments enshrined in
the other. In the latter it is written, I am the Lord thy God, and he
said, Am I in the place of God? Here it is written, Thou shalt have no
other gods before My face, and he said, I fear God. Here it is written,
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, and therefore
he did not swear by God, but said, By the life of Pharaoh. Here it is
written, Remember the Sabbath day, and he said to the overseer of his
palace on Friday, Slay and make ready, meaning for the Sabbath. Here it
is written, Honor thy father and thy mother, and he said, when his
father desired to send him to his brethren, Here am I, although he knew
it was perilous for him to go. Here it is written, Thou shalt not kill,
and he refrained from murdering Potiphar when Potiphar's wife urged him
to do it. Here it is written, Thou shalt not commit adultery, and he
scorned the adulterous proposals of Potiphar's wife. Here it is written,
Thou shalt not steal, and he stole nothing from Pharaoh, but gathered up
all the money and brought it unto Pharaoh's house. Here it is written,
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor, and he told his
father nothing of what his brethren had done to him, though what he
might have told was the truth. Here it is written, Thou shalt not covet,
and he did not covet Potiphar's wife."

On their arrival in the Holy Land, the Israelites buried the bones of
Joseph in Shechem, for God spake to the tribes, saying, "From Shechem
did ye steal him, and unto Shechem, shall ye return him."

God, who is so solicitous about the dead bodies of the pious, is even
more solicitous about their souls, which stand before Him like angels,
and do their service ministering unto Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: The Sons of Jacob](loj204)
