[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj305)  [Next](loj307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TWELVE PRINCES OF THE TRIBES

God in His love for Israel had frequent censuses taken of them, so that
He might accurately estimate His possession. In scarcely half a year
they were twice counted, once shortly before the erection of the
Tabernacle, and the second time a month after its dedication. On the
first day of the month of Iyyar, Moses received instructions to take a
census of all men over twenty who were physically fit to go to war. He
was ordered to take Aaron as his assistant, so that in case he should
overlook some of the men Aaron might remind him of them, for "two are
better than one." They were also to take as their subordinate assistants
Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons, and a man each from the several
tribes. These twelve men were appointed not only to conduct the census,
but also to look after the spiritual welfare of their respective tribes,
the sins of which would be upon their heads unless, with all their
powers, they strove to prevent them. Moses and Aaron nevertheless
adjured the princes of the tribes, in spite of their high rank, not to
tyrannize over the people, whereas, on the other hand, they admonished
the people to pay all due respect to their superiors.

The names of these twelve princes of the tribes indicated the history of
the tribes they represented. The prince of the tribe Reuben was called
Elizur, "my God is a rock," referring to the ancestor of this tribe,
Reuben, Jacob's son, who sinned, but, owing to his penance, was forgiven
by God, who bore his sin as a rock bears the house built upon it. The
name of Elizur's father was Shedeur, "cast into the fire," because
Reuben was converted to repentance and atonement through Judah, who
confessed his sin when his daughter-in-law Tamar was about to be cast
into the fire.

The prince of the tribe of Simeon was named Shelumiel, "my God is
peace," to indicate that in spite of the sin of Zimri, head of this
tribe, through whom four and twenty thousand men among Israel died, God
nevertheless made peace with this tribe.

The prince of the tribe of Judah bore the name Nahshon, "wave of the
sea," the son of Amminadab, "prince of My people," because the prince
received this dignity as a reward for having plunged into the waves of
the Red Sea to glorify God's name.

The tribe of Issachar had for its prince Nethanel, "God gave," for this
tribe devoted its life to the Torah given by God to Moses. Accordingly
Nethanel was called the son of Zuar, "burden," for Issachar assumed the
burden of passing judgement on the lawsuits of the other tribes.

Corresponding to the occupation of the tribe of Zebulun, its prince was
called Eliab, "the ship," son of Helon, "the sand," for this tribe spent
its life on ships, seeking "treasures hidden in the sand."

Elishama, son of Ammihud, the name of the prince of the tribe of
Ephraim, points to the history of Joseph, their forefather. God said:
"Elishama, 'he obeyed Me,' who bade him be chaste and not covet his
master's wife that wanted to tempt him to sin, and Ammihud, 'Me he
honored,' and none other."

The other tribe of Joseph, Manasseh, also named their prince in
reference to their forefather, calling him Gamaliel, son of Pedahzur,
which signifies, "God rewarded Joseph for his piety by releasing him
from bondage and making him ruler over Egypt."

The prince of the tribe of Benjamin was named Abidan, "my father
decreed," son of Gideoni, "mighty hosts," referring to the following
incident. When Rachel perceived that she would die at the birth of her
son, she called him "son of faintness," supposing that a similar fate
would overtake him, and that he was doomed through weakness to die
young. But Jacob, the child's father, decreed otherwise, and called him
Benjamin, "son of might and of many years."

The prince of the tribe of Dan bore the name Ahiezer, "brother of help,"
son of Ammishaddai, "My people's judge," because he was allied with the
helpful tribe of Judah at the erection of the Tabernacle, and like this
ruling tribe brought forth a mighty judge in the person of Samson.

The tribe of Asher was distinguished by the beauty of its women, which
was so excellent that even the old among them were fairer and stronger
than the young girls of the other tribes. For this reason kings chose
the daughters of this tribe to be their wives, and these, through their
intercession before the kings, saved the lives of many who had been
doomed to death. Hence the name of the prince of the tribe of Asher,
Pagiel, "the interceder," son of Ochran, "the afflicted," for the women
of the tribe of Asher, through their intercession, obtained grace for
the afflicted.

The prince of the tribe of Gad bore the name Eliasaph, "God multiplied;"
son of Deuel, "God is a witness." To reward them for passing over the
Jordan and not returning to their property on this side of the river
until the promised land was won, their wealth was multiplied by God; for
when, upon returning, they found the enemy at home, God aided them and
they gained all their enemies possessions. God was furthermore witness
that this tribe had no wicked motive when they erected an altar on their
land.

The prince of the tribe of Naphtali was called Ahira, "desirable
meadow," son of Enan, "clouds;" for the land of this tribe was
distinguished by its extraordinary excellence. Its products were exactly
what their owners "desired," and all this owing to the plenty of water,
for the "clouds" poured plentiful rain over their land.

At the census of the people the tribes were set down in the order in
which they put up their camp and moved in their marches. The tribes of
Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun formed the first group, the royal tribe of
Judah being associated with the tribe of learned men, Issachar, and with
Zebulun, which through its generosity enabled Issachar to devote itself
to the study of the Torah. The second group consisted of Reuben, Simeon,
and Gad. The sinful tribe of Simeon was supported on the right by the
penance of Reuben and on the left by the strength of Gad. The tribes of
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin formed a group by themselves, for these
before all the other tribes were destined to appear gloriously against
Amalek. The Ephraimite Joshua was the first who was victorious against
Amalek, the Benjamite Saul followed his example in his war against Agag,
king of Amalek, and, under the leadership of men out of the tribe of
Manasseh, the tribe of Simeon at the time of king Jehoshaphat succeeded
in destroying the rest of the Amalekites, and to take possession formed
the last group, and for the following reason were united in this way.
The tribe of Dan had already at the time of the exodus from Egypt been
possessed of the sinful thought to fashion an idol. To counteract this
"dark thought" Asher was made its comrade, from whose soil came "the oil
for lighting;" and that Dan might participate in the blessing, Naphtali,
"full with the blessing of the Lord," became its second companion.

At this third census the number of men who were able to go to war proved
to be exactly the same as the second census, taken in the same year. Not
one among Israel had died during this period, from the beginning of the
erection of the Tabernacle to its dedication, when the third census took
place. But no conclusive evidence concerning the sum total of the
separate tribes can be drawn from this number of men able to go to war,
because the ration of the two sexes varied among the different tribes,
as, for example, the female sex in the tribe of Naphtali greatly
outnumbered the male.

### THE CENSUS OF THE LEVITES

Moses at the census did not take into consideration the tribe of Levi,
because God had not commanded him to select a prince for this tribe as
for all others, hence he drew the conclusion that they were not to be
counted. Naturally he was not sure of his decision in this matter, and
wavered whether or not to include the Levites in the number, when God
said to him: "Do not muster the tribe of Levi, nor number them among the
children of Israel." At these words Moses was frightened, for he feared
that his tribe was considered unworthy of being counted with the rest,
and was therefore excluded by God. But God quieted him, saying: "Do not
number the Levites among the children of Israel, number them
separately." There was several reasons for numbering the Levites
separately. God foresaw that, owing to the sin of the spies who were
sent to search the land, all men who were able to go to war would perish
in the wilderness, "all that were numbered of them, according to their
whole number, from twenty years old and upward." Now had the Levites
been included in the sum total of Israel, the Angel of Death would have
held sway over them also, wherefore God excluded them from the census of
all the tribes, that they might in the future be exempt from the
punishment visited upon the others, and might enter the promised land.
The Levites were, furthermore, the body-guard of God, to whose care the
sanctuary was entrusted-another reason for counting them separately. God
in this instance conducted Himself like the king who ordered one of his
officers to number his legions, but added: "Number all the legions
excepting only the legion that is about me."

The extent of God's love for Levi is evident through the command given
to Moses, to number in the tribe of Levi "all males from a month old and
upward," whereas in the other tribes none were numbered save men able to
go to war, from twenty years and upward. Upon other occasions God had
even the embryos among the Levites numbered. This occurred upon Jacob's
entrance into Egypt, when the number seventy for his family was attained
only by including Jochebed who was still in the womb; and similarly at a
future time upon the return of the exiles from Babylon. For at that time
only twenty-three of the priestly sections returned, hence to complete
their number they had to include Bigvai, who belonged to the missing
section, even though he was still in the womb.

When Moses was ordered to number among the Levites all children from a
month old and upward, he said to God: "Thou biddest me count them from a
month old and upward. Shall I now wander about their courts and houses
and count each child, seeing that Thou givest me such a command?" But
God replied: "Do thou what thou canst do, and I will do what I can do."
It now came to pass that whenever Moses betook himself to a Levite tent
he found the Shekinah awaiting him, tell him exactly the number of
children without his having to count them.

In the choice of this tribe God showed His preference for the seventh,
for Levi was the seventh pious man, starting from Adam, to wit: Adam,
Noah, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Levi. As in this instance, so in
many others did God indicate His love for the seventh. He sits enthroned
in the seventh heaven; of the seven worlds the seventh alone is
inhabited by human beings; of the early generations the seventh was the
most excellent, for it produces Enoch. Moses, seventh among the
Patriarch, was judged worthy of receiving the Torah. David, seventh son
of Jesse, was chosen as king. In periods of time, also, the seventh was
the favorite. The seventh day is the Sabbath; the seventh month, Tishri,
is the month of the holy days; the seventh year is the Sabbatical year
of rest, and every seventh Sabbatical year of rest is the year of
jubilee.

Another reason for numbering even the youngest boys among the Levites
was that the tribe of Levi as a whole had the responsibility of atoning
for the sin of the first-born among the children of Israel. For it was
these who until the time of the worship of the Golden Calf performed the
services of the priesthood, and their privilege was taken from them
owing to this, their sin. This prerogative was then conferred upon the
tribe of Levi, who, moreover, dedicating themselves, man for man, to the
service of the Lord, served as an atonement for the first-born of
Israel, that they might not be destroyed as they deserved.

The exchange of Levites in place of the first-born did, however, present
a difficulty. For God had communicated the number of Levites to Moses in
the following way: "Their number amounts to as many as the number of My
legion." For, when God came down upon Sinai, twenty-two thousand angels
surrounded Him, and just as many men did the Levites number. Outside of
these there were three hundred first-born among the Levites that could
not well be offered in exchange for the first-born among the other
tribes, because their standing was the same as theirs. As the number of
first-born among the other tribes exceeded the number of Levites by two
hundred seventy-three, this surplus remained without actual atonement.
Hence God ordered Moses to take from them five shekels apiece by the
poll as redemption money, and give it to the priests. The sum was fixed
upon by God, who said: "Ye sold the first-born of Rachel for five
shekels, and for this reason shall ye give as redemption money for every
first-born among ye five shekels."

To avoid quarrels among the first-born, as otherwise each one would try
to lay the payment of redemption money upon his neighbor, Moses wrote
upon twenty-two thousand slips of paper the word "Levi," and upon two
hundred seventy-three the words "five shekels," all of which were then
thrown into an urn and mixed. Then every first-born had to draw one of
the slips. If he drew a slip with "Levi" he was not obliged to remit any
payment, but if he drew "five shekels," he had to pay that sum to the
priests.

### THE FOUR DIVISIONS OF THE LEVITES

Apart from the census of all male Levites, Moses now took another census
of the men from the ages of thirty to fifty, for only at this age were
the Levites permitted to perform service in the Tabernacle throughout
their march through the desert, a law that indeed ceased to hold good
when Israel settled in the Holy Land. These officiating Levites, as well
as the priests, were divided by Moses into eight sections, a number that
was not doubled until the prophet Samuel increased it to sixteen, to
which David again added eight, so that there were later twenty-four
divisions among the Levites and priests.

The most distinguished among the Levites were the sons of Kohath, whose
charge during the march through the desert was the Holy of Holies, and
among the vessels particularly the Holy Ark. This latter was a dangerous
trust, for out of the staves attached to it would issue sparks that
consumed Israel's enemies, but now and then this fire wrought havoc
among the bearers of the Ark. It therefore became a customary thing,
when the camp was about to be moved, for Kohath's sons to hasten into
the sanctuary and seek to pack up the different portions of it, each one
planning cautiously to shift the carrying of the Ark upon another. But
this even more kindled God's anger against them, and He slew many of the
Kohathites because they ministered to the Ark with an unwilling heart.
To avert the danger that threatened them, God ordered Aaron and his sons
to enter first into the sanctuary, and "to appoint to the Kohathites,
every one, his service and his burden, that they might not go in to see
when the holy things are covered, lest they die." This was done because
previous to this command the sons of Kohath had been accustomed to feast
their eyes on the sight of the Ark, which brought them instantaneous
death. But, according to this order, Aaron and his sons first took apart
the different portions of the sanctuary, covered the Ark, and not till
then called the sons of Kohath to bear the burden.

During the march the Levites might wear no shoes, but had to walk
barefoot because they carried and ministered to holy objects. The
Kohathites had, moreover, to walk backwards, for they might not turn
their backs to the Holy Ark. They were, furthermore, owing to their
offices as bearers of the Ark, distinguished by being the first of the
Levites to be numbered in the census, although in other respects the
sons of Gershon led, for Gershon was the first-born of Levi.

When giving the commission to count the sons of Kohath, God explicitly
mentioned that Moses should undertake the census with Aaron, but He did
not do so when He ordered the numbering of the sons of Gershon. Moses
now thought that God had done this intentionally because the former were
directly under Aaron's supervision while the Gershonites were not.
Nevertheless, out of respect to his brother, he bade his brother, as
well as, out of courtesy, the princes of the tribes to be present at the
numbering of the Levites, but he did not tell Aaron that he did so in
the name of God. In this Moses erred, for God wished Aaron to be present
at the numbering of the Levites. For this reason, when He ordered the
census of the third division, Merari's sons, to be taken, He expressly
mentioned Aaron's name. At the apportionment of the service among the
individual Levites, however, Aaron paid attention only to the sons of
Kohath, each of whom had his special task allotted to him, whereas Moses
appointed their tasks to the sons of Gershon and Merari. The highest
chief of the Levites, however, was Eleazar, who was "to have the
oversight of them that keep the charge of the santuary." But despite his
high position, Eleazar was modest enough to participate in the service
in person. During their marches from place to place, he himself would
carry all needful things for the daily offering. In his right hand he
carried the oil for the candlestick, in his left hand the incense, on
his are the things that were made in the pans, and, attached to his
girdle, the phial with the oil for ointment. Ithamar, Eleazar's brother,
also had a duty in the sanctuary, for it was he to whom the guidance of
the service of Gershon's and Merari's sons was assigned. For these must
perform none but the service God had specially assigned to them, as no
Gershonite might perform the duty of a Merarite, and vice versa, and
each individual, too, had his special duty, that no quarrel might arise
among them.

### THE FOUR STANDARDS

When God appeared upon Sinai, He was surrounded by twenty-two thousand
angels, all in full array and divided into groups, each of which had its
own standard. Looking upon these angel hosts, Israel wished like them to
be divided into groups with standards, and God fulfilled their wish.
After Moses had completed the census of the people, God said to Him:
"Fulfill their wish and provide them with standards as they desire.
'Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard,
with the ensign of their father's house; far off about the Tabernacle of
the congregation shall they pitch.'" This commission greatly agitated
Moses, who thought: "Now will there be much strife among the tribes. If
I bid the tribe of Judah pitch in the East, it will surely state its
preference for the South, and every tribe will likewise choose any
direction but the one assigned to it." But God said to Moses: "Do not
concern thyself with the position of the standards of the tribes, for
they have no need of thy direction. Their father Jacob before his death
ordered them to group themselves about the Tabernacle just as his sons
were to be grouped about his bier at the funeral procession." When Moses
now told the people to divide themselves in groups round about the
Tabernacle, they did it in the manner Jacob had bidden them.

"The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath He
established the heavens." The division of the tribes of Israel according
to four standards, as well as their subdivision at each standard, is not
arbitrary and accidental, it corresponds to the same plan and direction
as that of which God made use in heaven. The celestial Throne is
surrounded by four angels: to the right Michael, in front Gabriel, to
the left Uriel, and to the rear Raphael. To these four angels
corresponded the four tribes of Reuben, Judah, Dan, and Ephraim, the
standard bearers. Michael earned his name, "Who is like unto God," by
exclaiming during the passage of Israel through the Red Sea, "Who is
like unto Thee, O Lord, among the gods?" and he made a similar statement
when Moses completed the Torah, saying: "There is none like unto the God
of Jeshurun." In the same way Reuben bore upon his standard the words,
"Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God is one Lord," hence Reuben's position
with his standard to the right of the sanctuary corresponded exactly to
Michael's post at the right of the celestial Throne. Gabriel, "God is
mighty," stands in front of the Throne, as Judah, "mightiest among his
brethren," was the standard bearer in front of the camp. Dan, the tribe
"from which emanated dark sin," stood at the left side of the camp with
his standard, corresponding to the angel Uriel, "God is my light," for
God illuminated the darkness of sin by the revelation of the Torah, in
the study of which this angel instructed Moses, and devotion to which is
penance for sin. The tribe of Ephraim was the standard bearer to the
rear of the camp, occupying the same position as Raphael, "God heals,"
holds the celestial Throne; for this tribe, from which sprang Jeroboam,
was in need of God's healing for the wound that this wicked king dealt
Israel.

God had other reasons for the divisions of the tribes that He decreed,
for He said to Moses: "In the East whence comes the light shall the
tribe of Judah, whence arises the light of sovereignty, pitch its camp,
and with them the tribe of Issachar, with whom dwells the light of the
Torah, and Zebulum, shining through the wealth. From the South come the
dews of blessing and the rains of plenty, hence shall Reuben pitch on
this side, for this tribe owes its existence to the penitent deeds of
its forefather, penance being that which causes God to send His blessing
upon the world. Beside Reuben shall stand the warlike tribe of Gad, and
between these two Simeon, in order that this tribe, made weak by its
sins, might be protected on either side by the piety of Reuben and the
heroism of Gad. In the West are storehouses of snow, the storehouses of
hail, of cold, and of heat, and as powerless as are mortals against
these forces of nature, so ineffectual shall be the enemies of the
tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin, for which reason their post
was to the West of the camp. From the North comes the darkness of sin,
for this tribe alone will declare itself willing to accept the idols of
Jeroboam, hence its place is to the North of the camp. To illuminate its
darkness, put beside it shining Asher, and Naphtali, filled with God's
plenty."

The four standards were distinguished from one another by their
different colors, and by the inscriptions and figures worked upon each.
The color of Judah's standard corresponded to the color of the three
stones in the breastplate of the high priest, on which were engraved the
names of Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun, and was composed of red, green,
and fiery red. Judah's name, as well as Issachar's and Zebulun's, was
inscribed on the banner, and beside the names was this inscription:
"Rise up, Lord, and let Thine enemies be scattered; and let them that
hate Thee flee before Thee." The standard of Reuben, about which
gathered also the tribes of Simeon and Gad, was the color of the
emerald, the sapphire, and the sabhalom, for on these three stones were
the names of these tribes engraved on the breastplate of the high
priest. Besides the names of Reuben, Simeon, and Gad the following
device was wrought on the second standard, "Hear, O Israel: the Lord our
God is one Lord." The third standard, around which rallied the tribes of
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin, bore the color of the diamond, the
turquoise, and the amethyst, for on these three stones in the high
priest's breastplate were engrave the names of these three tribes. On
this standard beside the names of these three tribes was the motto, "And
the cloud of the Lord was upon them by day, when they went out of camp."
As on the breastplate of the high priest the stones chrysolite, beryl
and panther-stone bore the names of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali, so too did
the fourth standard, round which these three tribes gathered, bear a
color resembling these three stones. This standard contained the names
of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali, and the device: "Return, O Lord, unto the
many thousands of Israel."

The standards had also other distinguishing characteristics. Judah's
standard bore in its upper part the figure of a lion, for its forefather
had been characterized by Jacob as "a lion's whelp," and also sword-like
hooks of gold. On these hooks God permitted a strip of the seventh cloud
of glory to rest, in which were visible the initials of the names of the
three Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the letters being
radiations from the Shekinah. Reuben's standard had in its upper part
the figure of a man, corresponding to the mandrakes that Reuben,
forefather of this tribe, found, for this plant had the form of a
manikin. The hooks on this standard were like those on the standard of
Judah, but the second letters of the names of the three Patriarchs, Bet,
Zade, and 'Ayyin were seen above them in the cloud. In the standard of
Ephraim was fashioned the form of a fish, for Jacob had blessed the
forefather of this tribe by telling him to multiply like a fish; in all
other respects it was like the other two standards, save the above the
sword-like hooks of gold were seen the third letters in the names of the
Patriarchs, Resh, Het, and Kof. Dan's standard contained the form of a
serpent, for "Dan shall be a serpent by the way," was Jacob's blessing
for this tribe; and the gleaming letters over the hooks were: Mem for
Abraham, Kof for Isaac, and Bet for Jacob. The letter He of Abraham's
name was not indeed visible over the standards, but was reserved by God
for a still greater honor. For, over the Holy Ark, God let a pillar of
cloud rest, and in this were visible the letter Yod and He, spelling the
name Yah, by means of which God had created the world. This pillar of
cloud shed sunlight by day and moonlight by night, so that Israel, who
were surrounded by clouds, might distinguish between night and day.
These two sacred letters, Yod, He, would on week-days fly about in the
air over the four standards, hovering now upon this, now upon that. But
as soon as Friday was over and the Sabbath began, these letters stood
immovable on the spot where they chanced to be at that moment, and
remained in this rigid position from the first moment of the Sabbath to
the last.

Whenever God wanted Israel to break up camp and move on, He would send
on from its place over the Ark the cloud in which beamed the two sacred
letters Yod and He in the direction in which Israel was to march, and
the four strips of cloud over the standards would follow. As soon as the
priests saw the clouds in motion, they blew the trumpets as a signal for
starting, and the winds thereupon from all sides breathed myrrh and
frankincense.

Although it was the clouds that gave the signal for taking down and
pitching tents, still they always awaited the word of Moses. Before
starting the pillar of cloud would contract and stand still before
Moses, waiting for him to say: "Rise up, Lord, and let Thine enemies be
scattered; and let them that hate Thee flee before Thee," whereupon the
pillar of cloud would be set in motion. It was the same when they
pitched camp. The pillar of cloud would contract and stand still before
Moses, waiting for him to say: "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands
of Israel," whereupon it would expand first over the tribes that
belonged to the standard of Judah, and then over the sanctuary, within
and without.

### THE CAMP

The camp was in the form of a square, twelve thousand cubits on each
side, and in the middle was the space, four thousand cubits in size, for
the sanctuary, and the dwelling place of priests and Levites. In the
East of the sanctuary lived Moses, Aaron, and Aaron's sons; the Levites
of the family of Kohath lived in the South, the sons of Gershon in the
West, and the sons of Merari in the North. Each of theses divisions had
for its dwelling place a space of a hundred cubits, while each group of
three tribes that joined under one standard had a space of four thousand
cubits. This was only for the dwelling place of the people, the cattle
were outside the encampment, and the cloud of glory separated the
dwelling places of the human beings from those of the animals. Rivers
surrounded the camp from without, and so also were the different groups
separated one from the other by rivers. But in order that on the
Sabbath, when riding was prohibited, intercourse among the different
parts of the camp might not be rendered impossible, there were bridges
of boards over the rivers. The purple color of the cloud of glory was
reflected in the waters of the rivers, so that it spread afar a radiance
like that of the sun and the stars. The heathens, whenever they beheld
these wondrous radiant waters, were frightened and feared Israel, but at
the same time praised God for the miracles He wrought for Israel.

These were miracles that were visible to the outer world as well, but
there were others that were known to Israel alone. During their forty
years' march they had no need of change of raiment. The robe of purple
which the angels clothed each one among them at their exodus from Egypt
remained ever new; and as a snail's shell grows with it, so did their
garments grow with them. Fire could not injure these garments, and
though they wore the same things throughout forty years, still they were
not annoyed by vermin, yes, even the corpses of this generation were
spared by worms.

During their marches, as well as in their stay at a certain place, they
had not only the four standards that divided them into four groups of
three tribes each, each individual tribe had furthermore its own special
spot and its special ensign. Reuben's flag was red, and on it were
pictured mandrakes. Simeon's flag was green, with a picture of the city
of Shechem upon it, for the forefather of the tribe had conquered this
city. Judah's flag was azure, and bore the form of a lion. Issachar's
flag was black, and had two figures, the sun and the moon, for from this
tribe sprung the learned men who busied themselves with astronomy and
the science of the calendar. Zebulun's flag was white, with the form of
a ship, for this tribe devoted to navigation. Dan's flag had a color
like a sapphire, with the figure of a serpent. Naphtali's flag was a
dull red, the color of wine, and on it was the figure of a hind, in
memory of its forefather, who was like "a hind let loose." Ashere's flag
was red like fire, and had the token of an olive tree, because this
tribe had much olive oil of excellent quality. The two tribes descended
from Joseph,-Ephraim, and Manasseh-both flags of the same deep black
color with a representation of Egypt, but they had other forms besides.
Ephraim's had the picture of a bull, to symbolize Joshua, sprung of this
tribe, whose glory was like "the firstling of his bullock, that pusheth
the people together to the ends of the earth;" whereas Manasseh's was
that of a unicorn, symbolizing the judge Gideon that sprang from this
tribe, "who with his horns of unicorns pushed the people." Benjamin's
flag had a color composed of all the other eleven colors, and a wolf for
his token, Jacob having described this tribe a "a wolf that ravineth."
The different colors of the flags corresponded to the colors of the
stones set in the breastplate of the high priest, on which were engraved
the names of the twelve tribes. Reuben's stone had a red color like his
flag, Simeon's flag was green like the color of his stone, and in this
way with all the tribes the color of stones and of flags harmonized.

### THE BLASPHEMER AND THE SABBATH-BREAKER

When Israel received the Torah from God, all the other nations envied
them and said: "Why were these choosen by God out of all the nations?"
But God stopped their mouths, replying: "Bring Me your family records,
and My children shall bring their family records." The nations could not
prove the purity of their families, but Israel stood without a blemish,
every man among them ready to prove his pure descent, so that the
nations burst into praise at Israel's family purity, which was rewarded
by God with the Torah for this its excellence.

How truly chastity and purity reigned among Israel was shown by the
division of the people into groups and tribes. Among all these thousands
was found only a single man who was not of pure descent, and who
therefore at the pitching of the standards could attach himself to none
of the groups. This man was the son of Shelomith, a Danite woman, and
the Egyptian, whom Moses, when a youth of eighteen, had slain for having
offered violence to Shelomith, the incident that had necessitated Moses'
flight from Egypt. It had happened as follows: When Moses came to Goshen
to visit his parents, he witnessed how an Egyptian struck an Israelite,
and the latter, knowing that Moses was in high favor at Pharaoh's court,
sought his assistance, appealing to him with these words: "O, my lord,
this Egyptian by night forced his way into my house, bound me with
chains, and in my presence offered violence to my wife. Now he wants to
kill me besides." Indignant at this infamous action of the Egyptian,
Moses slew him, so that the tormented Israelite might go home. The
latter, on reaching his house, informed his wife that he intended
getting a divorce from her, as it was not proper for a member of the
house of Jacob to live together with a woman that had been defiled. When
the wife told her brothers of her husband's intentions, they wanted to
kill their brother-in-law, who eluded them only by timely flight.

The Egyptian's violence was not without issue, for Shelomith gave birth
to a son whom she reared as a Jew, even though his father had been and
Egyptian. When the division of the people according to the four standard
took place, this son of Shelomith appeared among the Danites into whose
division he meant to be admitted, pointing out to them that his mother
was a woman of the tribe of Dan. The Danites, however, rejected him,
saying: "The commandment of God says, 'each man by his own standard,
with the ensign of his father's house.' Paternal, not maternal descent
decides a man's admission to a tribe." As this man was not content with
this answer, his case was brought to Moses' court, who also passed
judgement against him. This so embittered him the he blasphemed the
Ineffable Name which he had heard on Mount Sinai, and cursed Moses. He
at the same time ridiculed the recently announced law concerning the
shewbread that was to be set on the table in the sanctuary every
Sabbath, saying: "It behooves a king to eat fresh bread daily, and no
stale bread."

At the same time as the crime blasphemy was committed by the son of
Shelomith, Zelophehad committed another capital crime. On a Sabbath day
he tore trees out of the ground although he had been warned by witnesses
not to break the Sabbath. The overseers whom Moses had appointed to
enforce the observance of the Sabbath rest seized him and brought him to
the school, where Moses, Aaron, and other leaders of the people studied
the Torah.

In both these cases Moses was uncertain how to pass judgement, for,
although he knew that capital punishment must follow the breaking of the
Sabbath, still the manner of capital punishment in this case had not yet
been revealed to him. Zelophehad was in the meantime kept in prison
until Moses should learn the details of the case, for the laws says that
a man accused of a capital charge may not be given liberty of person.
The sentence that Moses received from God was to execute Zelophehad in
the presence of all the community by stoning him. This was accordingly
done, and after the execution his corps was for a short time suspended
from the gallows.

The sin of the Sabbath-breaker was the occasion that gave rise to God's
commandment of Zizit to Israel. For He said to Moses, "dost thou know
how it came to pass that this man broke the Sabbath?" Moses: "I do not
know." God: "On week days he wore phylacteries on his head and
phylacteries on his arm to remind him of his duties, but on the Sabbath
day, on which no phylacteries may be worn, he had nothing to call his
duties to his mind, and he broke the Sabbath. God now, Moses, and find
for Israel a commandment the observance of which is not limited to week
days only, but which will influence them on Sabbath days and on holy
days as well." Moses selected the commandment of Zizit, the sight of
which will recall to the Israelites all the other commandments of God.

Whereas in the case of the Sabbath breaker Moses had been certain that
the sin was punishable by death, and had been certain that the sin was
punishable by death, and had been in doubt only concerning the manner of
execution, in the case of the blasphemer matters were different. Here
Moses was in doubt concerning the nature of the crime, for he was not
even sure if it was at all a capital offence. Hence he did not have
these two men imprisoned together, because one of them was clearly a
criminal, whereas the status of the other was undetermined. But God
instructed Moses that the blasphemer was also to be stoned to death, and
that this was to be the punishment for blasphemers in the future.

There were two other cases beside these two in Moses' career on which he
could not pass judgement without appealing to God. These were the claims
of Zelophehad's daughters to the inheritance of their father, and the
case of the unclean that might not participate in the offering of the
paschal lamb. Moses hastened in his appeal to God concerning the two
last mentioned cases, but took his time with the two former, for on
these depended human lives. In this Moses set the precedent to the
judges among Israel to dispatch civil cases with all celerity, but to
proceed slowly in criminal cases. In all these cases, however, he openly
confessed that he did not at the time know the proper decision, thereby
teaching the judges of Israel to consider it no disgrace, when
necessary, to consult others in cases when they were not sure of true
judgement.

### THE UNGRATEFUL MULTITUDE

When God commanded Israel to set out from Sinai and continue their
march, the Israelites were glad, for during their stay in that place
they had throughout eleven days received new laws daily, and they hoped
that after having departed from the holy mountain they would receive no
further laws. Hence, instead of making a day's march from Sinai, as God
had commanded them, they marched incessantly for three days, in order to
be as far as possible from the holy spot. They behaved like a boy who
runs quickly away after dismissal from school, that his teacher might
not call him back. Although this antipathy to His laws vexed God, He did
not therefore forsake them, but let the Ark move before them as long as
they desired to continue the march. For it was by this token that the
Israelites knew that the Shekinah was among them, as God had promised
them. As often as they broke camp or pitched camp Moses would say to
them: "Do what the Shekinah within the Ark bids you do." But they would
not believe Moses that the Shekinah dwelt among them unless he spoke the
words: "Rise up, Lord, and let Thine enemies be scattered; and let them
that hate Thee flee before Thee," whereupon the Ark would begin to move,
and they were convinced of the presence of the Shekinah. The Ark
furthermore gave the signal for breaking camp by soaring up high, and
then swiftly moving before the camp at a distance of three days' march,
until it found a suitable spot upon which Israel might encamp.

Hardly had they departed from Sinai when they once more began to lead
the wicked course of life that they had for a time abandoned. They began
to seek a pretext to renounce God and again to be addicted to idolatry.
They complained about the forced marches which at God's command they had
been obliged to make after their departure from Sinai, and in this way
showed their ingratitude to God who wanted them as quickly as possible
to reach the Holy Land, and for this reason allowed them to cover an
eleven days' distance in three days. Their murmurs and complaints,
however, were not silent, but quite loud, for they were anxious that God
should hear their wicked words. In punishment for their defamation of
the Divine glory, God sent upon them a fire emanating from the very
glory.

Upon twelve occasions did God send a Divine fire upon earth, six times
as a token of honor and distinction, but as many times as a punishment.
To the first class belong the fire at the consecration of the
Tabernacle, at the offering of Gideon as at that of Manoah and of David;
at the dedication of Solomon's Temple, and at the offering of Elijah
upon Mount Carmel. The six fatal fires are the following: the fire that
consumed Nadab and Abihu; that which wrought havoc among the murmuring
and complaining multitude; the fire that consumed the company of Korah;
the fire that destroyed Job's sheep, and the two fires that burned the
first and second troops which Ahaziah sent against Elijah.

This celestial fire wrought the greatest havoc among the idolatrous
tribe of Dan, and among the mixed multitude that had joined the
Israelites upon their exodus from Egypt. The elders of the people turned
to Moses, saying: "Rather deliver us as a sheep to the slaughter, but
not to a celestial fire that consumes earthly fire." They should by
right have prayed to God themselves, but in this instance they were like
the king's son who had kindled his father's anger against him, and who
not hastened to his father's friend, begging him to intercede for him.
So did Israel say to Moses: "Go thou to God and pray for us." Moses
instantly granted their wish, and God without delay heard Moses' prayer
and halted the destroying fire. But God did not simply take the fire
away from Israel and put it elsewhere, for it was of such a nature that
it would gradually have spread on all sides and finally have destroyed
everything. It had in this way caused the destruction in Israel, for,
beginning at one end of the camp, it spread so rapidly that one could at
not time tell how far it had gone. That the presence of this Divine fire
might continue to restrain Israel from sin, God did not allow it to rise
back to heaven, but it found its place on the altar of the Tabernacle,
where it consumed all the offerings that were brought during Israel's
stay in Egypt. This is the same fire that destroyed Aaron's sons as well
as Korah's company, and it is the Divine fire that every mortal beholds
in the moment of his death.

On this occasion also it was evident that pious men are greater than the
angels, for Moses took bundles of wool and laid them upon the Divine
fire, which thereupon went out. He then said to the people: "If you
repent of your sin, then the fire will go out, but otherwise it will
burst forth and consume you."

### THE FLESH-POTS OF EGYPT

Not mindful of the punishment by fire, Israel still did not mend their
ways, but soon again began to murmur against God. As so often before, it
was again the mixed multitude that rebelled against God and Moses,
saying: "Who shall give up flesh to eat? We remember the fish that we
did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks,
and the onions, and the garlic. But now our soul is dried away: there is
nothing at all, beside this manna before our eyes." But all this
murmuring and these complaints were only a pretext to sever themselves
from God, for first of all, they actually possessed many herds and much
cattle, enough plentifully to satisfy their lusting after flesh if they
had really felt it; and manna, furthermore, had the flavor of every
conceivable kind of food, so all they had to do while eating it was to
wish for a certain dish and they instantly perceived in manna the taste
of the desired food. It is true that manna never gave them the flavor of
the five vegetables they mentioned, but they should have been grateful
to God for sparing them the taste of these vegetables injurious to
health. Here they showed their perversity in being dissatisfied with
measures for which they should have been grateful to God. Manna
displeased them because it did not contain the flavor injurious to
health, and they also objected to it because it remained in their
bodies, wherefore they said: "The manna will swell in our stomachs, for
can there be a human being that takes food without excreting it!" God
had, as a special mark of distinction, given them this food of the
angels, which is completely dissolved in the body, and of which they
could always partake without injury to their health. It is a clear proof
of the excellent taste of manna that a later time, when the last manna
fell on the day of Moses' death, they ate of it for forty days, and
would not make use of other food until the manna had been exhausted to
the last grain, clearly showing that the taking of any different food
was disagreeable. But while manna was at hand in abundance, they
complained about seeing before them, morning and evening, no other food
than manna.

The true state of affairs was that they had a lurking dissatisfaction
with the yoke of the law. It is certain that they had not had in Egypt
better food for which they now longed, for their taskmasters, far from
giving them dainties, gave them not even straw for making bricks. But in
Egypt they had lived undisturbed by laws, and it was this unrestrained
life that they desired back. Especially hard for them were the new laws
on marriage, for in Egypt they had been accustomed to marry those
closely related by blood, from whom they were now obliged to separate.
They now trooped together in families, and awaiting the moment when
Moses, about to leave the house of study, would have to pass them, they
began to murmur publicly, accusing him of being to blame for all the
sufferings they had been obliged to bear. Upon his advice, they said,
had they abandoned a most fruitful land, and instead of enjoying the
great fortune promised to them, they were now wandering about in misery,
suffering thirst from lack of water, and were apprehensive of dying of
starvation in case the supply of manna should cease. When these and
similar abuses were uttered against Moses, one out of the people stepped
forth and exhorted them not so soon to forget the many benefactions they
had known from Moses, and not to despair of God's aid and support. But
the multitude upon this became even more excited, and raged and shouted
more violently than ever against Moses. This conduct of Israel called
forth God's wrath, but Moses, instead of interceding for the people,
began to complain of their treatment of him, and announced to God that
he could not now execute the commission he had undertaken in Egypt,
namely, to lead Israel in spite of all reverses, until he had reached
the promised land. He now begged God to relieve him of the leadership of
the people in some way, and at the same time to stand by him in his
present predicament, that he might satisfy the people's desire for
flesh.

### THE APPOINTMENT OF THE SEVENTY ELDERS

The sad predicament of Moses on this occasion is partly traceable to the
fact that he had to face alone the murmurs and complaints of the people
without the accustomed assistance of the seventy elders. Since the
exodus from Egypt the seventy elders of the people had always been at
his side, but these had recently been killed by the fire from heaven at
Taberah, so that he now stood all alone. This death overtook the elders
because like Nadab and Abihu they had not shown sufficient reverence in
ascending Mount Sinai on the day of the revelation, when, in view of the
Divine vision, they conducted themselves in an unseemly manner. Like
Nadab and Abihu the elder would have received instantaneous punishment
for their offense, had not God been unwilling to spoil the joyful day of
the revelation by their death. But they had to pay the penalty
nevertheless: Nadab and Abihu, by being burned at the consecration of
the Tabernacle, and the elders similarly, at Taberah.

As Moses now utterly refused to bear the burden of the people alone, God
said to him: "I gave thee sufficient understanding and wisdom to guide
My children alone, that thou mightest be distinguished by this honor.
Thou, however, wishest to share this guidance with others. Go, then, and
expect no help from Me, 'but I will take of the spirit that is upon thee
and will put it upon them; and they shall bear the burden of the people
with thee, that thou bear it not thyself alone'"

God bade Moses choose as his helpers in the guidance of the people such
men as had already been active leaders and officers in Egypt. In the
days of Egyptian bondage it frequently happened that the officers of the
children of Israel were beaten if the people had not fulfilled their
task in making bricks, but "he that is willing to sacrifice himself for
the benefit of Israel shall be rewarded with honor, dignity, and the
gift of the Holy Spirit." The officers suffered in Egypt for Israel, and
were now found worthy of having the Holy Spirit come upon them. God
moreover said to Moses: "With kindly words welcome the elders to their
new dignity, saying, 'Hail to you that are deemed worthy by God of being
fit for this office.' At the same time, however, speak seriously with
them also, saying, 'Know ye that the Israelites are a troublesome and
stiff-necked people, and that you must ever be prepared to have them
curse you or cast stones at you'"

God commanded the selection of the elders to take place at the
Tabernacle, that Israel might reverence them, saying, "Surely these are
worthy men," but they were not permitted with Moses to enter the
Tabernacle and hear God's word. The people were however mistaken in
assuming that God's word reached the ears of the elders, for He spoke
with Moses alone, even though the prophetic spirit came upon them also.

Now when Moses wished to proceed to the selection of the seventy elders,
he was in a sore predicament because he could not evenly divide the
number seventy among the twelve tribes, and was anxious to show no
partiality to one tribe over another, which would lead to
dissatisfaction among Israel. Bezalel, son of Uri, however, gave Moses
good advice. He took seventy slips of paper on which was written
"elder," and with them two blank slips, and mixed all these in an urn.
Seventy-two elders, six to each tribe, now advance and each drew a slip.
Those whose slips were marked "elder" were elected, while those who had
drawn blank slips were rejected, but in such a wise that they could not
well accuse Moses of partiality.

By this method of appointment, it came to pass that there were six
elders for each tribe except the tribe of Levi. The names of those
chosen were: from the tribe of Reuben,-Hanoch, Carmi, Pallu, Zaccur,
Eliab, Nemuel; from the tribe of Simeon,-Jamin, Jachin, Zohar, Ohad,
Shaul, Zimri; from the tribe of Levi,-Amram, Hananiah, Nethanel, Sithri;
from the tribe of Judah,-Zerah, Dan, Jonadab, Bezalel, Shephatiah,
Nahshon; from the tribe of Issachar,-Zuar, Uzza, Igal, Palti, Othniel,
Haggi; from the tribe of Zebulun,-Sered, Elon, Sodi, Oholiab, Elijah,
Nimshi; from the tribe of Benjamin,-Senaah, Kislon, Elidad, Ahitub,
Jediael, Mattaniah; from the tribe of Joseph,-Jair, Joezer, Malchiel,
Adoniram, Abiram, Sethur; from the tribe of Dan,-Gedaliah, Jogli,
Ahinoam, Ahiezer, Daniel, Seraiah; from the tribe of Naphtali,-Elhanan,
Eliakim, Elishama, Semachiah, Zabdi, Johanan; from the tribe of
Gad,-Haggai, Zarhi, Keni, Mattathiah, Zechariah, Shuni; from the tribe
of Asher,-Pashhur, Shelomi, Samuel, Shalom, Shecaniah, Abihu.

Moses gathered these seventy elders of novel extraction and of lofty and
pious character round about the tent in which God used to reveal
Himself, bidding thirty of them take their stand on the south side,
thirty on the northern, and ten on the eastern, whereas he himself stood
on the western side. For this tent was thirty cubits long and ten cubits
wide, so that a cubit each was apportioned to the elders. God was so
pleased with the appointment of the elders that, just as on the day of
the revelation, He descended from heaven and permitted the spirit of
prophecy to come upon the elders, so that they received the prophetic
gift to the end of their days, as God had put upon them of the spirit of
Moses. But Moses' spirit was not diminished by this, he was like a
burning candle from which many others are lighted, but which is not
therefore diminished; and so likewise was the wisdom of Moses
unimpaired. Even after the appointment of the elders did Moses remain
the leader of the people, for he was the head of this Sanhedrin of
seventy members which he guided and directed.

The position of the elders was not of the same rank as that of Moses,
for he was the king of Israel, and it was for this reason that God had
bidden him to secure trumpets, to use them for the calling of the
assembly, that this instrument might be blown before him as before a
king. Hence shortly before Moses' death these trumpets were recalled
from use, for his successor Joshua did not inherit from him either his
kingly dignity or these royal insignia. Not until David's time were the
trumpets used again which Moses had fashioned in the desert.

### ELDAD AND MEDAD

When Moses had completed the appointment of the elders and had asked
them to accompany him to the Tabernacle, there to receive the Holy
Spirit, Eldad and Medad, two of these elders, in their humility, did not
obey his summons, but hid themselves, deeming themselves unworthy of
this distinction. God rewarded them for their humility by distinguishing
them five-fold above the other elders. These prophesied what would take
place on the following day, announcing the appearance of the quails, but
Eldad and Medad prophesied what was still veiled in the distant future.
The elders prophesied only on this one day, but Eldad and Medad retained
the gift for life. The elders died in the desert, whereas Eldad and
Medad were the leaders of the people after the death of Joshua. The
elders are not mentioned by name in the Scriptures, whereas theses two
are called by name. The elders, furthermore, had received the prophetic
gift from Moses, whereas Eldad and Medad received it directly from God.

Eldad now began to make prophecies, saying: "Moses will die, and Joshua
the son of Nun will be his successor as leader of the people, whom he
will lead into the land of Canaan, and to whom he will give it as a
possession." Medad's prophecy was as follows: "Quails will come from the
sea and will cover the camp of Israel, but they will bring evil to the
people." Besides these prophecies, both together announced the following
revelation: "At the end of days there will come up out of the land of
Magog a king to whom all nations will do homage. Crowned kings, princes,
and warriors with shields will gather to make war upon those returned
from exile in the land of Israel. But God, the Lord, will stand by
Israel in their need and will slay all their enemies by hurling a flame
from under His glorious Throne. This will consume the souls in the hosts
of the king of Magog, so that their bodies will drop lifeless upon the
mountains of the land of Israel, and will become a prey to the beasts of
the field and the fowls of the air. Then will all the dead among Israel
arise and rejoice in the good that at the beginning of the world was
laid up for them, and will receive the reward for their good deeds."

When Gershon, Moses' son, heard these prophecies of Eldad and Medad, he
hurried to his father and told him of them. Joshua was now greatly
agitated about the prophecy that Moses was to die in the desert and that
he as to be his successor, and said to Moses: "O lord, destroy these
people that prophesy such evil news!" But Moses replied: "O Joshua,
canst thou believe that I begrudge thee thy splendid future? It is my
wish that thou mayest be honored as much as I have been and that all
Israel be honored like thee."

Eldad and Medad were distinguished not only by their prophetic gift, but
also by their noble birth, being half-brothers of Moses and Aaron. When
the marriage laws were revealed, all those who had been married to
relatives by blood had to be divorced from them, so that Amram, too, had
to be separated from his wife Jochebed, who was his aunt, and he married
another woman. From this union sprang Eldad, "not of an aunt," and
Medad, "in place of an aunt," so called by Amram to explain by these
names why he had divorced his first wife, his aunt.

### THE QUAILS

The prophecy of these men concerning the quails turned out as they had
predicted, the quails being, as God had foretold to Moses, no blessing
for the people. For God said to Moses: "Tell the people to be prepared
for impending punishment, they shall eat flesh to satiety, but then they
shall loathe it more than they now lust for it. I know, however, how
they came to have such desires. Because My Shekinah is among them they
believe that they may presume anything. Had I removed My Shekinah from
their midst they would never have cherished so foolish a desire." Moses,
knowing that the granting of the people's wish would be disastrous to
them, said to God: "O Lord, why, pray, dost Thou first give them flesh,
and then, in punishment for their sin, slay them? Who ever heard any one
say to an ass, 'Here is a measure of wheat; eat it, for we want to cut
off they head?' Or to a man, 'Here is a loaf of bread for thee; take it,
and go to hell with it?'" God replied: "Well, then, what wouldst thou
do?" Moses: "I will go to them and reason with them that they may desist
from their lusting after flesh." God: "I can tell thee beforehand that
thy endeavors in this matter will be fruitless." Moses betook himself to
the people, saying to them: "Is the Lord's hand waxed short? Behold, He
smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed;
He can give bread also; can He not provide flesh for His people?" The
people, however, said: "Thou are only trying to soothe us; God cannot
grant our wish." But they erred vastly, for hardly had the pious among
them retired to their tents, when upon the godless, who had remained in
the open, came down quails in masses as thick as snowflakes, so that
many more were kill by the descent of the quails than later by the
tasting of them. The quails came in such masses that they completely
filled the space between heaven and earth, so that they even covered the
sun's disk, and settled down on the north side and the south side of the
camp, as it were a day's journey, lying, however, not directly upon the
ground but two cubits above it, that people might not have to stoop to
gather them up. Considering this abundance, it is not surprising that
even the halt that could not go far, and the lazy the would not,
gathered each a hundred kor. These vast quantities of flesh did not,
however, benefit them, for hardly had they tasted of it, when they gave
up the ghost. This was the punishment for the grave sinners, while the
better ones among them enjoyed the taste of the flesh for a month before
they died, whereas the pious without suffering harm caught the quails,
slaughtered them, and ate of them. This was the heaviest blow that had
fallen upon Israel since their exodus from Egypt, and in memory of the
many men who had died because of their forbidden lusting after flesh,
they changed the name of the place where this misfortune occurred to
Kibroth-hattaavah, "Graves of those who lusted." The winds that went
forth to bring the quails was so powerful a storm that it could have
destroyed the world, so great was God's anger against the ungrateful
people, and it was only due to the merits of Moses and Aaron that this
wind finally left the world upon its hinges.

### AARON AND MIRIAM SLANDER MOSES

When the seventy elders were appointed, and the spirit of the Lord came
upon them, all the women lighted the candles of joy, to celebrate by
this illumination the elevation of these men to the dignity of prophets.
Zipporah, Moses' wife, saw the illumination, and asked Miriam to explain
it. She told her the reason, and added, "Blessed are the women who
behold with their eyes how their husbands are raised to dignity."
Zipporah answered, "It would be more proper to say, 'Woe to the wives of
these men who must now abstain from all conjugal happiness!'" Miriam:
"How does thou know this?" Zipporah: "I judge so from the conduct of thy
brother, for ever since he was chosen to receive Divine revelations, he
no longer knows his wife." Miriam hereupon went to Aaron, and said to
him: "I also received Divine revelations, but without being obliged to
separated myself from my husband," whereupon Aaron agreed, saying" "I,
too, received Divine revelations, without, however, being obliged to
separated myself from my wife." Then both said: "Our fathers also
received revelations, but without discontinuing their conjugal life.
Moses abstains from conjugal joys only out of pride, to show how holy a
man he is." Not only did they speak evil of Moses to each other, but
hastened to him and told him to his face their opinion of his conduct.
But he, who could be self-assured and stern when it touched a matter
concerning God's glory, was silent to the undeserved reproached they
heaped upon him, knowing that upon God's bidding he had foresworn
earthly pleasures. God therefore said: "Moses is very meek and pays no
attention to the injustice meted out to him, as he did when My glory was
detracted from, and boldly stepped forth and exclaimed, 'Who is on the
Lord's side? Let him come unto me.' I will therefore now stand by him."

It is quite true that this was not the only occasion on which Moses
proved himself humble and gentle, for it was part of his character.
Never among mortals, counting even the three Patriarchs, was there more
meek a man than he. The angels alone excelled him in humility, but no
human being; for the angels are so humble and meek, that when the
assemble to praise God, each angel calls to the other and asks him to
precede him, saying among themselves: "Be thou the first, thou are
worthier than I."

God carried out His intention to uphold Moses' honor, for just as Aaron
was with his wife and Miriam with her husband, a Divine call suddenly
reached Amram's three children, one voice that simultaneously called,
"Aaron!" "Moses!" and "Miriam!"-a miracle that God's voice alone can
perform. The call went to Moses also, that the people might not think
that Aaron and Miriam had been chosen to take Moses' place. He was ready
to hearken to God's words, but not so his brother and his sister, who
had been surprised in the state of uncleanness, and who therefore, upon
hearing God's call, cried, "Water, water," that they might purify
themselves before appearing before God. They then left their tents and
followed the voice until God appeared in a pillar of cloud, a
distinction that was conferred also upon Samuel. The pillar of cloud did
not, however, appear in the Tabernacle, where it always rested whenever
God revealed Himself to Moses, and this was due to the following
reasons. First of all, God did not want to create the impression of
having removed Moses from his dignity, and of giving it to his brother
and sister, hence He did not appear to them in the holy place. At the
same time, moreover, Aaron was spared the disgrace of being reproached
by God in his brother's presence, for Moses did not follow his brother
and sister, but awaited God's word in the sanctuary. But there was still
another reason why God did not want Moses to be present during His
conference with Aaron and Miriam-"Never praise a man to his face." As
God wanted to praise Moses before Aaron and Miriam, He preferred to do
so in his absence.

Hardly had God addressed Aaron and Miriam, when they began to interrupt
Him, whereupon He said to them: "Pray, contain yourselves until I have
spoken." In these words He taught people the rule of politeness, never
to interrupt. He then said: "Since the creation of the world hath the
word of God ever appeared to any prophet otherwise than in a dream? Not
so with Moses, to whom I have shown what is above and what is below;
what it before and what it behind; what was and what will be. To him
have I revealed all that is in the water and all that is upon the dry
land; to him did I confide the sanctuary and set him above the angels. I
Myself ordered him to abstain from conjugal life, and the word he
received was revealed to him clearly and not in dark speeches, he saw
the Divine presence from behind when It passed by him. Wherefore then
were ye not afraid to speak against a man like Moses, who is, moreover,
My servant? Your censure is directed to Me, rather than to him, for 'the
receiver is no better than the thief,' and if Moses is not worthy of his
calling, I, his Master, deserve censure."

### MIRIAM'S PUNISHMENT

God now gently rebuked Aaron and Miriam for their transgression, and did
not give vent to His wrath until He had shown them their sin. This was
an example to man never to show anger to his neighbor before giving his
reason for his anger. The effects of God's wrath were shown as soon as
He had departed from them, for while He was with them, His mercy
exceeded His anger, and nothing happened to them, but when He was not
long with them, punishment set in. Both Aaron and Miriam became leprous,
for this is the punishment ordained for those who speak ill of their
neighbors. Aaron's leprosy, however, lasted for a moment only, for his
sin had not been as great as that of his sister, who started the talk
against Moses. His disease vanished as soon as he looked upon his
leprosy. Not so with Miriam. Aaron in vain tried to direct his eyes upon
her leprosy and in this way to heal her, for in her case the effect was
the reverse; as soon as he looked upon her the leprosy increased, and
nothing remained but to call for Moses' assistance, who was ready to
give it before being called upon. Aaron thereupon turned to his brother
with the following words: "Think not that the leprosy is on Miriam's
body only, it is as if it were on the body of our father Amram, of whose
flesh and blood she is." Aaron did not, however, try to extenuate their
sin, saying to Moses: "Have we, Miriam and I, ever done harm to a human
being?" Moses: "No." Aaron: "If we have done evil to no strange people,
how then canst thou believe that we wished to harm thee? For a moment
only did we forget ourselves and acted in an unnatural way toward our
brother. Shall we therefore lose our sister? If Miriam's leprosy doth
not now vanish, she must pass all her life as a leper, for only a priest
who is not a relative by blood of the leper may under certain conditions
declare her clean, but all the priests, my sons and I, are her relatives
by blood. The life of a leper is as of one dead, for as a corpse makes
unclean all that comes in contact with it, so too the leper. Alas!" so
Aaron closed his intercession, "Shall our sister, who was with us in
Egypt, who with us intoned the song at the Red Sea, who took upon
herself the instruction of the women while we instructed the men, shall
she now, while we are about to leave the desert and enter the promised
land, sit shut out from the camp?"

These words of Aaron, however, were quite superfluous, for Moses had
determined, as soon as his sister became diseased, to intercede for her
with God, saying to himself: "It is not right that my sister should
suffer and I dwell in contentment." He now drew a circle about himself,
stood up, and said a short prayer to God, which he closed with the
words: "I will not go from this spot until Thou shalt have healed my
sister. But if Thou do not heal her, I myself shall do so, for Thou hast
already revealed to me, how leprosy arises and how it disappears." This
prayer was fervent, spoken with his whole heart and soul, though very
brief. Had he spoken long, some would have said: "His sister is
suffering terribly and he, without heeding her, spends his time in
prayer." Others again would have said: "He prayeth long for his sister,
but for us he prayeth briefly." God said to Moses: "Why dost thou shout
so?" Moses: "I know what suffering my sister is enduring. I remember the
chain which my hand was chained, for I myself once suffered from this
disease." God: "If a king, or if her father had but spit in her face,
should she not be ashamed seven days? I, the King of kings, have spit in
her face, and she should be ashamed at least twice seven days. For thy
sake shall seven days be pardoned her, but the other seven days let her
be shut out from the camp." For want of priest who, according to the
tenets of the law, must declare a leper clean after the healing, God
Himself assumed this part, declaring Miriam unclean for a week, and
clean after the passing of that period.

Although leprosy came to Miriam as a punishment for her sin, still this
occasion served to show how eminent a personage she was. For the people
were breaking camp and starting on the march when, after having saddled
their beasts of burden for the march, upon turning to see the pillar of
cloud moving before them, they missed the sight of it. They looked again
to see if Moses and Aaron were in the line of procession, but they were
missing, nor was there anywhere to be seen a trace of the well that
accompanied them on their marches. Hence they were obliged to return
again to camp, where they remained until Miriam was healed. The clouds
and the well, the sanctuary and the sixty myriads of the people, all had
to wait a week in this spot until Miriam recovered. Then the pillar of
cloud moved on once more and the people knew that they had not been
permitted to proceed on their march only because of this pious
prophetess. This was a reward for the kind deed Miriam had done when the
child Moses was thrown into the water. Then Miriam for some time walked
up and down along the shore to wait the child's fate, and for this
reason did the people wait for her, nor could they move on until she had
recovered.

### THE SENDING OF THE SPIES

The punishment that God brought upon Miriam was meant as a lesson of the
severity with which God punishes slander. For Miriam spoke no evil of
Moses in the presence of any one except her brother Aaron. She had
moreover no evil motive, but a kindly intention, wishing only to induce
Moses to resume his conjugal life. She did not even dare to rebuke Moses
to his face, and still, even in spite of her great piety, Miriam was not
spared this heavy punishment. Her experience, nevertheless, did not awe
the wicked man who, shortly after this incident, made an evil report of
the promised land, and by their wicked tongues stirred up the whole
people in rebellion against God, so that they desired rather to return
to Egypt than to enter Palestine. The punishment that God inflicted upon
the spies as well as upon the people they had seduced was well deserved,
for had they not been warned of slander by Miriam's example, there might
still have been some excuse. In that case they might have been ignorant
of the gravity of the sin of slander, but now they had no excuse to
offer.

When Israel approached the boundaries of Palestine, they appeared before
Moses, saying: "We will send men before us, and they shall search out
the land, and bring us word again by what way we must go up, and into
what cities we shall come." This desire caused God to exclaim: "What!
When you went through a land of deserts and of pits, you had no desire
for scouts, but now that you are about to enter a land full of good
things, now you wish to send out scouts. Not only was the desire in
itself unseemly, but also the way in which they presented their request
to Moses; for instead of approaching as they had been accustomed,
letting the older men be the spokesmen of the younger they appeared on
this occasion without guidance or order, the young crowding out the old,
and these pushing away their leaders. Their bad conscience after making
this request-for they knew that their true motive was lack of faith in
God-caused them to invent all sorts of pretexts for their plans. They
said to Moses: "So long as we are in the wilderness, the clouds act as
scouts for us, for they move before us and show us the way, but as these
will not proceed with us into the promised land, we want men to search
out the land for us." Another plea that they urged for their desire was
this. They said: "The Canaanites fear an attack from us and therefore
hid their treasures. This is the reason why we want to sent spies there
in time, to discover for us where they are hiding their treasures." They
sought in other ways to give Moses the impression that their one wish
was exactly to carry out the law. They said: "Hast not thou taught us
that an idol to which homage is no longer paid may be used, but
otherwise it must be destroyed? If we now enter Palestine and find
idols, we shall not know which of them were adored by the Canaanites and
must be destroyed, and which of them were no longer adored, so that we
might use them." Finally they said the following to Moses: "Thou, our
teacher, hast taught us that God 'would little by little drive the
Canaanites before us.' If this be so, we must send out spies to find out
which cities we must attack first." Moses allowed himself to be
influenced by their talk, and he also liked the idea of sending out
spies, but not wishing to act arbitrarily he submitted to God the desire
of the people. God answered: "It is not the first time that they
disbelieve My promises. Even in Egypt they ridiculed Me, it is now
become a habit with them, and I know what their motive in sending spies
is. If thou wishest to send spies do so, but do not pretend that I have
ordered thee."

Moses hereupon chose one man from every tribe with the exception of
Levi, and sent these men to spy out the land. These twelve men were the
most distinguished and most pious of their respective tribes, so that
even God gave His assent to the choice of every man among them. But
hardly had these men been appointed to their office when they made the
wicked resolve to bring up an evil report of the land, and dissuade the
people from moving to Palestine. Their motive was a purely personal one,
for they thought to themselves that they would retain their offices at
the head of the tribes so long as they remained in the wilderness, but
would be deprived of them when they entered Palestine.

### SIGNIFICANT NAMES

Significant of the wickedness of these men are their names, all of which
point to their godless action. The representative of the tribe of Reuben
was called Shammua, the son of Zaccur, because he did not obey God,
which was counted against him just as if he had pursued sorcery.
Shaphat, the son of Hori, was Simeon's representative. His name
signifies, "He did not conquer his evil inclination, and hence went out
empty-handed, without having received a possession in the land of
Israel." The tribe of Issachar was represented by Igal, the son of
Joseph. He bore this name because he soiled the reputation of the Holy
Land, and therefore died before his time. Benjamin's representative was
Palti, the son of Raphu, so called because "he spat out the good
qualities that had previously been his, and therefore wasted away." The
name of Gaddiel, the son of Sodi, Zebulun's representative, signifies,
"He spoke infamous things against God in executing the secret plan of
the spies." Manasseh's representative, Gaddi, the son of Susi, was so
called because he blasphemed God and aroused His wrath; for it was he
who said of the land, "it eateth up its inhabitants." But the worst one
among them was Ammiel, the son of Gemalli, the representative of Dan,
for it was he who said, "The land is so strong that not even God could
go up against it," hence his name, which means, "He cast a shadow upon
God's strength," and he was punished according to his wicked words, for
he did not enter the promised land. Asher's representative was Sethur,
the son of Michael, who had resolved to act against God and instead of
saying, "Who is like unto God?" he said, "Who is God?" Naphtali's
representative was named Nahbi, the son of Vophsi, for he suppressed the
truth, and faith found no room in his mouth, for he brought forth lies
against God. The last of these spies, Gad's representative, bore the
name Geuel, the son of Machi, for he was humbled because he urged
untruths against God.

As the ten sinners were name in accordance with their actions, so too
did the names of the two pious spies among them correspond to their
pious actions. Judah's representative was name Caleb, the son of
Jephunneh, because "he spoke what he felt in his heart and turned aside
from the advice of the rest of the spies." The pious representative of
Ephraim was Hoshea, the son of Nun, a fitting name for him, for he was
full of understanding and was not caught like a fish by the spies. Moses
who perceived, even when he sent out the spies, the evil intentions they
harbored, changed Hoshea's name to Joshua, saying: "May God stand by
thee, that thou mayest not follow the counsel of the spies."

This change of name that was brought about by the prefixing of the
letter Yod at last silenced the lamentations of this letter. For ever
since God had changed Sarai's name to Sarah, the letter Yod used to fit
about the celestial Throne and lament: "Is it perchance because I am the
smallest among the letters that Thou has taken me away from the name of
the pious Sarah?" God quieted this letter, saying: "Formerly thou wert
in a woman's name, and, moreover, at the end. I will not affix thee to a
man's name, and, moreover, at the beginning." This promise was redeemed
when Hoshea's name was changed to Joshua.

When the spies set out on their way, they received instructions from
Moses how to conduct themselves, and what in particular, they were to
note. He ordered them not to walk on the highways, but to go along
private pathways, for although the Shekinah would follow them, they were
still to incur no needless danger. If they entered a city, however, they
were not to slink like thieves in alleyways, but to show themselves in
public and answer those who asked what they wanted by saying: "We came
only to buy some pomegranates and grapes." They were emphatically to
deny that they had any intention of destroying the idols or of felling
the sacred trees. Moses furthermore said: "Look about carefully what
manner of land it is, for some lands produce strong people and some
weak, some lands produce many people and some few. If you find the
inhabitants dwelling in open places, then know that they are mighty
warriors, and depending upon their strength have no fear of hostile
attack. If, however, they live in a fortified place, they are weaklings,
and in their fear of strangers seek shelter within their walls. Examine
also the nature of the soil. If it be hard, know then that it it fat;
but if it be soft, it is lean." Finally he bade them inquire whether Job
was still alive, for if he was dead, then they assuredly needed not to
fear the Canaanites, as there was not a single pious man among them
whose merits might be able to shield them. And truly when the spies
reached Palestine, Job died, and they found the inhabitants of the land
at his grave, partaking of the funeral feast.

### THE SPIES IN PALESTINE

On the twenty-seventh day of Siwan Moses sent out the spies from
Kadesh-Barnea in the wilderness of Paran, and following his directions
they went first to the south of Palestine, the poorest part of the Holy
Land. Moses did like the merchants, who first show the poorer wares, and
then the better kind; so Moses wished the spies to see better parts of
the land the farther they advanced into it. When they reached Hebron,
they could judge what a blessed land this was that had been promised
them, for although Hebron was the poorest tract in all Palestine, it was
still much better than Zoan, the most excellent part of Egypt. When,
therefore, the sons of Ham built cities in several lands, it was Hebron
that they erected first, owing to its excellence, and not Zoan, which
they built in Egypt fully seven years later.

Their progress through the land was on the whole easy, for God had
wished it so, that as soon as the spies entered a city, the plague
struck it, and the inhabitants, busied with the burial of their dead,
had neither time nor inclination to concern themselves with the
strangers. Although they met with no evil on the part of the
inhabitants, still the sight of the three giants, Ahiman, Sheshai, and
Talmai inspired them with terror. These were so immensely tall that the
sun reached only to their ankles, and they received their names in
accordance with their size and strength. The strongest among them was
Ahiman, beholding whom one fancied oneself standing at the foot of a
mountain that was about to fall, and exclaimed involuntarily, "What is
this that is coming upon me?" Hence the name Ahiman. Strong as marble
was the second brother, wherefore he was called Sheshai, "marble." The
mighty strides of the third brother threw up plots from the ground when
he walked, hence he was called Talmi, "plots." Not only the sons of Anak
were of such strength and size, but his daughters also, whom the spies
chanced to see. For when these reached the city inhabited by Anak, that
was called Kiriath-Arba, "City of Four," because the giant Anak and his
three sons dwelt there, they were struck with such terror by them that
they sought a hiding place. But what they had believed to be a cave was
only the rind of a huge pomegranate that the giant's daughter had thrown
away, as they later, to their horror, discovered. For this girl, after
having eaten the fruit, remembered that she must not anger her father by
letting the rind lie there, so she picked it up with the twelve men in
it as one picks up an egg shell, and threw it into the garden, never
noticing that she had thrown with it twelve men, each measuring sixty
cubits in height. When they left their hiding place, they said to one
another: "Behold the strength of these women and judge by their standard
the men!"

They soon had an opportunity of testing the strength of the men, for as
soon as the three giants heard of the presence of the Israelite men,
they pursued them, but the Israelites found out with what manner of men
they were dealing even before the giants had caught up with them. One of
the giants shouted, and the spies fell down as men dead, so that it took
a long time for the Canaanites to restore them to life by the aid of
friction and fresh air. The Canaanites hereupon said to them: "Why do
you come here? Is not the whole world your God's, and did not He parcel
it out according to His wish? Came ye here with the purpose of felling
the sacred trees?" The spied declared their innocence, whereupon the
Canaanites permitted them to go their ways unmolested. As a reward for
this kind deed, the nation to which these giants belonged has been
preserved even to this day.

They would certainly not have escaped from the hands of the giants, had
not Moses given them two weapons against them, his staff and the secret
of the Divine Name. These two brought them salvation whenever they felt
they were in danger from the giants. For these were none other than the
seed of the angels fallen in the antediluvian era. Sprung from their
union with the daughters of men, and being half angels, half men, these
giants were only half mortal. They lived very long, and then half their
body withered away. Threatened by an eternal continuance of this
condition, half life, and half death, they preferred either to plunge
into the sea, or by magic herb which they knew to put an end to their
existence. They were furthermore of such enormous size that the spies,
listening one day while the giants discussed them, heard them say,
pointing to the Israelites: "There are grasshoppers by the trees that
have the semblance of men," for "so they were in their sight."

The spies, with the exception of Joshua and Caleb, had resolved from the
start to warn the people against Palestine, and so great was their
influence that Caleb feared he would yield to it. He therefore hastened
to Hebron where the three Patriarchs lie, and, standing at their graves,
said: "Joshua is proof against the pernicious influence of the spies,
for Moses had prayed to God for him. Send up prayers now, my fathers,
for me, that God in His mercy may keep me far from the counsel of the
spies."

There had always been a clash between Caleb and his comrades during
their crossing through Palestine. For whereas he insisted upon taking
along the fruits of the land to show their excellence to the people,
they strongly opposed this suggestion, wishing as they did to keep the
people from gaining an impression of the excellence of the land. Hence
they yielded only when Caleb drew his sword, saying: "If you will not
take of the fruits, either I shall slay you, or you will slay me." They
hereupon cut down a vine, which was so heavy that eight of them had to
carry it, putting upon each the burden of one hundred and twenty seah.
The ninth spy carried a pomegranate, and the tenth a fig, which they
brought from a place that had once belonged to Eshcol, one of Abraham's
friends, but Joshua and Caleb carried nothing at all, because it was not
consistent with their dignity to carry a burden. This vine was of such
gigantic size that the wine pressed from its grapes sufficed for all the
sacrificial libations of Israel during the forty years' march.

After the lapse of forty days they returned to Moses and the people,
after having crossed through Palestine from end to end. By natural means
it would not, of course, have been possible to traverse all the land in
so short a time, by God made it possible by "bidding the soil to leap
for them," and they covered a great distance in a short time. God knew
that Israel would have to wander in the wilderness forty years, a year
for every day the spies had spent in Palestine, hence He hastened their
progress through the land, that Israel might not have to stay too long
in the wilderness.

### THE SLANDEROUS REPORT

When Moses heard that the spies had returned from their enterprise, he
went to his great house of study, where all Israel too assembled, for it
was a square of twelve miles, affording room to all. There too the spies
betook themselves and were requested to give their report. Pursuing the
tactics of slanderers, they began by extolling the land, so that they
might not by too unfavorable a report arouse the suspicion of the
community. They said: "We came unto the land whither thou sentest us,
and surely it floweth with milk and honey." This was not an
exaggeration, for honey flowed from the trees under which the goats
grazed, out of whose udders poured mile, so that both mile and honey
moistened the ground. But they used these words only as an introduction,
and the passed on to their actual report, which they had elaborated
during those forty days, and by means of which they hoped to be able to
induce the people to desist from their plan of entering Palestine.
"Nevertheless," they continued, "the people be strong that dwell in the
land, and the cities are walled, and very great: and moreover we saw
children of Anak there." Concerning the latter they spoke an untruth
with the intention of inspiring Israel with fear, for the sons of Anak
dwelt in Hebron, whither Caleb alone had gone to pray at the graves of
the Patriarchs, at the same time as the Shekinah went there to announce
to the Patriarch that their children were now on the way to take
possession of the land which had been promised to them of yore. To
intensify to the uttermost their fear of the inhabitants of Palestine,
they furthermore said: "The Amalekites dwell in the land of the South."
They threatened Israel with Amalek as one threatens a child with a strap
that had once been employed to chastise him, for they had had bitter
experiences with Amalek. The statement concerning Amalek was founded on
fact, for although southern Palestine had not originally been their
home, still they had recently settled there in obedience to the last
wish of their forefather Esau, who had bidden them cut off Israel from
their entrance into the promised land. "If, however," continued the
spies in their report, "you are planning to enter the land from the
mountain region in order to evade Amalek, let us inform you that the
Hittites, and the Jebussites, and the Amorites dwell in the mountains;
and if you plan to go there by sea, let us inform you that the
Canaanites dwell by the sea, and along the Jordan."

As soon as the spies had completed their report, Joshua arose to
contradict them, but they gave him no chance to speak, calling out to
him: "By what right dost thou, foolish man, presume to speak? Thou hast
neither sons nor daughters, so what dost thou care if we perish in our
attempt to conquer the land? We, on the other hand, have to look out for
our children and wives." Joshua, therefore, very much against his will,
had to be silent. Caleb now considered in what way he could manage to
get a hearing without being shouted down as Joshua had been.

Caleb had given his comrades an entirely false impression concerning his
sentiments, for when these formed the plan to try to make Israel desist
from entering Palestine, they drew him into their council, and he
pretended to agree with them, whereas he even then resolved to intercede
for Palestine. Hence, when Caleb arose, the spies were silent, supposing
he would corroborate their statements, a supposition which his
introductory words tended to strengthen. He began: "Be silent, I will
reveal the truth. This is not all for which we have to thank the son of
Amram." But to the amazement of the spies, his next words praised, not
blamed, Moses. He said: "Moses-it is he who drew us up out of Egypt, who
clove the sea for us, who gave us manna as food." In this way he
continued his eulogy on Moses, closing with the words: "We should have
to obey him even if he bade us ascend to heaven upon ladders!" These
words of Caleb were heard by all the people, for his words were so
mighty that they could be heard twelve miles off. It was this same
powerful voice that had saved the life of the spies. For when the
Canaanites first took note of them and suspected them of being spies,
the three giants, Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai pursued them and caught up
with them in the plain of Judea. When Caleb, hidden behind a fence, saw
that the giants were at their heels, he uttered such a shout that the
giants fell down in a swoon because of the frightful din. When they had
recovered, the giants declared that they had pursued the Israelites not
because of the fruits, but because they had suspected them of the wish
to burn their cities.

Caleb's mighty voice did not, however, in the least impress the people
or the spies, for the latter, far from retracting their previous
statements, went so far as to say: "We be not able to go up against the
people; for they are stronger than we, they are so strong that even God
can not get at them. The land through which we had gone to search it is
a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof through disease; and all
the people that we saw in it are men of wicked traits. And here we saw
men upon sight of whom we almost swooned in fright, the giants, the sons
of Anak, which come of giants: and we were in our own sight as
grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight." At these last words, God
said: "I have not objection to your saying, 'We were in our own sight as
grasshoppers,' but I take it amiss if you say, 'And so we were in their
sight,' for how can you tell how I made you appear in their sight? How
do you know if you did not appear to them to be angels?"

### THE NIGHT OF TEARS

The words of the spies were heard by willing ears. The people believed
them implicitly, and when called to task by Moses, replied: "O our
teacher Moses, if there had been only two spies or three, we should have
had to give credence to their words, for the law tells us to consider
the testimony of even two as sufficient, whereas in this case there are
fully ten! Our brethren have made us faint of heart. Because the Lord
hated us, He hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver
us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us." By these words the
Israelites revealed that they hated God, and for this reason did they
believe that they were hated by Him, for "whatever a man wisheth his
neighbor, doth he believe that his neighbor wisheth him." They even
tried to convince Moses that God hated them. They said: "If an earthly
king has two sons and two fields, on watered by a river, and the other
dependent upon rains, will he not five the one that is watered by the
river to his favorite son, and give the other, less excellent field to
his other son? God led us out of Egypt, a land that is not dependent
upon rain, only to give us the land of Canaan, which produces abundantly
only if the rains fall."

Not only did the spies in the presence of Moses and Aaron voice their
opinion that is was not advisable to attempt conquering Palestine, but
they employed every means of inciting the people into rebellion against
Moses and God. On the following evening every one of them betook himself
to his house, donned his mourning cloths, and began to weep bitterly and
to lament. Their housemates quickly ran toward them and in astonishment
asked their reason for these tears and lamentations. Without
interrupting their wailings, they answered" "Woe is me for ye, my sons,
and woe is me for ye, my daughters and daughters-in-law, that are doomed
to be dishonored by the uncircumcised and to be given as a prey to their
lusts. These men that we have beheld are not like unto mortals. Strong
and mighty as angels are they; one of them might well slay a thousand of
us. How dare we look into the iron faces of men so powerful that a nail
of theirs is sufficient to stop up a spring of water!" At these words
all the household, sons, daughters, and daughters-in-law, burst into
tears and loud lamentations. Their neighbors came running to them and
joined in the wails and sobs until they spread throughout all the camp,
and all the sixty myriads of people were weeping. When the sound of
their weeping reached heaven, God said: "Ye weep to-day without a cause,
I shall see to it that in the future ye shall have a cause to weep on
this day." It was then that God decreed to destroy the Temple on the
ninth day of Ab, the day on which Israel in the wilderness wept without
cause, so that this day became forever a day of tears.

The people were not, however, content with tears, they resolved to set
up as leaders in place of Moses and Aaron, Dathan and Abiram, and under
their guidance to return to Egypt. But worse than this, not only did
they renounce their leader, but also their God, for they denied Him and
wished to set up and idol for their God. Not only the wicked ones among
them such as the mixed multitude demurred against Moses and Aaron, but
those also who had heretofore been pious, saying: "Would to God that we
had died in the land of Egypt! Or would to God we had died in this
wilderness!" When Joshua and Caleb heard these speeches of the people
teeming with blasphemy, they rent their garments and tried to restrain
the people from their sinful enterprise, exhorting them particularly to
have fear of the Canaanites, because the time was at hand when God had
promised Abraham to give the land of Canaan to his descendants, and
because there were no pious men among the inhabitants of the land for
whose sake God would have been willing to leave it longer in their
possession. They also assured the people that God had hurled from heaven
the guardian angel of the inhabitants of Palestine, so that they were
now impotent. The people, however, replied: "We do not believe you; the
other spies have our weal and woe more at heart than you." Nor were the
admonitions of Moses of more avail, even though he brought them a direct
message from God to have no fear of the Canaanites. In vain did he say
to them, "He who wrought all those miracles for you in Egypt and during
your stay in the wilderness will work miracles for you as well when you
will enter the promised land. Truly the past ought to inspire you with
trust in the future." The only answer the people had to this was, "Had
we heard this report of the land from strangers, we should not have
given it credit, but we have heard it from men whose sons are our sons,
and whose daughters are our daughters." In their bitterness against
their leaders they wanted to lay hands upon Moses and Aaron, whereupon
God sent His cloud of glory as a protection to them, under which they
sought refuge. But far from being brought to a realization of their
wicked enterprise by this Divine apparition, they cast stones at the
cloud, hoping in this way to kill Moses and Aaron. This outrage on their
part completely wore out God's patience, and He determined upon the
destruction of the spies, and a severe punishment of the people misled
by them.

### INGRATITUDE PUNISHED

God now appeared to Moses, bidding him convey the following words to the
people: "You kindle My anger on account of the very benefits I conferred
upon you. When I clove the sea for you that you might pass through,
while the Egyptians stuck in the loam at its bottom, you said to one
another, 'In Egypt we trod loam, and He led us out of Egypt, only that
we might again tread it.' I gave you manna as food, which made you
strong and fat, but you, perceiving of it, said: 'How comes it to pass
that twenty days a human being dies if after four or five days he does
not excrete food he had taken. Surely we are doomed to die.' When the
spies came to Palestine, I arranged it so that as soon as they entered
the city its king or governor dies, in order that the inhabitants,
occupied with the burial of their ruler, might not take account of the
spies' presence and kill them. Instead of being thankful for this, the
spies returned and reported, 'The land through which we have gone to
search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof.' To you I
gave the Torah; for your sake I said to the Angel of Death, 'Continue to
hold sway over the rest of the world, but not over this nation that I
have chosen as My people.' Truly I had hopes that after all this you
would sin no more, and like Myself and the angels would live eternally,
without ever tasting death. You, however, in spite of the great
opportunity that I offered you, conducted yourselves like Adam. Upon him
also did I lay a commandment, promising him life eternal on condition he
observed it, but he brought ruin upon himself by trespassing My
commandment and eating of the tree. To him I said, 'Dust thou art, and
unto dust shalt thou return.' Similar was My experience with you. I
said, 'You are angels,' but you conducted yourselves like Adam in your
sins, and hence like Adam you must die. I had thought and hoped you
would follow example of the Patriarchs, but you act like the inhabitants
of Sodom, who in punishment for their sins were consumed by fire." "If,"
continued God, turning to Moses, "they suppose that I have need of
swords or spears to destroy them, they are mistaken. As through the word
I created the world, so can I destroy the world by it, which would be a
proper punishment for them. As through their words and their talk they
angered Me, so shall the word kill them, and thou shalt be their heir,
for 'I will make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they.'"
Moses said: "If the chair with three legs could not withstand the moment
of Thy wrath, how then shall a chair that have but one leg endure? Thou
are about to destroy the seed of the three Patriarchs; how then may I
hope that my seed is to fare better? This is not the only reason for
which Thou shouldst preserve Israel, as there are other considerations
why Thou shouldst do so. Were Thou to destroy Israel, the Edomites,
Moabites, and all the inhabitants of Canaan would say that Thou hadst
done this only because Thou wert not able to maintain Thy people, and
therefore Thou didst destroy them. These will furthermore declare that
the gods of Canaan are mightier than those of Egypt, that Thou hadst
indeed triumphed over the river gods of Egypt, but that Thou wert not
the peer of the rain gods of Canaan. Worse even than this, the nations
of the world will accuse Thee of continuous cruelty, saying, 'He
destroyed the generation of the flood through water; He rased to the
ground the builders of the tower, as well as the inhabitants of Sodom;
and no better then theirs was the fate of the Egyptians, whom He drowned
in the sea. Now He hath also ruined Israel whom He had called, 'My
firstborn son,' like Lilith who, when she can find no strange children,
slays her own. So did He slay His own son." Moses furthermore said:
"Every pious man makes a point of cultivating a special virtue. Do Thou
also in this instance bring Thy special virtue to bear." God: "And what
is My special virtue?" Moses: "Long-suffering, love, and mercy, for Thou
art wont to be long-suffering with them that kindle Thy wrath, and to
have mercy for them. In Thy very mercy is Thy strength best shown. Mete
out to Thy children, then, justice in small measure only, but mercy in
great measure."

Moses well knew that mercy was God's chief virtue. He remembered that he
had asked God, when he interceded for Israel after their sin of the
Golden Calf, "Pray tell me by what attribute of Thine Thou rulest the
world." God answered: "I rule the world with loving-kindness, mercy, and
long-suffering." "Can it be," said Moses, "that Thy long-suffering lets
sinners off with impunity?" To this question Moses had received no
answer, hence he felt he might now say to God: "Act now as Thou didst
then assent. Justice, that demands the destruction of Israel, is on one
side of the scales, but it is exactly balance by my prayer on the other
side. Let us now see how the scales will balance." God replied: "As
truly as thou livest, Moses, thy prayer shall dip the scales to the side
of mercy. For thy sake must I cancel My decision to annihilate the
children of Israel, so that the Egyptians will exclaim, 'Happy the
servant to whose wish his master defers.' I shall, however, collect My
debt, for although I shall not annihilate Israel all at once, they shall
make partial annual payments during the following forty years. Say to
them, 'Your carcasses shall fall in this wilderness; and all that were
numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old
and upward, which have murmured against Me. And your children shall be
wanderers in the wilderness forty years, and shall bear you whoredoms,
until your carcasses be consumed in the wilderness.'"

This punishment was not, however, as severe as it might appear, for none
among them died below the ages of sixty, whereas those who had at the
time of the exodus from Egypt been either below twenty or above sixty
were entirely exempt from this punishment. Besides only such were
smitten as had followed the counsel of the spies, whereas the others,
and the Levites and the women were exempt. Death, moreover, visited the
transgressors in such fashion that they were aware it was meant as
punishment for their sins. Throughout all the year not one among them
died. On the eighth day of the month of Ab, Moses would have a herald
proclaim throughout the camp, "Let each prepare his grave." They dug
their graves, and spent there the following night, the same night on
which, following the counsel of the spies, they had revolted against God
and Moses. In the morning a herald would once more appear and cry: "Let
the living separate themselves from the dead." Those that were still
alive arose, but about fifteen thousand of them remained dead in their
graves. After forty years, however, when the herald repeated his
customary call the ninth day of Ab, all arose, and there was not a
single dead man among them. At first they thought they had made a
miscalculation in their observation of the moon, that is was not the
ninth day of Ab at all, and that this was the reason why their lives had
been spared. Hence they repeated their preparations for death until the
fifteenth day of Ab. Then the sight of the full moon convinced them that
the ninth day of Ab had gone by, and that their punishment had been done
away with. In commemoration of the relief from this punishment, they
appointed the fifteenth day of Ab to be a holy day.

### THE YEARS OF DISFAVOR

Although God had now cancelled His resolution to annihilate Israel, He
was not yet quite reconciled with them, and they were out of favor
during the following years of their march through the desert, as was
made evident by several circumstances. During these years of disfavor
the north wind did not blow, with the result that the boys who were born
in the desert could not be circumcised, as the absence of the wind
produced and excessively high temperature, a condition that made it very
dangerous for the young boys to have this operation performed upon them.
As the law, however, prohibits the offering of the paschal lamb unless
the boys have been circumcised, Israel could not properly observe the
feast of Passover after the incident of the spies. Moses also felt the
effects of the disfavor, for during this time he received from God none
but the absolutely essential directions, and no other revelations. This
was because Moses, like all other prophets, received this distinction
only for the sake of Israel, and when Israel was in disgrace, God did
not communicate with him affectionately. Indeed Moses' fate, to die in
the desert without entering the promised land, had been decreed
simultaneously with the fate of the generation led by him out of Egypt.

But the most terrible punishment of all fell upon the spies who, with
their wicked tongues, had brought about the whole disaster. God repaid
them measure for measure. Their tongues stretched to so great a length
that they touched the navel; and worms crawled out of their tongues, and
pierced the navel; in this horrible fashion these men died. Joshua and
Caleb, however, who had remained true to God and had not followed the
wicked counsel of their colleagues, were not only exempted from death,
but were furthermore rewarded by God, by receiving in the Holy Land the
property that had been allotted to the other spies. Caleb was forty
years of age at the time when he was sent out as a spy. He had married
early, and at the age of ten had begot a son, still at the age of
eighty-five he was sturdy enough to enjoy his possession in the Holy
Land.

God's mercy is also extended to sinners, hence He bade Moses say to the
people: "The Amalekites and the Canaanites are now dwelling in the
valley, to-morrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way
of the Red Sea." God did this because He had firmly resolved, in the
event of a war between Israel and the inhabitants of Palestine, not to
aid the former. Knowing that in this cast their annihilation was sure,
He commanded them to make no attempt to enter the land by force. "It had
been My intention," said God, "to exalt you, but now if you were to
attempt to make war upon the inhabitants of Palestine, you would suffer
humiliation." The people did not, however, hearken to the words of God
that Moses communicated to them, and all at once formed in battle array
in order to advance against the Amorites. They thought that after they
had confessed their sin of having been misled by the spies, God would
stand by them in their battles, so they said to Moses: "Surely these few
drops have not filled the bucket." Their transgression against God
seemed to them only a peccadillo that had long since been forgiven. They
were, however, mistaken. Like bees the enemies swarmed down upon them,
and whereas these had in former times fallen dead of fright upon hearing
the names of the Israelites, now a blow from them sufficed to kill the
Israelites. Their attempt to wage war without the Holy Ark in their
midst proved a miserable failure. Many of them, and Zelophehad among
these, met their death, and as many others returned to camp covered with
wounds. The wailing and weeping of the people was of no avail, God
persisted in His resolve, and they brought upon themselves grave
punishment for this new proof of disobedience, for God said to Moses:
"If I were to deal with them now in accordance with strict justice, they
should never enter the land. After a while, however, I shall let them
'possess the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give unto them.'"

In order to comfort and encourage Israel in their dejection, Moses
received directions to announce the law of sacrifices, and other
precepts laid down for the life in the Holy Land, that the people might
see that God did not mean to be angry with them forever. When Moses
announced the laws to them, a dispute arose between the Israelites and
the proselytes, because the former declared that they alone and not the
others were to make offerings to God in His sanctuary. God hereupon
called Moses, and said to him: "Why do these always quarrel one with
another?" Moses replied: "Thou knowest why." God: "Have I not said to
thee, 'One law and one ordinance shall be for you and for the stranger
that sojourneth with you?'"

Although the forty years' march through the desert was a punishment for
the sin of Israel, still it had one advantage. At the time when Israel
departed from Egypt, Palestine was in poor condition; the trees planted
in the time of Noah were old and withered. Hence God said: "What! Shall
I permit Israel to enter an uninhabitable land? I shall bid them wander
in the desert for forty years, that the Canaanites may in the meantime
fell the old trees and plant new ones, so that Israel, upon entering the
land, may find it abounding in plenty." So did it come to pass, for when
Israel conquered Palestine, they found the land not only newly
cultivated, but also filled to overflowing with treasures. The
inhabitants of this land were such misers that they would not indulge in
a drop of oil for their gruel; if an egg broke, they did not use it, but
sold it for cash. The hoardings of these miserly Canaanites God later
gave to Israel to enjoy and to use.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](loj307)
