[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj404)  [Next](loj406) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IV. DAVID

### DAVID'S BIRTH AND DESCENT

David, the "elect of God," was descended from a family which itself
belonged to the elect of Israel. Those ancestors of his who are
enumerated in the Bible by name are all of them men of distinguished
excellence. Besides, David was a descendant of Miriam, the sister of
Moses, and so the strain of royal aristocracy was reinforced by the
priestly aristocracy. Nor was David the first of his family to occupy
the throne of a ruler. His great-grandfather Boaz was one and the same
person with Ibzan, the judge of Bethlehem. Othniel, too, the first judge
in Israel after the death of Joshua, and Caleb, the brother of Othniel,
were connected with David's family. As examples of piety and virtue,
David had his grandfather and more particularly his father before him.
His grandfather's whole life was a continuous service of God, whence his
name Obed, "the servant," and his father Jesse was one of the greatest
scholars of his time, and one of the four who died wholly untainted by
sin. If God had not ordained death for all the descendants of our first
parents after their fall, Jesse would have continued to live forever. As
it was, he died at the age of four hundred, and then a violent death, by
the hand of the Moabite king, in whose care David, trusting in the ties
of kinship between the Moabites and the seed of Ruth, left his family
when he was fleeing before Saul. Jesse's piety will not go unrewarded.
In the Messianic time he will be one of the eight princes to rule over
the world.

In spite of his piety, Jesse was not always proof against temptation.
One of his slaves caught his fancy, and he would have entered into
illicit relations with her, had his wife, Nazbat, the daughter of Adiel,
not frustrated the plan. She disguised herself as the slave, and Jesse,
deceived by the ruse, met his own wife. The child borne by Nazbat was
given out as the son of the freed slave, so that the father might not
discover the deception practiced upon him. This child was David.

In a measure David was indebted for his life to Adam. At first only
three hours of existence had been allotted to him. When God caused all
future generations to pass in review before Adam, he besought God to
give David seventy of the thousand years destined for him. A deed of
gift, signed by God and the angel Metatron, was drawn up. Seventy years
were legally conveyed from Adam to David, and in accordance with Adam's
wishes, beauty, dominion, and poetical gift went with them.

### ANOINTED KING

Beauty and talent, Adam's gifts to David, did not shield their possessor
against hardship. As the supposed son of a slave, he was banished from
association with his brothers, and his days were passed in the desert
tending his father's sheep. It was his shepherd life that prepared him
for his later exalted position. With gentle consideration he led the
flocks entrusted to him. The young lambs he guided to pastures of tender
grass; the patches of less juicy herbs he reserved for the sheep; and
the full-grown sturdy rams were given the tough weeds for food. Then God
said: "David knows how to tend sheep, therefore he shall be the shepherd
of my flock Israel."

In the solitude of the desert David had opportunities of displaying his
extraordinary physical strength. One day he slew four lions and three
bears, though he had no weapons. His most serious adventure was with the
reem. David encountered the mammoth beast asleep, and taking it for a
mountain, he began to ascend it. Suddenly the reem awoke, and David
found himself high up in the air on its horns. He vowed, if he were
rescued, to build a temple to God one hundred ells in height, as high as
the horns of the reem. Thereupon God sent a lion. The king of beasts
inspired even the reem with awe. The reem prostrated himself, and David
could easily descend from his perch. At that moment a deer appeared. The
lion pursued after him, and David was saved from the lion as well as the
reem.

He continued to lead the life of a shepherd until, at the age of
twenty-eight, he was anointed king by Samuel, who was taught by a
special revelation that the despised youngest son of Jesse was to be
king. Samuel's first charge had been to anoint one of the sons of Jesse,
but he was not told which one. When he saw the oldest, Eliab, he thought
him the king of God's choice. God had allowed him to be deceived, in
order to punish Samuel for his excessive self-consciousness in calling
himself the seer. It was thus proved to him that he could not foresee
all things. However, Samuel's error was pardonable. God's first choice
had rested upon Eliab. Only on account of his violent nature, his
swiftness to anger against David, the position destined for him was
transferred to his youngest brother. Eliab was in a sense compensated by
seeing his daughter become the wife of Rehoboam. Thus he, too, enjoys
the distinction of being among the ancestors of the Judaic kings, and
Samuel's vision of Eliab as king was not wholly false.

The election of David was obvious from what happened with the holy oil
with which he was anointed. When Samuel had tried to pour the oil on
David's brothers, it had remained in the horn, but at David's approach
it flowed of its own accord, and poured itself out over him. The drops
on his garments changed into diamonds and pearls, and after the act of
anointing him, the horn was as full as before.

The amazement was great that the son of a slave should be made king.
Then the wife of Jesse revealed her secret, and declared herself the
mother of David.

The anointing of David was for a time kept a secret, but its effect
appeared in the gift of prophecy which manifested itself in David, and
in his extraordinary spiritual development. His new accomplishments
naturally earned envy for him. None was more bitterly jealous than Doeg,
the greatest scholar of his time. When he heard that Saul was about to
have David come to court as his attendant, Doeg began to praise David
excessively, with the purpose of arousing the king's jealousy and making
David hateful in his eyes. He succeeded, yet Saul did not relinquish his
plan of having David at court. David had become known to Saul in his
youth, and at that time the king had conceived great admiration for him.
The occasion was one on which David had shown cleverness as well as love
of justice. A rich woman had had to leave her home temporarily. She
could not carry her fortune with her, nor did she wish to entrust it to
any one. She adopted the device of hiding her gold in honey jars, and
these she deposited with a neighbor. Accidentally he discovered what was
in the jars, and he abstracted the gold. On her return the woman
received her vessels, but the gold concealed in them was gone. She had
no evidence to bring up against her faithless neighbor, and the court
dismissed her complaint. She appealed to the king, but he was equally
powerless to help. When the woman came out of the palace of the king,
David was playing with his companions. Seeing her dejection, he demanded
an audience of the king, that truth might prevail. The king authorized
him to do as he saw fit. David ordered the honey jars to be broken, and
two coins were found to adhere to the inner side of the vessels. The
thief had overlooked them, and they proved his dishonesty.

### ENCOUNTER WITH GOLIATH

David was not long permitted to enjoy the ease of life at court. The
aggressive manner assumed by Goliath drove him to the front. It was a
curious chance that designated David to be the slayer of Goliath, who
was allied with him by the ties of blood. Goliath, it will be
remembered, was the son of the Moabitess Orpah, the sister-in-law of
David's ancestress Ruth, and her sister as well, both having been the
daughters of the Moabite king Eglon. David and Goliath differed as
widely as their grandams, for in contrast to Ruth, the pious, religious
Jewess, Orpah had led a life of unspeakable infamy. Her son Goliath was
jeered at as "the son of a hundred fathers and one mother." But God lets
naught go unrewarded, even in the wicked. In return for the forty steps
Orpah had accompanied her mother-in-law Naomi, Goliath the Philistine,
her son, was permitted to display his strength and skill for forty days,
and in return for the four tears Orpah had shed on parting from her
mother-in-law, she was privileged to give birth to four giant sons.

Of the four, Goliath was the strongest and greatest. What the Scriptures
tell about him is but a small fraction of what might have been told. The
Scriptures refrain intentionally from expatiating upon the prowess of
the miscreant. Nor do they tell how Goliath, impious as he was, dared
challenge the God of Israel to combat with him, and how he tried by
every means in his power to hinder the Israelites in their Divine
worship. Morning and evening he would appear in the camp at the very
time when the Israelites were preparing to say the Shema.

All the more cause, then, for David to hate Goliath and determine to
annihilate him. His father encouraged him to oppose Goliath, for he
considered it David's duty to protect Saul the Benjamite against the
giant, as Judah, his ancestor, had in ancient days pledged himself for
the safety of Benjamin, the ancestor of Saul. For Goliath was intent
upon doing away with Saul. His grievance against him was that once,
when, in a skirmish between the Philistines and the Israelites, Goliath
had succeeded in capturing the holy tables of the law, Saul had wrested
them from the giant. In consequence of his malady, Saul could not
venture to cross swords with Goliath, and he accepted David's offer to
enter into combat in his place. David put on Saul's armor, and when it
appeared that the armor of the powerfully-built king fitted the
erstwhile slender youth, Saul recognized that David had been predestined
for the serious task he was about to undertake, but at the same time
David's miraculous transformation did not fail to arouse his jealousy.
David, for this reason, declined to array himself as a warrior for his
contest with Goliath. He wanted to meet him as a simple shepherd. Five
pebbles came to David of their own accord, and when he touched them,
they all turned into one pebble. The five pebbles stood for God, the
three Patriarchs, and Aaron. Hophni and Phinehas, the descendants of the
last, had only a short time before been killed by Goliath.

Scarcely did David begin to move toward Goliath, when the giant became
conscious of the magic power of the youth. The evil eye David cast on
his opponent sufficed to afflict him with leprosy, and in the very same
instant he was rooted to the ground, unable to move. Goliath was so
confused by his impotence that he scarcely knew what he was saying, and
he uttered the foolish threat that he would give David's flesh to the
cattle of the field, as though cattle ate flesh. One can see, David said
to himself, that he is crazy, and there can be no doubt he is doomed.
Sure of victory, David retorted that he would cast the carcass of the
Philistine to the fowls of the air. At the mention of fowls, Goliath
raised his eyes skyward, to see whether there were any birds about. The
upward motion of his head pushed his visor slightly away from his
forehead, and in that instant the pebble aimed by David struck him on
the exposed spot. An angel descended and cast him to the ground face
downward, so that the mouth that had blasphemed God might be choked with
earth. He fell in such wise that the image of Dagon which he wore on his
breast touched the ground, and his head came to lie between the feet of
David, who now had no difficulty in dispatching him.

Goliath was encased, from top to toe, in several suits of armor, and
David did not know how to remove them and cut off the head of the giant.
At this juncture Uriah the Hittite offered him his services, but under
the condition that David secure him an Israelitish wife. David accepted
the condition, and Uriah in turn showed him how the various suits of
armor were fastened together at the heels of the giant's feet.

David's victory naturally added fuel to the fire of Saul's jealousy.
Saul sent Abner, his general, to make inquiry whether David, who, he
knew, was of the tribe of Judah, belonged to the clan of the Perez or to
the clan of the Zerah. In the former case his suspicion that David was
destined for kingship would be confirmed. Doeg, David's enemy from of
old, observed that David, being the descendant of the Moabitess Ruth,
did not even belong to the Jewish communion, and Saul need entertain no
fears from that quarter. A lively discussion arose between Abner and
Doeg, as to whether the law in Deuteronomy regarding Moabites affected
women as well as men. Doeg, an expert dialectician, brilliantly refuted
all of Abner's arguments in favor of the admission of Moabitish women.
Samuel's authority had to be appealed to in order to establish for all
times the correctness of Abner's view. Indeed, the dispute could be
settled only by recourse to threats of violence. Ithra, the father of
Amasa, in Arab fashion, for which reason he was sometimes called the
Ishmaelite, threatened to hew down any one with his sword who refused to
accept Samuel's interpretation of the law, that male Moabites and male
Ammonites are forever excluded from the congregation of Israel, but not
Moabite and Ammonite women.

### PURSUED BY SAUL

As God stood by David in his duel with Goliath, so he stood by him in
many other of his difficulties. Often when he thought all hope lost, the
arm of God suddenly succored him, and in unexpected ways, not only
bringing relief, but also conveying instruction on God's wise and just
guidance of the world.

David once said to God: "The world is entirely beautiful and good, with
the one exception of insanity. What use does the world derive from a
lunatic, who runs hither and thither, tears his clothes, and is pursued
by a mob of hooting children?" "Verily, a time will come," said God in
reply, "when thou wilt supplicate me to afflict thee with madness." Now,
it happened when David, on his flight before Saul, came to Achish, the
king of the Philistines, who lived in Gath, that the brothers of Goliath
formed the heathen king's body-guard, and they demanded that their
brother's murderer be executed. Achish, though a heathen, was pious, for
which reason he is called Abimelech in the Psalms, after the king of
Gerar, who also was noted for piety. He therefore sought to pacify
David's enemies. He called their attention to the fact that Goliath had
been the one to challenge the Jews to combat, and it was meet,
therefore, that he should be left to bear the consequences. The brothers
rejoined, if that view prevailed, then Achish would have to give up his
throne to David, for, according to the conditions of the combat, the
victor was to have dominion over the vanquished as his servants. In his
distress, David besought God to let him appear a madman in the eyes of
Achish and his court. God granted his prayer. As the wife and daughter
of the Philistine king were both bereft of reason, we can understand his
exclamation: "Do I lack madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play
the madman in my presence?" Thus it was that David was rescued.
Thereupon he composed the Psalm beginning with the words, "I will bless
the Lord at all times," which includes even the time of lunacy.

On another occasion David expressed his doubt of God's wisdom in having
formed such apparently useless creatures as spiders are. They do nothing
but spin a web that has no value. He was to have striking proof that
even a spider's web may serve an important purpose. On one occasion he
had taken refuge in a cave, and Saul and his attendants, in pursuit of
him, were about to enter and seek him there. But God sent a spider to
weave its web across the opening, and Saul told his men to desist from
fruitless search in the cave, for the spider's web was undeniable proof
that no one had passed through its entrance.

Similarly, when David became indebted to one of them for his life, he
was cured of his scorn for wasps. He had thought them good for nothing
but to breed maggots. David once surprised Saul and his attendants while
they were fast asleep in their camp, and he resolved to carry off, as
proof of his magnanimity, the cruse that stood between the feet of the
giant Abner, who like the rest was sleeping. Fortunately his knees were
drawn up, so that David could carry out his intention unhindered. But as
David was retiring with the cruse, Abner stretched out his feet, and
pinned David down as with two solid pillars. His life would have been
forfeit, if a wasp had not stung Abner, who mechanically, in his sleep,
moved his feet, and released David.

There were still other miracles that happened to David in his flight.
Once, when Saul and his men compassed David round about, an angel
appeared and summoned him home, to repulse the raid of the Philistines
upon the land. Saul gave up the pursuit of David, but only after a
majority had so decided, for some had been of the opinion that the
seizure of David was quite as important as the repulse of the
Philistines. Again, in his battle with the Amalekites, David enjoyed
direct intervention from above. Lightning in flashes and sheets
illumined the dark night, so enabling him to carry on the struggle.

### WARS

David's first thought after ascending the throne was to wrest Jerusalem,
sacred since the days of Adam, Noah, and Abraham, from the grasp of the
heathen. The plan was not easy of execution for various reasons. The
Jebusites, the possessors of Jerusalem, were the posterity of those sons
of Heth who had ceded the Cave of Machpelah to Abraham only on condition
that their descendants should never be forcibly dispossessed of their
capital city Jerusalem. In perpetuation of this agreement between
Abraham and the sons of Heth, monuments of brass were erected, and when
David approached Jerusalem with hostile intent, the Jebusites pointed to
Abraham's promise engraven upon them and still plainly to be read. They
maintained that before David could take the city, which they had
surrounded with a high wall, he would have to destroy the monuments.
Joab devised a plan of getting into Jerusalem. He set up a tall cypress
tree near the wall, bent it downward, and standing on David's head, he
grasped the very tip of the tree. When the tree rebounded, Joab sat high
above the wall, and could jump down upon it. Once in the city, he
destroyed the monuments, and possessed himself of Jerusalem. For David a
miracle had happened; the wall had lowered itself before him so that he
could walk into the city without difficulty. David, however, was not
desirous of using forcible means. He therefore offered the Jebusites six
hundred shekels, fifty shekels for each Israelitish tribe. The Jebusites
accepted the money, and gave David a bill of sale.

Jerusalem having been acquired, David had to prepare for war with the
Philistines, in which the king gave proof at once of his heroic courage
and his unshakable trust in God. The latter quality he displayed
signally in the battle that took place in the Valley of the Giants. God
had commanded David not to attack the host of the Philistines until he
heard "the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry trees." God
desired to pass judgment upon the tutelary angels of the heathen, before
surrendering the heathen themselves to the pious, and the motion of the
tops of the trees was to indicate that the battle could proceed. The
enemy advanced until there were but four ells between them and the
Israelites. The latter were about to throw themselves against the
Philistines, but David restrained them, saying: "God forbade me to
attack the Philistines before the tops of the trees begin to move. If we
transgress God's command, we shall certainly die. If we delay, it is
probable that we shall be killed by the Philistines, but, at least, we
shall die as pious men that keep God's command. Above all, let us have
confidence in God." Scarcely had he ended his speech when the tops of
the trees rustled, and David made a successful assault upon the
Philistines. Whereupon God said to the angels, who were constantly
questioning him as to why he had taken the royal dignity from Saul and
given it to David: "See the difference between Saul and David."

Of David's other campaigns, the most notable is his war with Shobach the
Aramean, whom he conquered in spite of his gigantic size and strength.
Shobach was very tall, as tall as a dove-cote, and one look at him
sufficed to strike terror to the heart of the beholder. The Aramean
general indulged in the belief that David would treat the Syrians gently
on account of the monument, still in existence at that time, which Jacob
and Laban had erected on the frontier between Palestine and Aram as a
sign of their covenant that neither they nor their descendants should
wage war with each other. But David destroyed the monument. Similarly,
the Philistines had placed trust in a relic from Isaac, the bridle of a
mule which the Patriarch had given to Abimelech, the king of the
Philistines, as a pledge of the covenant between Israel and his people.
David took it from them by force.

However, David was as just as he was bold. Disregard of the covenants
made by the Patriarchs was far removed from his thoughts. Indeed, before
departing for the wars with the Arameans and the Philistines, he had
charged the Sanhedrin to investigate carefully the claims of the two
nations. The claims of the Philistines were shown to be utterly
unfounded. In no sense were they the descendants of those Philistines
who had concluded a treaty with Isaac; they had immigrated from Cyprus
at a much later date. The Arameans, on the other hand, had forfeited
their claims upon considerate treatment, because under the "Aramean"
Balaam, and later again, in the time of Othniel, under their king
Cushan-rishathaim, they had attacked and made war upon the Israelites.

### AHITHOPHEL

Among David's courtiers and attendants, a prominent place is occupied by
his counsellor Ahithophel, with whom the king was connected by family
ties, Bath-sheba being his granddaughter. Ahithophel's wisdom was
supernatural, for his counsels always coincided with the oracles
rendered by the Urim and Thummim, and great as was his wisdom, it was
equalled by his scholarship. Therefore David did not hesitate to submit
himself to his instruction, even though Ahithophel was a very young man,
at the time of his death not more than thirty-three years old. The one
thing lacking in him was sincere piety, and this it was that proved his
undoing in the end, for it induced him to take part in Absalom's
rebellion against David. Thus he forfeited even his share in the world
to come.

To this dire course of action he was misled by astrologic and other
signs, which he interpreted as prophecies of his own kingship, when in
reality they pointed to the royal destiny of his granddaughter
Bath-sheba. Possessed by his erroneous belief, he cunningly urged
Absalom to commit an unheard-of crime. Thus Absalom would profit nothing
by his rebellion, for, though he accomplished his father's ruin, he
would yet be held to account and condemned to death for his violation of
family purity, and the way to the throne would be clear for Ahithophel,
the great sage in Israel.

The relation between David and Ahithophel had been somewhat strained
even before Absalom's rebellion. Ahithophel's feelings had been hurt by
his being passed over at the time when David, shortly after ascending
the throne, invested, on a single day, no less than ninety thousand
functionaries with positions.

On that day a remarkable incident occurred. When the Ark was to be
brought up from Geba to Jerusalem, the priests who attempted to take
hold of it were raised up in the air and thrown violently to the ground.
In his despair the king turned for advice to Ahithophel, who retorted
mockingly: "Ask thy wise men whom thou hast but now installed in
office." It was only when David uttered a curse on him who knows a
remedy and withholds it from the sufferer, that Ahithophel advised that
a sacrifice should be offered at every step taken by the priests.
Although the measure proved efficacious, and no further disaster
occurred in connection with the Ark, yet Ahithophel's words had been
insincere. He knew the real reason of the misadventure, and concealed it
from the king. Instead of following the law of having the Ark carried on
the shoulders of priests, David had had it put on a wagon, and so
incurred the wrath of God.

Ahithophel's hostility toward David showed itself also on the following
occasion. When David was digging the foundations of the Temple, a shard
was found at a depth of fifteen hundred cubits. David was about to lift
it, when the shard exclaimed: "Thou canst not do it." "Why not?" asked
David. "Because I rest upon the abyss." "Since when?" "Since the hour in
which the voice of God was heard to utter the words from Sinai, 'I am
the Lord thy God,' causing the earth to quake and sink into the abyss. I
lie here to cover up the abyss." Nevertheless David lifted the shard,
and the waters of the abyss rose and threatened to flood the earth.
Ahithophel was standing by, and he thought to himself: "Now David will
meet with his death, and I shall be king." Just then David said:
"Whoever knows how to stem the tide of waters, and fails to do it, will
one day throttle himself." Thereupon Ahithophel had the Name of God
inscribed upon the shard, and the shard thrown into the abyss. The
waters at once commenced to subside, but they sank to so great a depth
that David feared the earth might lose her moisture, and he began to
sing the fifteen "Songs of Ascents," to bring the waters up again.

Nevertheless David's curse was realized. Ahithophel ended his days by
hanging himself. His last will contained the following three rules of
conduct: 1. Refrain from doing aught against a favorite of fortune. 2.
Take heed not to rise up against the royal house of David. 3. If the
Feast of Pentecost falls on a sunny day, then sow wheat.

Posterity has been favored with the knowledge of but a small part of
Ahithophel's wisdom, and that little through two widely different
sources, through Socrates, who was his disciple, and through a
fortune-book written by him.

### JOAB

Joab, the warrior, was a contrast to Ahithophel in every essential. He
was David's right hand. It was said, if Joab had not been there to
conduct his wars, David would not have had leisure to devote himself to
the study of the Torah. He was the model of a true Jewish hero,
distinguished at the same time for his learning, piety, and goodness.
His house stood wide open for all comers, and the campaigns which he
undertook redounded invariably to the benefit of the people. They were
indebted to him for luxuries even, and more than that, he took thought
for the welfare of scholars, he himself being the president of the
Sanhedrin.

It interested Joab to analyze the character of men and their opinions.
When he heard King David's words: "Like as a father pitieth his
children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him," he expressed his
astonishment that the comparison should be made with the love of a
father for a child, and not with the love of a mother; mother love as a
rule is considered the stronger and the more self-sacrificing. He made
up his mind to keep his eyes open, and observe whether David's idea was
borne out by facts. On one of his journeys he happened into the house of
a poor old man who had twelve children, all of whom the father
supported, however meagrely, with the toil of his own hands. Joab
proposed that he sell him one of the twelve children; he would thus be
relieved of the care of one, and the selling-price could be applied to
the better support of the rest. The good father rejected the proposition
brusquely. Then Joab approached the mother, offering her a hundred gold
denarii for one of the children. At first she resisted the temptation,
but finally she yielded. When the father returned in the evening, he cut
the bread, as was his wont, into fourteen pieces, for himself, his wife,
and his twelve children. In allotting the portions he missed a child,
and insisted upon being told its fate. The mother confessed what had
happened during his absence. He neither ate nor drank, and next morning
he set out, firmly resolved to return the money to Joab and to slay him
if he should refuse to surrender the child. After much parleying, and
after the father had threatened him with death, Joab yielded the child
to the old man, with the exclamation: "Yes, David was right when he
compared God's love for men to a father's love for his child. This poor
fellow who has twelve children to support was prepared to fight me to
the death for one of them, which the mother, who calmly stayed at home,
had sold to me for a price."

Among all the heroic achievements of Joab, the most remarkable is the
taking of the Amalekite capital. For six months the flower of the
Israelitish army, twelve thousand in number, under the leadership of
Joab, had been besieging the capital city of the Amalekites without
result. The soldiers made representations to their general, that it
would be well for them to return home to their wives and children. Joab
urged that this not only would earn for them contempt and derision, but
also would invite new danger. The heathen would be encouraged to unite
against the Israelites. He proposed that they hurl him into the city by
means of a sling, and then wait forty days. If at the end of this period
they saw blood flow from the gates of the fortress, it should be a sign
to them that he was still alive.

His plan was executed. Joab took with him one thousand pieces of money
and his sword. When he was cast from the sling, he fell into the
courtyard of a widow, whose daughter caught him up. In a little while he
regained consciousness. He pretended to be an Amalekite taken prisoner
by the Israelites, and thrown into the city by his captors, who thus
wished to inflict death. As he was provided with money, which he
dispensed lavishly among his entertainers, he was received kindly, and
was given the Amalekite garb. So apparelled, he ventured, after ten
days, on a tour of inspection through the city, which he found to be of
enormous size.

His first errand was to an armorer, to have him mend his sword, which
had been broken by his fall. When the artisan scanned Joab's weapon, he
started back--he had never seen a sword like it. He forged a new one,
which snapped in two almost at once when Joab grasped it firmly. So it
happened with a second sword, and with a third. Finally he succeeded in
fashioning one that was acceptable. Joab asked the smith whom he would
like him to slay with the sword, and the reply was, "Joab, the general
of the Israelitish king." "I am he," said Joab, and when the smith in
astonishment turned to look at him, Joab ran him through so skillfully
that the victim had no realization of what was happening. Thereupon he
hewed down five hundred Amalekite warriors whom he met on his way, and
not one escaped to betray him. The rumor arose that Asmodeus, the king
of demons, was raging among the inhabitants of the city, and slaying
them in large numbers.

After another period of ten days, which he spent in retirement with his
hosts, Joab sallied forth a second time, and caused such bloodshed among
the Amalekites that his gory weapon clave to his hand, and his right
hand lost all power of independent motion, it could be made to move only
in a piece with his arm. He hastened to his lodging place to apply hot
water to his hand and free it from the sword. On his way thither the
woman who had caught him up when he fell into the city called to him:
"Thou eatest and drinkest with us, yet thou slayest our warriors."
Seeing himself betrayed, he could not but kill the woman. Scarcely had
his sword touched her, when it was separated from his hand, and his hand
could move freely, for the dead woman had been with child, and the blood
of the unborn babe loosed the sword.

After Joab had slain thousands, the Israelites without, at the very
moment when they were beginning to mourn their general as dead, saw
blood issue from the city, and joyfully they cried out with one accord:
"Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord is One." Joab mounted a
high tower, and in stentorian tones shouted: "The Lord will not forsake
his people." Inspired with high and daring courage, the Israelites
demanded permission to assault the city and capture it. As Joab turned
to descend from the tower, he noticed that six verses of a Psalm were
inscribed on his foot, the first verse running thus: "The Lord answers
thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob is thy
defense." Later David added three verses and completed the Psalm.
Thereupon the Israelites took the Amalekite capital, destroyed the
heathen temples in the city, and slew all its inhabitants, except the
king, whom, with his crown of pure gold on his head, they brought before
David.

### DAVID'S PIETY AND HIS SIN

Neither his great achievements in war nor his remarkable good fortune
moved David from his pious ways, or in aught changed his mode of life.
Even after he became king he sat at the feet of his teachers, Ira the
Jairite and Mephibosheth. To the latter he always submitted his
decisions on religious questions, to make sure that they were in
accordance with law. Whatever leisure time his royal duties afforded
him, he spent in study and prayer. He contented himself with "sixty
breaths" of sleep. At midnight the strings of his harp, which were made
of the gut of the ram sacrificed by Abraham on Mount Moriah, began to
vibrate. The sound they emitted awakened David, and he would arise at
once to devote himself to the study of the Torah.

Besides study, the composition of psalms naturally claimed a goodly
portion of his time. Pride filled his heart when he had completed the
Psalter, and he exclaimed: "O Lord of the world, is there another
creature in the universe who like me proclaims thy praise?" A frog came
up to the king, and said: "Be not so proud; I have composed more psalms
than thou, and, besides, every psalm my mouth has uttered I have
accompanied with three thousand parables." And, truly, if David indulged
in conceit, it was only for a moment. As a rule he was the exemplar of
modesty. The coins which were stamped by him bore a shepherd's crook and
pouch on the obverse, and on the reverse the Tower of David. In other
respects, too, his bearing was humble, as though he were still the
shepherd and not the king.

His great piety invested his prayer with such efficacy that he could
bring things in heaven down to earth. It is natural that so godly a king
should have used the first respite granted by his wars to carry out his
design of erecting a house of worship to God. But in the very night in
which David conceived the plan of building the Temple, God said to
Nathan the prophet: "Hasten to David. I know him to be a man with whom
execution follows fast upon the heels of thought, and I should not like
him to hire laborers for the Temple work, and then, disappointed,
complain of me. I furthermore know him to be a man who obligates himself
by vows to do good deeds, and I desire to spare him the embarrassment of
having to apply to the Sanhedrin for absolution from his vow."

When David heard Nathan's message for him, he began to tremble, and he
said: "Ah, verily, God hath found me unworthy to erect His sanctuary."
But God replied with these words: "Nay, the blood shed by thee I
consider as sacrificial blood, but I do not care to have thee build the
Temple, because then it would be eternal and indestructible." "But that
would be excellent," said David. Whereupon the reply was vouchsafed him:
"I foresee that Israel will commit sins. I shall wreak My wrath upon the
Temple, and Israel will be saved from annihilation. However, thy good
intentions shall receive their due reward. The Temple, though it be
built by Solomon, shall be called thine."

David's thinking and planning were wholly given to what is good and
noble. He is one of the few pious men over whom the evil inclination had
no power. By nature he was not disposed to commit such evil-doing as his
relation to Bath-sheba involved. God Himself brought him to his crime,
that He might say to other sinners: "Go to David and learn how to
repent." Nor, indeed, may David be charged with gross murder and
adultery. There were extenuating circumstances. In those days it was
customary for warriors to give their wives bills of divorce, which were
to have validity only if the soldier husbands did not return at the end
of the campaign. Uriah having fallen in battle, Bath-sheba was a
regularly divorced woman. As for the death of her husband, it cannot be
laid entirely at David's door, for Uriah had incurred the death penalty
by his refusal to take his ease in his own house, according to the
king's bidding. Moreover, from the first, Bath-sheba had been destined
by God for David, but by way of punishment for having lightly promised
Uriah the Hittite an Israelitish woman to wife, in return for his aid in
unfastening the armor of the prostrate Goliath, the king had to undergo
bitter trials before he won her.

Furthermore, the Bath-sheba episode was a punishment for David's
excessive self-consciousness. He had fairly besought God to lead him
into temptation, that he might give proof of his constancy. It came
about thus: He once complained to God: "O Lord of the world, why do
people say God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, and why not God
of David?" The answer came: "Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were tried by me,
but thou hast not yet been proved." David entreated: "Then examine me, O
Lord, and try me." And God said: "I shall prove thee, and I shall even
grant thee what I did not grant the Patriarchs. I shall tell thee
beforehand that thou wilt fall into temptation through a woman."

Once Satan appeared to him in the shape of a bird. David threw a dart at
him. Instead of striking Satan, it glanced off and broke a wicker screen
which hid Bath-sheba combing her hair. The sight of her aroused passion
in the king. David realized his transgression, and for twenty-two years
he was a penitent. Daily he wept a whole hour and ate his "bread with
ashes." But he had to undergo still heavier penance. For a half-year he
suffered with leprosy, and even the Sanhedrin, which usually was in
close personal attendance upon him, had to leave him. He lived not only
in physical, but also in spiritual isolation, for the Shekinah departed
from him during that time.

### ABSALOM'S REBELLION

Of all the punishments, however, inflicted upon David, none was so
severe as the rebellion of his own son.

Absalom was of such gigantic proportions that a man who was himself of
extraordinary size, standing in the eye-socket of his skull, sank in
down to his nose. As for his marvellous hair, the account of it in the
Bible does not convey a notion of its abundance. Absalom had taken the
vow of a Nazarite. As his vow was for life, and because the growth of
his hair was particularly heavy, the law permitted him to clip it
slightly every week. It was of this small quantity that the weight
amounted to two hundred shekels.

Absalom arranged for his audacious rebellion with great cunning. He
secured a letter from his royal father empowering him to select two
elders for his suite in every town he visited. With this document he
travelled through the whole of Palestine. In each town he went to the
two most distinguished men, and invited them to accompany him, at the
same time showing them what his father had written, and assuring them
that they had been chosen by him because he had a particular affection
for them. So he succeeded in gathering the presidents of two hundred
courts about him. This having been accomplished, he arranged a large
banquet, at which he seated one of his emissaries between every two of
his guests, for the purpose of winning them over to his cause. The plan
did not succeed wholly, for, though the elders of the towns stood by
Absalom, in their hearts they hoped for David's victory.

The knowledge that a part of Absalom's following sided with him in
secret,--that, though he was pursued by his son, his friends remained
true to him,--somewhat consoled David in his distress. He thought that
in these circumstances, if the worst came to the worst, Absalom would at
least feel pity for him. At first, however, the despair of David knew no
bounds. He was on the point of worshipping an idol, when his friend
Hushai the Archite approached him, saying: "The people will wonder that
such a king should serve idols." David replied: "Should a king such as I
am be killed by his own son? It is better for me to serve idols than
that God should be held responsible for my misfortune, and His Name thus
be desecrated." Hushai reproached him: "Why didst thou marry a captive?"
"There is no wrong in that," replied David, "it is permitted according
to the law." Thereupon Hushai: "But thou didst disregard the connection
between the passage permitting it and the one that follows almost
immediately after it in the Scriptures, dealing with the disobedient and
rebellious son, the natural issue of such a marriage."

Hushai was not the only faithful friend and adherent David had. Some
came to his rescue unexpectedly, as, for instance, Shobi, the son of
Nahash, who is identical with the Ammonite king Hanun, the enemy of
David at first, and later his ally. Barzillai, another one of his
friends in need, also surprised him by his loyalty, for on the whole his
moral attitude was not the highest conceivable.

Absalom's end was beset with terrors. When he was caught in the branches
of the oak-tree, he was about to sever his hair with a sword stroke, but
suddenly he saw hell yawning beneath him, and he preferred to hang in
the tree to throwing himself into the abyss alive. Absalom's crime was,
indeed, of a nature to deserve the supreme torture, for which reason he
is one of the few Jews who have no portion in the world to come. His
abode is in hell, where he is charged with the control of ten heathen
nations in the second division. Whenever the avenging angels sit in
judgment on the nations, they desire to visit punishment on Absalom,
too, but each time a heavenly voice is heard to call out: "Do not
chastise him, do not burn him. He is an Israelite, the son of My servant
David." Whereupon Absalom is set upon his throne, and is accorded the
treatment due to a king. That the extreme penalties of hell were thus
averted from him, was on account of David's eightfold repetition of his
son's name in his lament over him. Besides, David's intercession had the
effect of re-attaching Absalom's severed head to his body.

At his death Absalom was childless, for all his children, his three sons
and his daughter, died before him, as a punishment for his having set
fire to a field of grain belonging to Joab.

### DAVID'S ATONEMENT

All these sufferings did not suffice to atone for David's sin. God once
said to him: "How much longer shall this sin be hidden in thy hand and
remain unatoned? On thy account the priestly city of Nob was destroyed,
on thy account Doeg the Edomite was cast out of the communion of the
pious, and on thy account Saul and his three sons were slain. What dost
thou desire now--that thy house should perish, or that thou thyself
shouldst be delivered into the hands of thine enemies?" David chose the
latter doom.

It happened one day when he was hunting, Satan, in the guise of a deer,
enticed him further and further, into the very territory of the
Philistines, where he was recognized by Ishbi the giant, the brother of
Goliath, his adversary. Desirous of avenging his brother, he seized
David, and cast him into a winepress, where the king would have suffered
a torturous end, if by a miracle the earth beneath him had not begun to
sink, and so saved him from instantaneous death. His plight, however,
remained desperate, and it required a second miracle to rescue him.

In that hour Abishai, the cousin of David, was preparing for the advent
of the Sabbath, for the king's misfortune happened on Friday as the
Sabbath was about to come in. When Abishai poured out water to wash
himself, he suddenly caught sight of drops of blood in it. Then he was
startled by a dove that came to him plucking out her plumes, and moaning
and wailing. Abishai exclaimed: "The dove is the symbol of the people of
Israel. It cannot be but that David, the king of Israel, is in
distress." Not finding the king at home, he was confirmed in his fears,
and he determined to go on a search for David on the swiftest animal at
his command, the king's own saddle-beast. But first he had to obtain the
permission of the sages to mount the animal ridden by the king, for the
law forbids a subject to avail himself of things set aside for the
personal use of a king. Only the impending danger could justify the
exception made in this case.

Scarcely had Abishai mounted the king's animal, when he found himself in
the land of the Philistines, for the earth had contracted miraculously.
He met Orpah, the mother of the four giant sons. She was about to kill
him, but he anticipated the blow and slew her. Ishbi, seeing that he now
had two opponents, stuck his lance into the ground, and hurled David up
in the air, in the expectation that when he fell he would be transfixed
by the lance. At that moment Abishai appeared, and by pronouncing the
Name of God he kept David suspended 'twixt heaven and earth.

Abishai questioned David how such evil plight had overtaken him, and
David told him of his conversation with God, and how he himself had
chosen to fall into the hands of the enemy, rather than permit the ruin
of his house. Abishai replied: "Reverse thy prayer, plead for thyself,
and not for thy descendants. Let thy children sell wax, and do thou not
afflict thyself about their destiny." The two men joined their prayers,
and pleaded with God to avert David's threatening doom. Abishai again
uttered the Name of God, and David dropped to earth uninjured. Now both
of them ran away swiftly, pursued by Ishbi. When the giant heard of his
mother's death, his strength forsook him, and he was slain by David and
Abishai.

### VISITATIONS

Among the sorrows of David are the visitations that came upon Palestine
during his reign, and he felt them all the more as he had incurred them
through his own fault. There was first the famine, which was so
desolating that it is counted among the ten severest that are to happen
from the time of Adam to the time of the Messiah. During the first year
that it prevailed, David had an investigation set on foot to discover
whether idolatry was practiced in the land, and was keeping back the
rain. His suspicion proved groundless. The second year he looked into
the moral conditions of his realm, for lewdness can bring about the same
punishment as idolatry. Again he was proved wrong. The third year, he
turned his attention to the administration of charity. Perhaps the
people had incurred guilt in this respect, for abuses in this department
also were visited with the punishment of famine. Again his search was
fruitless, and he turned to God to inquire of Him the cause of the
public distress. God's reply was: "Was not Saul a king anointed with
holy oil, did he not abolish idolatry, is he not the companion of Samuel
in Paradise? Yet, while you all dwell in the land of Israel, he is
'outside of the land.'" David, accompanied by the scholars and the
nobles of his kingdom, at once repaired to Jabesh-gilead, disinterred
the remains of Saul and Jonathan, and in solemn procession bore them
through the whole land of Israel to the inheritance of the tribe of
Benjamin. There they were buried. The tributes of affection paid by the
people of Israel to its dead king aroused the compassion of God, and the
famine came to an end.

The sin against Saul was now absolved, but there still remained Saul's
own guilt in his dealings with the Gibeonites, who charged him with
having killed seven of their number. David asked God why He had punished
His people on account of proselytes. God's answer to him was: "If thou
dost not bring near them that are far off, thou wilt remove them that
are near by." To satisfy their vengeful feelings, the Gibeonites
demanded the life of seven members of Saul's family. David sought to
mollify them, representing to them that they would derive no benefit
from the death of their victims, and offering them silver and gold
instead. But though David treated with each one of them individually,
the Gibeonites were relentless. When he realized their hardness of
heart, he cried out: "Three qualities God gave unto Israel; they are
compassionate, chaste, and gracious in the service of their fellow-men.
The first of these qualities the Gibeonites do not possess, and
therefore they must be excluded from communion with Israel."

The seven descendants of Saul to be surrendered to the Gibeonites were
determined by letting all his posterity pass by the Ark of the law.
Those who were arrested before it were the designated victims.
Mephibosheth would have been one of the unfortunates, had he not been
permitted to pass by unchecked in answer to the prayer of David, to whom
he was dear, not only as the son of his friend Jonathan, but also as the
teacher who instructed him in the Torah.

The cruel fate that befell the descendants of Saul had a wholesome
effect. All the heathen who saw and heard exclaimed: "There is no God
like unto the God of Israel, there is no nation like unto the nation of
Israel; the wrong inflicted upon wretched proselytes has been expiated
by the sons of kings." So great was the enthusiasm among the heathen
over this manifestation of the Jewish sense of justice that one hundred
and fifty thousand of them were converted to Judaism.

As for David, his wrong in connection with the famine lay in his not
having applied his private wealth to the amelioration of the people's
suffering. When David returned victorious from the combat with Goliath,
the women of Israel gave him their gold and silver ornaments. He put
them aside for use in building the Temple, and even during the three
years' famine this fund was not touched. God said: "Thou didst refrain
from rescuing human beings from death, in order to save thy money for
the Temple. Verily, the Temple shall not be built by thee, but by
Solomon."

David is still more blameworthy on account of the census which he took
of the Israelites in defiance of the law in the Pentateuch. When he was
charged by the king with the task of numbering the people, Joab used
every effort to turn him away from his intention. But in vain. Incensed,
David said: "Either thou art king and I am the general, or I am king and
thou art the general." Joab had no choice but to obey. He selected the
tribe of Gad as the first to be counted, because he thought that the
Gadites, independent and self-willed, would hinder the execution of the
royal order, and David would be forced to give up his plan of taking a
census. The Gadites disappointed the expectations of Joab, and he betook
himself to the tribe of Dan, hoping that if God's punishment descended,
it would strike the idolatrous Danites. Disliking his mission as he did,
Joab spent nine months in executing it, though he might have dispatched
it in a much shorter time. Nor did he carry out the king's orders to the
letter. He himself warned the people of the census. If he saw the father
of a family of five sons, he would bid him conceal a few of them.
Following the example set by Moses, he omitted the Levites from the
enumeration, likewise the tribe of Benjamin, because he entertained
particularly grave apprehensions in behalf of this greatly decimated
tribe. In the end, David was not informed of the actual number obtained.
Joab made two lists, intending to give the king a partial list if he
found that he had no suspicion of the ruse.

The prophet Gad came to David and gave him the choice of famine,
oppression by enemies, or the plague, as the penalty for the heavy crime
of popular census-taking. David was in the position of a sick man who is
asked whether he prefers to be buried next to his father or next to his
mother. The king considered: "If I choose the calamities of war, the
people will say, 'He cares little, he has his warriors to look to.' If I
choose famine, they will say, 'He cares little, he has his riches to
look to.' I shall choose the plague, whose scourge strikes all alike."
Although the plague raged but a very short time, it claimed a large
number of victims. The most serious loss was the death of Abishai, whose
piety and learning made him the counterpoise of a host of seventy-five
thousand.

David raised his eyes on high, and he saw the sins of Israel heaped up
from earth to heaven. In the same moment an angel descended, and slew
his four sons, the prophet Gad, and the elders who accompanied him.
David's terror at this sight, which was but increased when the angel
wiped his dripping sword on the king's garments, settled in his limbs,
and from that day on they never ceased to tremble.

### THE DEATH OF DAVID

David once besought God to tell him when he would die. His petition was
not granted, for God has ordained that no man shall foreknow his end.
One thing, however, was revealed to David, that his death would occur at
the age of seventy on the Sabbath day. David desired that he might be
permitted to die on Friday. This wish, too, was denied him, because God
said that He delighted more in one day passed by David in the study of
the Torah, than in a thousand holocausts offered by Solomon in the
Temple. Then David petitioned that life might be vouchsafed him until
Sunday; this, too, was refused, because God said it would be an
infringement of the rights of Solomon, for one reign may not overlap by
a hairbreadth the time assigned to another. Thereafter David spent every
Sabbath exclusively in the study of the Torah, in order to secure
himself against the Angel of Death, who has no power to slay a man while
he is occupied with the fulfillment of God's commandments. The Angel of
Death had to resort to cunning to gain possession of David. One Sabbath
day, which happened to be also the Pentecost holiday, the king was
absorbed in study, when he heard a sound in the garden. He rose and
descended the stairway leading from his palace to the garden, to
discover the cause of the noise. No sooner had he set foot on the steps
than they tumbled in, and David was killed. The Angel of Death had
caused the noise in order to utilize the moment when David should
interrupt his study. The king's corpse could not be moved on the
Sabbath, which was painful to those with him, as it was lying exposed to
the rays of the sun. So Solomon summoned several eagles, and they stood
guard over the body, shading it with their outstretched pinions.

### DAVID IN PARADISE

The death of David did not mean the end of his glory and grandeur. It
merely caused a change of scene. In the heavenly realm as on earth David
ranks among the first. The crown upon his head outshines all others, and
whenever he moves out of Paradise to present himself before God, suns,
stars, angels, seraphim, and other holy beings run to meet him. In the
heavenly court-room a throne of fire of gigantic dimensions is erected
for him directly opposite to the throne of God. Seated on this throne
and surrounded by the kings of the house of David and other Israelitish
kings, he intones wondrously beautiful psalms. At the end he always
cites the verse: "The Lord reigns forever and ever," to which the
archangel Metatron and those with him reply: "Holy, holy, holy, is the
Lord of hosts!" This is the signal for the holy Hayyot and heaven and
earth to join in with praise. Finally the kings of the house of David
sing the verse: "And the Lord shall be king over all; in that day shall
the Lord be one, and His name one."

The greatest distinction to be accorded David is reserved for the
judgment day, when God will prepare a great banquet in Paradise for all
the righteous. At David's petition, God Himself will be present at the
banquet, and will sit on His throne, opposite to which David's throne
will be placed. At the end of the banquet, God will pass the wine cup
over which grace is said, to Abraham, with the words: "Pronounce the
blessing over the wine, thou who art the father of the pious of the
world." Abraham will reply: "I am not worthy to pronounce the blessing,
for I am the father also of the Ishmaelites, who kindle God's wrath."
God will then turn to Isaac: "Say the blessing, for thou wert bound upon
the altar as a sacrifice." "I am not worthy," he will reply, "for the
children of my son Esau destroyed the Temple." Then to Jacob: "Do thou
speak the blessing, thou whose children were blameless." Jacob also will
decline the honor on the ground that he was married to two sisters at
the same time, which later was strictly prohibited by the Torah. God
will then turn to Moses: "Say the blessing, for thou didst receive the
law and didst fulfil its precepts." Moses will answer: "I am not worthy
to do it, seeing that I was not found worthy to enter the Holy Land."
God will next offer the honor to Joshua, who both led Israel into the
Holy Land, and fulfilled the commandments of the law. He, too, will
refuse to pronounce the blessing, because he was not found worthy to
bring forth a son. Finally God will turn to David with the words: "Take
the cup and say the blessing, thou the sweetest singer in Israel and
Israel's king. And David will reply: 'Yes, I will pronounce the
blessing, for I am worthy of the honor.'" Then God will take the Torah
and read various passages from it, and David will recite a psalm in
which both the pious in Paradise and the wicked in hell will join with a
loud Amen. Thereupon God will send his angels to lead the wicked from
hell to Paradise.

### THE FAMILY OF DAVID

David had six wives, including Michal, the daughter of Saul, who is
called by the pet name Eglah, "Calfkin," in the list given in the Bible
narrative. Michal was of entrancing beauty, and at the same time the
model of a loving wife. Not only did she save David out of the hands of
her father, but also, when Saul, as her father and her king, commanded
her to marry another man, she acquiesced only apparently. She entered
into a mock marriage in order not to arouse the anger of Saul, who had
annulled her union with David on grounds which he thought legal. Michal
was good as well as beautiful; she showed such extraordinary kindness to
the orphan children of her sister Merab that the Bible speaks of the
five sons of Michal "whom she bore to Adriel." Adriel, however, was her
brother-in-law and not her husband, but she had raised his children,
treating them as though they were her own. Michal was no less a model of
piety. Although the law exempted her, as a woman, from the duty, still
she executed the commandment of using phylacteries. In spite of all
these virtues, she was severely punished by God for her scorn of David,
whom she reproached with lack of dignity, when he had in mind only to do
honor to God. Long she remained childless, and at last, when she was
blessed with a child, she lost her own life in giving birth to it.

But the most important among the wives of David was Abigail, in whom
beauty, wisdom, and prophetical gifts were joined. With Sarah, Rahab,
and Esther, she forms the quartet of the most beautiful women in
history. She was so bewitching that passion was aroused in men by the
mere thought of her. Her cleverness showed itself during her first
meeting with David, when, though anxious about the life of her husband
Nabal, she still, with the utmost tranquility, put a ritual question to
him in his rage. He refused to answer it, because, he said, it was a
question to be investigated by day, not by night. Thereupon Abigail
interposed, that sentence of death likewise may be passed upon a man
only during the day. Even if David's judgment were right, the law
required him to wait until daybreak to execute it upon Nabal. David's
objection, that a rebel like Nabal had no claim upon due process of law,
she overruled with the words: "Saul is still alive, and thou art not yet
acknowledged king by the world."

Her charm would have made David her captive on this occasion, if her
moral strength had not kept him in check. By means of the expression,
"And this shall not be unto thee," she made him understand that the day
had not yet arrived, but that it would come, when a woman, Bath-sheba,
would play a disastrous part in his life. Thus she manifested her gift
of prophecy.

Not even Abigail was free from the feminine weakness of coquetry. The
words "remember thine handmaid" should never have been uttered by her.
As a married woman, she should not have sought to direct the attention
of a man to herself. In the women's Paradise she supervises the fifth of
the seven divisions into which it is divided, and her domain adjoins
that of the wives of the Patriarchs, Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel, and Leah.

Among the sons of David, Adonijah, the son of Haggith, must be mentioned
particularly, the pretender to the throne. The fifty men whom he
prepared to run before him had fitted themselves for the place of
heralds by cutting out their spleen and the flesh of the soles of their
feet. That Adonijah was not designated for the royal dignity, was made
manifest by the fact that the crown of David did not fit him. This crown
had the remarkable peculiarity of always fitting the legitimate king of
the house of David.

Chileab was a son worthy of his mother Abigail. The meaning of his name
is "like the father," which had been given him because of his striking
resemblance to David in appearance, a circumstance that silenced the
talk against David's all too hasty marriage with the widow of Nabal.
Intellectually, too, Chileab testified to David's paternity. In fact, he
excelled his father in learning, as he did even the teacher of David,
Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan. On account of his piety he is one of
the few who have entered Paradise alive.

Tamar cannot be called one of the children of David, because she was
born before her mother's conversion to Judaism. Consequently, her
relation to Amnon is not quite of the grave nature it would have been,
had they been sister and brother in the strict sense of the terms.

To the immediate household of David belonged four hundred young squires,
the sons of women taken captive in battle. They wore their hair in
heathen fashion, and, sitting in golden chariots, they formed the
vanguard of the army, and terrified the enemy by their appearance.

### HIS TOMB

When David was buried, Solomon put abundant treasures into his tomb.
Thirteen hundred years later the high priest Hyrcanus took a thousand
talents of the money secreted there to use it in preventing the siege of
Jerusalem by the Greek king Antiochus. King Herod also abstracted great
sums. But none of the marauders could penetrate to the resting-place of
the kings,--next to David his successors were interred,--for it was sunk
into the earth so skillfully that it could not be found.

Once on a time, a Moslem pasha visited the mausoleum, and as he was
looking through the window in it, a weapon of his ornamented with
diamonds and pearls dropped into the tomb. A Mohammedan was lowered
through the window to fetch the weapon. When he was drawn up again, he
was dead, and three other Mohammedans who tried to enter in the same way
met the fate of their comrade. At the instigation of the kadi, the pasha
informed the Rabbi of Jerusalem that the Jews would be held responsible
for the restoration of the weapon. The Rabbi ordered a three days' fast,
to be spent in prayer. Then lots were cast to designate the messenger
who was to be charged with the perilous errand. The lot fell upon the
beadle of the synagogue, a pious and upright man. He secured the weapon,
and returned it to the pasha, who manifested his gratitude by kindly
treatment of the Jews thereafter. The beadle later told his adventures
in the tomb to the Hakam Bashi. When he had descended, there suddenly
appeared before him an old man of dignified appearance, and handed him
what he was seeking.

Another miraculous tale concerning the tomb of David runs as follows: A
poor but very pious Jewish washerwoman was once persuaded by the keeper
of the tomb to enter it. Hardly was she within, when the man nailed up
the entrance, and ran to the kadi to inform him that a Jewess had gone
in. Incensed, the kadi hastened to the spot, with the intention of
having the woman burnt for her presumptuousness. In her terror the poor
creature had begun to weep and implore God for help. Suddenly a flood of
light illumined the dark tomb, and a venerable old man took her by the
hand, and led her downward under the earth until she reached the open.
There he parted from her with the words: "Hasten homeward, and let none
know that thou wert away from thy house." The kadi had the tomb and its
surroundings thoroughly searched by his bailiffs, but not a trace of the
woman could be discovered, although the keeper again and again swore by
the Prophet that the woman had entered. Now the messengers whom the kadi
had sent to the house of the woman returned, and reported they had found
her washing busily, and greatly astonished at their question, whether
she had been at the tomb of David. The kadi accordingly decided that for
his false statements and his perjury, the keeper must die the very death
intended for the innocent woman, and so he was burnt. The people of
Jerusalem suspected a miracle, but the woman did not divulge her secret
until a few hours before her death. She told her story, and then
bequeathed her possessions to the congregation, under the condition that
a scholar recite Kaddish for her on each anniversary of her death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Solomon](loj406)
