[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](loj408)  [Next](loj410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VIII. ELISHA AND JONAH

### ELISHA THE DISCIPLE OF ELIJAH

The voices of the thousands of prophets of his time were stilled when
Elijah was translated from earth to heaven. With him vanished the
prophetical spirit of those who in former times had in no wise been his
inferiors. Elisha was the only one among them whose prophetical powers
were not diminished. On the contrary, they were strengthened, as a
reward for the unhesitating readiness with which he obeyed Elijah's
summons, and parted with the field he was ploughing, and with all else
he possessed, in favor of the community. Thenceforward he remained
Elijah's unwearying companion. When the angel descended from heaven to
take Elijah from earth, he found the two so immersed in a learned
discussion that he could not attract their attention, and he had to
return, his errand unfulfilled.

Elijah's promise to bestow a double portion of his wondrous spirit upon
his disciple was realized instantaneously. During his life Elisha
performed sixteen miracles, and eight was all his master had performed.
The first of them, the crossing of the Jordan, was more remarkable than
the corresponding wonder done by Elijah, for Elisha traversed the river
alone, and Elijah had been accompanied by Elisha. Two saints always have
more power than one by himself.

His second miracle, the "healing" of the waters of Jericho, so that they
became fit to drink, resulted in harm to himself, for the people who had
earned their livelihood by the sale of wholesome water were very much
incensed against the prophet for having spoiled their trade. Elisha,
whose prophetic powers enabled him to read both the past and the future
of these tradesmen, knew that they, their ancestors, and their posterity
had "not even the aroma of good about them." Therefore he cursed them.
Suddenly a forest sprang up and the bears that infested it devoured the
murmuring traders. The wicked fellows were not undeserving of the
punishment they received, yet Elisha was made to undergo a very serious
sickness, by way of correction for having yielded to passion. In this he
resembled his master Elijah; he allowed wrath and zeal to gain the
mastery over him. God desired that the two great prophets might be
purged of this fault. Accordingly, when Elisha rebuked King Jehoram of
Israel, the spirit of prophecy forsook him, and he had to resort to
artificial means to re-awaken it within himself.

Like his teacher, Elisha was always ready to help the poor and needy, as
witness his sympathy with the widow of one of the sons of the prophets,
and the effective aid he extended to her. Her husband had been none
other than Obadiah, who, though a prophet, had at the same time been one
of the highest officials at the court of the sinful king Ahab. By birth
an Edomite, Obadiah had been inspired by God to utter the prophecy
against Edom. In his own person he embodied the accusation against Esau,
who had lived with his pious parents without following their example,
while Obadiah, on the contrary, lived in constant intercourse with the
iniquitous King Ahab and his still more iniquitous spouse Jezebel
without yielding to the baneful influence they exercised. This same
Obadiah not only used his own fortune, but went to the length of
borrowing money on interest from the future king, in order to have the
wherewithal to support the prophets who were in hiding. On his death,
the king sought to hold the children responsible for the debt of the
father. In her despair the pious wife of Obadiah went to the graveyard,
and there she cried out: "O thou God-fearing man!" At once a heavenly
voice was heard questioning her: "There are four God-fearing men,
Abraham, Joseph, Job, and Obadiah. To which of them does thou desire to
speak?" "To him of whom it is said, "He feared the Lord greatly.'"

She was led to the grave of the prophet Obadiah, where she poured out
the tale of her sorrow. Obadiah told her to take the small remnant of
oil she still had to the prophet Elisha and request him to intercede for
him with God, "for God," he said, "is my debtor, seeing that I provided
a hundred prophets, not only with bread and water, but also with oil to
illuminate their hiding-place, for do not the Scriptures say: 'He that
hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the Lord'?" Forthwith the woman
carried out his behest. She went to Elisha, and he helped her by making
her little cruse of oil fill vessels upon vessels without number, and
when the vessels gave out, she fetched potsherds, saying, "May the will
that made empty vessels full, make broken vessels perfect." So it was.
The oil ceased to flow only when the supply of potsherds as well as
vessels gave out. In her piety the woman wanted to pay her
tithe-offering, but Elisha was of the opinion that, as the oil had been
bestowed upon her miraculously, she could keep it wholly and entirely
for her own use. Furthermore, Elisha reassured her as to the power of
the royal princes to do her harm: "The God who will close the jaws of
the lions set upon Daniel, and who did close the jaws of the dogs in
Egypt, the same God will blind the eyes of the sons of Ahab, and deafen
their ears, so that they can do thee no harm." Not only was the poor
widow helped out of her difficulties, her descendants unto all times
were provided for. The oil rose in price, and it yielded so much profit
that they never suffered want.

### THE SHUNAMMITE

The great woman of Shunem, the sister of Abishag and wife of the prophet
Iddo, also had cause to be deeply grateful to Elisha. When Elisha came
to Shunem on his journey through the land of Israel, his holiness made a
profound impression upon the Shunammite. Indeed, the prophet's eye was
so awe-inspiring that now woman could look him in the face and live.
Contrary to the habit of most women, who are intent upon diminishing
their expenses and their toil, the Shunammite took delight in the
privilege of welcoming the prophet to her house as a guest. She observed
that not even a fly dared approach close to the holy man, and a grateful
fragrance exhaled from his person. "If he were not so great a saint,"
she said, "and the holiness of the Lord did not invest him, there were
no such pleasant fragrance about him." That he might be undisturbed, she
assigned the best chambers in the house to the prophet. He on his part,
desiring to show his appreciation of her hospitality, knew no better
return for her kindness than to promise that she should be blessed with
a child within a year. The woman protested: "O, my husband is an old
man, nor am I of an age to bear children; the promise cannot be
fulfilled." Yet it happened as the prophet had foretold. Before a
twelvemonth had passed, she was a mother.

A few years later her child died a sudden death. The mother repaired to
the prophet, and lamented before him: "O that the vessel had remained
empty, rather than it should be filled first, and then be left void."
The prophet admitted that, though as a rule he was acquainted with all
things that were to happen, God had left him in the dark about the
misfortune that had befallen her. With trust in God, he gave his staff
to his disciple Gehazi, and sent him to bring the boy back to life. But
Gehazi was unworthy of his master. His conduct toward the Shunammite was
not becoming a disciple of the prophet, and, above all, he had no faith
in the possibility of accomplishing the mission entrusted to him.
Instead of obeying the behest of Elisha, not to speak a word on his way
to the child of the Shunammite, Gehazi made sport of the task laid upon
him. To whatever man he met he addressed the questions: "Dost thou
suppose this staff can bring the dead back to life?" The result was that
he forfeited the power of executing the errand with which he had been
charged. Elisha himself had to perform the miracle. The prophet uttered
the prayer: "O Lord of the world! As Thou didst wonders through my
master Elijah, and didst permit him to bring the dead to life, so, I
pray Thee, do Thou perform a wonder through me, and let me restore life
to this lad." The prayer was granted, and the child was revived. The act
of the prophet proves the duty of gratitude in return for hospitality.
Elisha did not attempt to resuscitate his own kith and kin who had been
claimed by death; he invoked a miracle for the sake of the woman who had
welcomed him kindly to her house.

### GEHAZI

Gehazi, proved untrustworthy by his conduct on this occasion, again
aroused the ire of the prophet when he disregarded the order not to
accept money from Naaman, the Syrian captain. He did not succeed in
deceiving the prophet. On his return from Naaman he found Elisha
occupied with the study of the chapter in the Mishnah Shabbat which
deals with the eight reptiles. The prophet Elisha greeted him with the
rebuke: "Thou villain! the time has come for me to be rewarded for the
study of the Mishnah about the eight reptiles. May my reward be that the
disease of Naaman afflict thee and thy descendants for evermore."
Scarcely had these words escaped his lips, when he saw the leprosy come
out on Gehazi's face. Gehazi deserved the punishment on account of his
base character. He was sensual and envious, and did not believe in the
resurrection of the dead. His unworthy qualities were displayed in his
conduct toward the Shunammite and toward the disciples of Elisha. When
the pretty Shunammite came to the prophet in her grief over the death of
her child, Gehazi took her passionately in his arms, under the pretext
of forcing her away from the prophet, on whom she had laid hold in her
supplications.

As for the other disciples of Elisha, he endeavored to keep them away
from the house of the prophet. He was in the habit of standing without
the door. This induced many to turn away and go home, for they reasoned
that, if the house were not full to overflowing, Gehazi would not be
standing outside. Only after Gehazi's dismissal did the disciples of
Elisha increase marvellously. That Gehazi had no faith in the
resurrection of the dead, is shown by his incredulity with regard to the
child of the Shunammite.

In spite of all these faults, Elisha regretted that he had cast off his
disciple, who was a great scholar in the law, especially as Gehazi
abandoned himself to a sinful life after leaving the prophet. By means
of magnetism he made the golden calves at Beth-el float in the air, and
many were brought to believe in the divinity of these idols. Moreover,
he engraved the great and awful Name of God in their mouth. Thus they
were enabled to speak, and they gave forth the same words God had
proclaimed from Sinai: "I am the Lord thy God Thou shalt have no other
gods before Me." Elisha accordingly repaired to Damascus to lead Gehazi
back to the paths of righteousness. But he remained impenitent, for he
said: "From thyself I have learned that there is no return for him who
not only sins himself, but also induces others to sin." So Gehazi died
without having done aught to atone for his transgressions, which were so
great that he is one of the few Jews who have no share in Paradise. His
children inherited his leprosy. He and his three sons are the four
leprous men who informed the king of Israel of the precipitate flight of
the Syrian host.

Elisha's excessive severity toward his servant Gehazi and toward the
mocking boys of Jericho did not go unpunished. He had to endure two
periods of disease, and the third sickness that befell him cause his
death. He is the first known to history who survived a sickness. Before
him death had been the inevitable companion of disease.

A great miracle marked the end of a life rich in miraculous deeds: a
dead man revived at the touch of Elisha's bier, and stood on his feet.
It was a worthy character for whom the wonder was accomplished Shallum
the son of Tikvah, the husband of Huldah the prophetess, a man of noble
descent, who had led a life of lovingkindness. He was in the habit of
going daily beyond the city bearing the pitcher of water, from which he
gave every traveller to drink, a good deed that received a double
reward. His wife became a prophetess, and when he died and his funeral,
attended by a large concourse of people, was disturbed by the invasion
of the Arameans, he was given new life by contact with the bones of
Elisha. He lived to have a son, Hanamel by name.

The death of Elisha was a great misfortune for the Israelites. So long
as he was alive, no Aramean troops entered Palestine. The first invasion
by them happened on the day of his burial.

### THE FLIGHT OF JONAH

Among the many thousands of disciples whom Elisha gathered about him
during the sixty years and more of his activity, the most prominent was
the prophet Jonah. While the master was still alive, Jonah was charged
with the important mission of anointing Jehu king. The next task laid
upon him was to proclaim their destruction to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. The doom did not come to pass, because they repented of their
wrong-doing, and God had mercy upon them. Among the Israelites Jonah
was, therefore, known as "the false prophet." When he was sent to
Nineveh to prophesy the downfall of the city, he reflected: "I know to a
certainly that the heathen will do penance, the threatened punishment
will not be executed, and among the heathen, too, I shall gain the
reputation of being a false prophet." To escape this disgrace, he
determined to take up his abode on the sea, where there were none to
whom prophecies never to be fulfilled would have to be delivered.

On his arrival at Joppa, there was no vessel in port. To try him, God
cause a storm to arise, and it carried a vessel back to Joppa, which had
made a two days' journey away from the harbor. The prophet interpreted
this chance to mean that God approved his plan. He was so rejoiced at
the favorable opportunity for leaving land that he paid the whole amount
for the entire cargo in advance, no less a sum than four thousand gold
denarii. After a day's sailing out from shore, a terrific storm broke
loose. Wonderful to relate, it injured no vessel but Jonah's. Thus he
was taught the lesson that God is Lord over heaven and earth and sea,
and man can hide himself nowhere from His face.

On the same vessel were representatives of the seventy nations of the
earth, each with his peculiar idols. They all resolved to entreat their
gods for succor, and the god from whom help would come should be
recognized and worshipped at the only one true God. But help came from
none. Then it was that the captain of the vessel approached Jonah where
he lay asleep, and said to him: "We are suspended 'twixt life and death,
and thou liest here asleep. Pray, tell me, to what nation dost thou
belong?" "I am a Hebrew," replied Jonah. "We have heard," said the
captain, "that the God of the Hebrews is the most powerful. Cry to Him
for help. Perhaps He will perform such miracles for us as He did in days
of old for the Jews at the Red Sea."

Jonah confessed to the captain that he was to blame for the whole
misfortune, and he besought him to cast him adrift, and appease the
storm. The other passengers refused to consent to so cruel an act.
Though the lot decided against Jonah, they first tried to save the
vessel by throwing the cargo overboard. Their efforts were in vain. Then
they placed Jonah at the side of the vessel and spoke: "O Lord of the
world, reckon this not up against us as innocent blood, for we know not
the case of this man, and he himself bids us throw him into the sea."
Even then they could not make up their minds to let him drown. First
they immersed him up to his knees in the water of the sea, and the storm
ceased; they drew him back into the vessel, and forthwith the storm
raged in its old fury. Two more trials they made. They lowered him into
the water up to his navel, and raised him out of the depths when the
storm was assuaged. Again, when the storm broke out anew, they lowered
him to his neck, and a second time they took him back into the vessel
when the wind subsided. But finally the renewed rage of the storm
convinced them that their danger was due to Jonah's transgressions, and
they abandoned him to his fate. He was thrown into the water, and on the
instant the sea grew calm.

### JONAH IN THE WHALE

At the creation of the world, God made a fish intended to harbor Jonah.
He as so large that the prophet was as comfortable inside of him as in a
spacious synagogue. The eyes of the fish served Jonah as windows, and,
besides, there was a diamond, which shone as brilliantly as the sun at
midday, so that Jonah could see all things in the sea down to its very
bottom.

It is a law that when their time has come, all the fish of the sea must
betake themselves to leviathan, and let the monster devour them. The
life term of Jonah's fish was about to expire, and the fish warned Jonah
of what was to happen. When he, with Jonah in his belly, came to
leviathan, the prophet said to the monster: "For thy sake I came hither.
It was meet that I should know thine abode, for it is my appointed task
to capture thee in the life to come and slaughter thee for the table of
the just and pious." When leviathan observed the sign of the covenant on
Jonah's body, he fled affrighted, and Jonah and the fish were saved. To
show his gratitude, the fish carried Jonah whithersoever there was a
sight to be seen. He showed him the river from which the ocean flows,
showed him the spot at which the Israelites crossed the Red Sea, showed
him Gehenna and Sheol, and many other mysterious and wonderful place.

Three days Jonah had spent in the belly of the fish, and he still felt
so comfortable that he did not think of imploring God to change his
condition. But God sent a female fish big with three hundred and
sixty-five thousand little fish to Jonah's host, to demand the surrender
of the prophet, else she would swallow both him and the guest he
harbored. The message was received with incredulity, and leviathan had
to come and corroborate it; he himself had heard God dispatch the female
fish on her errand. So it came about that Jonah was transferred to
another abode. His new quarters, which he had to share with all the
little fish, were far from comfortable, and from the bottom of his heart
a prayer for deliverance arose to God on high. The last words of his
long petition were, "I shall redeem my vow," whereupon God commanded the
fish to spew Jonah out. At a distance of nine hundred and sixty-five
parasangs from the fish he alighted on dry land. These miracles induced
the ship's crew to abandon idolatry, and they all became pious
proselytes in Jerusalem.

### THE REPENTANCE OF NINEVEH

Jonah went straightway to Nineveh, the monster city covering forty
square parasangs and containing a million and half of human beings. He
lost no time in proclaiming their destruction to the inhabitants. The
voice of the prophet was so sonorous that it reached to every corner of
the great city, and all who heard his words resolved to turn aside from
their ungodly ways. At the head of the penitents was King Osnappar of
Assyria. He descended from his throne, removed his crown, strewed ashes
on his head instead, took off his purple garments, and rolled about in
the dust of the highways. In all the streets royal heralds proclaimed
the king's decree bidding the inhabitants fast three days, wear
sackcloth, and supplicate God with tears and prayers to avert the
threatened doom. The people of Nineveh fairly compelled to God's mercy
to descend upon them. They held their infants heavenward, and amid
streaming tears they cried: "For the sake of these innocent babes, hear
our prayers." The young of their stalled cattle they separated from the
mother beasts, the young were left within the stable, the old were put
without. So parted from one another, the young and the old began to
bellow aloud. Then the Ninevites cried: "If Thou wilt not have mercy
upon us, we will not have mercy upon these beasts."

The penance of the Ninevites did not stop at fasting and praying. Their
deeds showed that they had determined to lead a better life. If a man
had usurped another's property, he sought to make amends for his
iniquity; some went so far as to destroy their palaces in order to be
able to give back a single brick to the rightful owner. Of their own
accord others appeared before the courts of justice, and confessed their
secret crimes and sins, known to none beside themselves, and declared
themselves ready to submit to well-merited punishment, though it be
death that was decreed against them.

One incident that happened at the time will illustrate the contrition of
the Ninevites. A man found a treasure in the building lot he had
acquired from his neighbor. Both buyer and seller refused to assume
possession of the treasure. The seller insisted that the sale of the lot
carried with it the sale of all it contained. The buyer held that he had
bought the ground, not the treasure hidden therein. Neither rested
satisfied until the judge succeeded in finding out who had hidden the
treasure and where were his heirs, and the joy of the two was great when
they could deliver the treasure up to its legitimate owners.

Seeing that the Ninevites had undergone a real change of heart, God took
mercy upon them, and pardoned them. Thereupon Jonah likewise felt
encouraged to plead for himself with God, that He forgive him for his
flight. God spoke to him: "Thou wast mindful of Mine honor," the prophet
had not wanted to appear a liar, so that men's trust in God might not be
shaken "and for this reason thou didst take to sea. Therefore did I deal
mercifully with thee, and rescue thee from the bowels of Sheol."

His sojourn in the inside of the fish the prophet could not easily
dismiss from his mind, nor did it remain without visible consequences.
The intense heat in the belly of the fish had consumed his garments, and
made his hair fall out, and he was sore plagued by swarms of insects. To
afford Jonah protection, God caused the kikayon to grow up. When he
opened his eyes one morning, he saw a plant with two hundred and
seventy-five leaves, each leaf measuring more than a span, so that it
afforded relief from the heat of the sun. But the sun smote the gourd
that it withered, and Jonah was again annoyed by the insects. He began
to weep and wish for death to release him from his troubles. But when
God led him to the plant, and showed him what lesson he might derive
from it, how, though he had not labored for the plant, he had pity on
it, he realized his wrong in desiring God to be relentless toward
Nineveh, the great city, with its many inhabitants, rather than have his
reputation as a prophet suffer taint. He prostrated himself and said: "O
God, guide the world according to Thy goodness."

God was gracious to the people of Nineveh so long as they continued
worthy of His lovingkindness. But at the end of forty days they departed
from the path of piety, and they became more sinful than ever. Then the
punishment threatened by Jonah overtook them, and they were swallowed up
by the earth.

Jonah's suffering in the watery abyss had been so severe that by way of
compensation of God exempted him from death: living he was permitted to
enter Paradise. Like Jonah, his wife was known far and wide for her
piety. She had gained fame particularly through her pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, a duty which, by reason of her sex, she was not obliged to
fulfil. On one of these pilgrimages it was that the prophetical spirit
first descended upon Jonah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: The Later Kings of Judah](loj410)
