[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m18000) 
[Next](m18002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**1**

*Om!* Having bowed down into Narayana, and to Nara, the foremost of men,
as also to the goddess Sarasvati, should the word "Jaya" be uttered.

Janamejaya said, "Having attained to Heaven, what regions were
respectively attained by my grandsires of old, viz., the Pandavas and
the sons of Dhritarashtra? I desire to hear this. I think that thou art
conversant with everything, having been taught by the great Rishi Vyasa
of wonderful feats.

Vaishampayana said, "Listen now to what thy grandsires, Yudhishthira and
others, did after having attained to Heaven, that place of the deities.
Arrived at Heaven, king Yudhishthira the just, beheld Duryodhana endued
with prosperity and seated on an excellent seat. He blazed with
effulgence like the sun and wore all those signs of glory which belong
to heroes. And he was in the company of many deities of blazing
effulgence and of Sadhyas of righteous deeds. Yudhishthira, beholding
Duryodhana and his prosperity, became suddenly filled with rage and
turned back from the sight.

"He loudly addressed his companions, saying, ‘I do not desire to share
regions of felicity with Duryodhana who was stained by cupidity and
possessed of little foresight. It was for him that friends, and kinsmen,
over the whole Earth were slaughtered by us whom he had afflicted
greatly in the deep forest. It was for him that the virtuous princess of
Pancala, Draupadi of faultless features, our wife, was dragged into the
midst of the assembly before all our seniors. Ye gods, I have no desire
to even behold Suyodhana. I wish to go there where my brothers are.’

"Narada, smiling, told him, ‘It should not be so, O king of kings. While
residing in Heaven, all enmities cease. O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, do
not say so about king Duryodhana. Hear my words. Here is king
Duryodhana. He is worshipped with the gods by those righteous men and
those foremost of kings who are now denizens of Heaven. By causing his
body to be poured as a libation on the fire of battle, he has obtained
the end that consists in attainment of the region for heroes. You and
your brothers, who were veritable gods on Earth, were always persecuted
by this one. Yet through his observance of Kshatriya practices he has
attained to this region. This lord of Earth was not terrified in a
situation fraught with terror.

"‘O son, thou shouldst not bear in mind the woes inflicted on thee on
account of the match at dice. It behoveth thee not to remember the
afflictions of Draupadi. It behoveth thee not to remember the other woes
which were yours in consequence of the acts of your kinsmen,—the woes,
viz., that were due to battle or to other situations. Do thou meet
Duryodhana now according to the ordinances of polite intercourse. This
is Heaven, O lord of men. There can be no enmities here.’

"Though thus addressed by Narada, the Kuru king Yudhishthira, endued
with great intelligence, enquired about his brothers and said, ‘If these
eternal regions reserved for heroes be Duryodhana’s, that unrighteous
and sinful wight, that man who was the destroyer of friends and of the
whole world, that man for whose sake the entire Earth was devastated
with all her horses and elephants and human beings, that wight for whose
sake we were burnt with wrath in thinking of how best we might remedy
our wrongs, I desire to see what regions have been attained by those
high-souled heroes, my brothers of high vows, steady achievers of
promises, truthful in speech, and distinguished for courage. The
high-souled Karna, the son of Kunti, incapable of being baffled in
battle, Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the sons of Dhrishtadyumna and those
other Kshatriyas who met with death in the observance of Kshatriya
practices, where are those lords of Earth, O Brahmana? I do not see them
here, O Narada. I desire to see, O Narada, Virata and Drupada and the
other great Kshatriyas headed by Dhrishtaketu, as also Shikhandi, the
Pancala prince, the sons of Draupadi, and Abhimanyu, irresistible in
battle.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](m18002)
