[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m18004.md) 
[Next](m18006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**5**

Janamejaya said, "Bhishma and Drona, those two high-souled persons, king
Dhritarashtra, and Virata and Drupada, and Sankha and Uttara.
Dhrishtaketu and Jayatsena and king Satyajit, the sons of Duryodhana,
and Shakuni the son of Subala, Karna’s sons of great prowess, king
Jayadratha, Ghatotkaca and others whom thou hast not mentioned, the
other heroic kings of blazing forms—tell me for what period they
remained in Heaven. O foremost of regenerate persons, was theirs an
eternal place in Heaven? What was the end attained to by those foremost
of men when their acts came to an end? I desire to hear this, O foremost
of regenerate persons, and therefore have I asked thee. Through thy
blazing penances thou seest all things.

Sauti said: Thus questioned, that regenerate Rishi, receiving the
permission of the high-souled Vyasa, set himself to answer the question
of the king.

Vaishampayana said, "Every one, O king of men, is not capable of
returning to his own nature at the end of his deeds. Whether this is so
or not, is, indeed a good question asked by thee. Hear, O king, this
which is a mystery of the gods, O chief of Bharata’s race. It was
explained (to us) by Vyasa of mighty energy, celestial vision and great
prowess, that ancient ascetic, O Kauravya, who is the son of Parasara
and who always observes high vows, who is of immeasurable understanding,
who is omniscient, and who, therefore knows the end attached to all
acts.

"Bhishma of mighty energy and great effulgence attained to the status of
the Vasus. Eight Vasus, O chief of Bharata’s race, are now seen. Drona
entered into Brihaspati, that foremost one of Angirasa’s descendants.
Hridika’s son Kritavarma entered the Maruts. Pradyumna entered
Sanatkumara whence he had issued. Dhritarashtra obtained the regions, so
difficult of acquisition, that belong to the Lord of treasures. The
famous Gandhari obtained the same regions with her husband
Dhritarashtra. With his two wives, Pandu proceeded to the abode of the
great Indra. Both Virata and Drupada, the king Dhrishtaketu, as also
Nishatha, Akrura, Samva, Bhanukampa, and Viduratha, and Bhurishrava and
Sala and king Bhuri, and Kansa, and Ugrasena, and Vasudeva, and Uttara,
that foremost of men, with his brother Sankha—all these foremost of
persons entered the deities. Soma’s son of great prowess, named Varchas
of mighty energy, became Abhimanyu, the son of Phalguna, that lion among
men. Having fought, agreeably to Kshatriya practices, with bravery such
as none else had ever been able to show, that mighty-armed and
righteous-souled being entered Soma. Slain on the field of battle, O
foremost of men, Karna entered Surya. Shakuni obtained absorption into
Dwapara, and Dhrishtadyumna into the deity of fire. The sons of
Dhritarashtra were all Rakshasas of fierce might. Sanctified by death
caused by weapons, those high-souled beings of prosperity all succeeded
in attaining to Heaven. Both Kshattri and king Yudhishthira entered into
the god of Righteousness. The holy and illustrious Ananta (who had taken
birth as Balarama) proceeded to the region below the Earth. Through the
command of the Grandsire, he, aided by his Yoga power, supported the
Earth. Vasudeva was a portion of that eternal god of gods called
Narayana. Accordingly, he entered into Narayana. 16,000 women had been
married to Vasudeva as his wives. When the time came, O Janamejaya,
they, plunged into the Sarasvati. Casting off their (human) bodies
there, they re-ascended to Heaven. Transformed into Apsaras, they
approached the presence of Vasudeva. Those heroic and mighty
car-warriors, Ghatotkaca and others, who were slain in the great battle,
attained to the status, some of gods and some of Yakshas. Those that had
fought on the side of Duryodhana are said to have been Rakshasas.
Gradually, O king, they have all attained to excellent regions of
felicity. Those foremost of men have proceeded, some to the abode of
Indra, some to that of Kuvera of great intelligence, and some to that of
Varuna. I have now told thee, O thou of great splendour, everything
about the acts, O Bharata, of both the Kurus and the Pandavas.

Sauti said: Hearing this, ye foremost of regenerate ones, at the
intervals of sacrificial rites, king Janamejaya became filled with
wonder. The sacrificial priests then finished the rites that remained to
be gone through. Astika, having rescued the snakes (from fiery death),
became filled with joy. King Janamejaya then gratified all the Brahmanas
with copious presents. Thus worshipped by the king, they returned to
their respective abodes. Having dismissed those learned Brahmanas, king
Janamejaya came back from Takshasila to the city named after the
elephant.

I have now told everything that Vaishampayana narrated, at the command
of Vyasa, unto the king at his snake sacrifice. Called a history, it is
sacred, sanctifying and excellent. It has been composed by the ascetic
Krishna, O Brahmana, of truthful speech. He is omniscient, conversant
with all ordinances, possessed of a knowledge of all duties, endued with
piety, capable of perceiving what is beyond the ken of the senses, pure,
having a soul cleansed by penances, possessed of the six high
attributes, and devoted to Sankhya Yoga. He has composed this, beholding
everything with a celestial eye that has been cleansed (strengthened) by
varied lore. He has done this, desiring to spread the fame, throughout
the world, of the high-souled Pandavas, as also of other Kshatriyas
possessed of abundant wealth of energy.

That learned man who recites this history of sacred days in the midst of
a listening auditory becomes cleansed of every sin, conquers Heaven, and
attains to the status of Brahma. Of that man who listens with rapt
attention to the recitation of the whole of this Veda composed by (the
Island-born) Krishna, a million sins, numbering such grave ones as
Brahmanicide and the rest, are washed off. The Pitris of that man who
recites even a small portion of this history at a Sraddha, obtain
inexhaustible food and drink. The sins that one commits during the day
by one’s senses or the mind are all washed off before evening by
reciting a portion of the Mahabharata. Whatever sins a Brahmana may
commit at night in the midst of women are all washed off before dawn by
reciting a portion of the Mahabharata.

The high race of the Bharatas is its topic. Hence it is called Bharata.
And because of its grave import, as also of the Bharatas being its
topic, it is called *Mahabharata.* He who is versed in interpretations
of this great treatise, becomes cleansed of every sin. Such a man lives
in righteousness, wealth, and pleasure, and attains to Emancipation
also, O chief of Bharata’s race.

That which occurs here occurs elsewhere. That which does not occur here
occurs nowhere else. This history is known by the name of Jaya. It
should be heard by every one desirous of Emancipation. It should be read
by Brahmanas, by kings, and by women quick with children. He that
desires Heaven attains to Heaven; and he that desires victory attains to
victory. The woman quick with child gets either a son or a daughter
highly blessed. The puissant Island-born Krishna, who will not have to
come back, and who is Emancipation incarnate, made an abstract of the
Bharata, moved by the desire of aiding the cause of righteousness. He
made another compilation consisting of sixty lakhs of verses. Thirty
lakhs of these were placed in the region of the deities. In the region
of the Pitris fifteen lakhs, it should be known, are current; while in
that of the Yakshas fourteen lakhs are in vogue. One lakh is current
among human beings.

Narada recited the Mahabharata to the gods; Asita-Devala to the Pitris;
Suka to the Rakshasas and the Yakshas; and Vaishampayana to human
beings. This history is sacred, and of high import, and regarded as
equal to the Vedas. That man, O Saunaka, who hears this history, placing
a Brahmana before him, acquires both fame and the fruition of all his
wishes. He who, with fervid devotion, listens to a recitation of the
Mahabharata, attains (hereafter) to high success in consequence of the
merit that becomes his through understanding even a very small portion
thereof. All the sins of that man who recites or listens to this history
with devotion are washed off.

In former times, the great Rishi Vyasa, having composed this treatise,
caused his son Suka to read it with him, along with these four Verses.
—Thousands of mothers and fathers, and hundreds of sons and wives arise
in the world and depart from it. Others will (arise and) similarly
depart. There are thousands of occasions for joy and hundreds of
occasions for fear. These affect only him that is ignorant but never him
that is wise. With uplifted arms I am crying aloud but nobody hears me.
From Righteousness is Wealth as also Pleasure. Why should not
Righteousness, therefore, be courted? For the sake neither of pleasure,
nor of fear, nor of cupidity should any one cast off Righteousness.
Indeed, for the sake of even life one should not cast off Righteousness.
Righteousness is eternal. Pleasure and Pain are not eternal. Jiva is
eternal. The cause, however, of Jiva’s being invested with a body is not
so.

That man who, waking up at dawn, reads this Savittri of the Bharata,
acquires all the rewards attached to a recitation of this history and
ultimately attains to the highest Brahma. As the sacred Ocean, as the
Himavat mountain, are both regarded as mines of precious gems, even so
is this Bharata (regarded as a mine of precious gems). The man of
learning, by reciting to others this Veda or Agama composed by (the
Island-born) Krishna, earns wealth. There is no doubt in this that he
who, with rapt attention, recites this history called Bharata, attains
to high success. What need has that man of a sprinkling of the waters of
Pushkara who attentively listens to this Bharata, while it is recited to
him? It represents the nectar that fell from the lips of the
Island-born. It is immeasurable, sacred, sanctifying, sin-cleansing, and
auspicious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](m18006.md)
