[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mcm13)  [Next](mcm15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486419460/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002KCO7KA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Musings of a Chinese Mystic*, by Lionel Giles, \[1906\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### THE SAGE, OR PERFECT MAN

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> perfect man ignores self; the divine
man ignores action; the true Sage ignores reputation.

.        .        .        .        .

The perfect man is a spiritual being. Were the ocean itself scorched up,
he would not feel hot. Were the Milky Way frozen hard, he would not feel
cold. Were the mountains to be riven with thunder, and the great deep to
be thrown up by storm, he would not tremble.

.        .        .        .        .

How does the Sage seat himself by the sun and moon, and hold the
universe in his grasp? He blends everything into one harmonious whole,
rejecting the confusion of this and that. Rank and precedence, which the
vulgar prize, the Sage stolidly ignores. The revolutions of ten thousand
years leave his unity unscathed. The universe itself may pass away, but
he will flourish still.

.        .        .        .        .

With the truly wise, wisdom is a curse, sincerity like glue, virtue only
a means to acquire, and

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

skill nothing more than a commercial capacity. For the truly wise make
no plans, and therefore require no wisdom. They do not separate, and
therefore require no glue. They want nothing, and therefore need no
virtue. They sell nothing, and therefore are not in want of a commercial
capacity. These four qualifications are bestowed upon them by God and
serve as heavenly food to them. And those who thus feed upon the divine
have little need for the human. They wear the forms of men, without
human passions. Because they wear the forms of men, they associate with
men. Because they have not human passions, positives and negatives find
in them no place. Infinitesimal, indeed, is that which makes them man;
infinitely great is that which makes them divine!

Hui Tzŭ said to Chuang Tzŭ: "Are there, then, men who have no passions?"

Chuang Tzŭ replied: "Certainly."

"But if a man has no passions," argued Hui Tzŭ, "what is it that makes
him a man?"

"Tao," replied Chuang Tzŭ, "gives him his expression, and God gives him
his form. How should he not be a man?"

"If, then, he is a man," said Hui Tzŭ, "how can he be without passions?"

"What you mean by passions," answered Chuang Tzŭ, "is not what I mean.
By a man without passions I mean one who does not

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

permit good and evil to disturb his internal economy, but rather falls
in with whatever happens, as a matter of course, and does not add to the
sum of his mortality."

.        .        .        .        .

He who knows what God is, and who knows what Man is, has attained.
Knowing what God is, he knows that he himself proceeded therefrom.
Knowing what Man is, he rests in the knowledge of the known, waiting for
the knowledge of the unknown. Working out one's allotted span, and not
perishing in mid career,—this is the fulness of knowledge.

Herein, however, there is a flaw. Knowledge is dependent upon
fulfilment. And as this fulfilment is uncertain, how can it be known
that my divine is not really human, my human really divine? We must have
*pure men*, and then only can we have *pure knowledge*.

But what is a pure man?—The pure men of old acted without calculation,
not seeking to secure results. They laid no plans. Therefore, failing,
they had no cause for regret; succeeding, no cause for congratulation.
And thus they could scale heights without fear; enter water without
becoming wet; fire, without feeling hot. So far had their wisdom
advanced towards Tao.

The pure men of old slept without dreams, and waked without anxiety.
They ate without discrimination, breathing deep breaths. For pure

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

men draw breath from their uttermost depths; the vulgar only from their
throats. Out of the crooked, words are retched up like vomit. If men's
passions are deep, their divinity is shallow.

The pure men of old did not know what it was to love life nor to hate
death. They did not rejoice in birth, nor strive to put off dissolution.
Quickly come and quickly go;—no more. They did not forget whence it was
they had sprung, neither did they seek to hasten their return thither.
Cheerfully they played their allotted parts, waiting patiently for the
end. This is what is called not to lead the heart astray from Tao, nor
to let the human seek to supplement the divine. And this is what is
meant by a pure man.

.        .        .        .        .

The pure men of old did their duty to their neighbours, but did not
associate with them. They behaved as though wanting in themselves, but
without flattering others. Naturally rectangular, they were not
uncompromisingly hard. They manifested their independence without going
to extremes. They appeared to smile as if pleased, when the expression
was only a natural response. Their outward semblance derived its
fascination from the store of goodness within. They seemed to be of the
world around them, while proudly treading beyond its limits. They seemed
to desire silence, while in truth they had

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

dispensed with language. They saw in penal laws a trunk <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22); in social ceremonies, wings <span
id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23); in wisdom, a useful accessory; in
morality, a guide. For them penal laws meant a merciful administration;
social ceremonies, a passport through the world; wisdom, an excuse for
doing what they could not help; and morality, walking like others upon
the path. And thus all men praised them for the worthy lives they led.

.        .        .        .        .

The repose of the Sage is not what the world calls repose. His repose is
the result of his mental attitude. All creation could not disturb his
equilibrium: hence his repose. When water is still, it is like a mirror,
reflecting the beard and the eyebrows. It gives the accuracy of the
water-level, and the philosopher makes it his model. And if water thus
derives lucidity from stillness, how much more the faculties of the
mind! The mind of the Sage, being in repose, becomes the mirror of the
universe, the speculum of all creation.

.        .        .        .        .

The truly great man, although he does not injure others, does not credit
himself with charity and mercy. He seeks not gain, but does not despise
his followers who do. He struggles not

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

for wealth, but does not take credit for letting it alone. He asks help
from no man, but takes no credit for his self-reliance, neither does he
despise those who seek preferment through friends. He acts differently
from the vulgar crowd, but takes no credit for his exceptionality; nor,
because others act with the majority, does he despise them as
hypocrites. The ranks and emoluments of the world are to him no cause
for joy; its punishments and shame no cause for disgrace. He knows that
positive and negative cannot be distinguished, that great and small
cannot be defined.

.        .        .        .        .

The true Sage ignores God. He ignores man. He ignores a beginning. He
ignores matter. He moves in harmony with his generation and suffers not.
He takes things as they come and is not overwhelmed. How are we to
become like him?

.        .        .        .        .

The true Sage is a passive agent. If he succeeds, he simply feels that
he was provided by no effort of his own with the energy necessary to
success.

.        .        .        .        .

External punishments are inflicted by metal and wood. Internal
punishments are inflicted by anxiety and remorse. Fools who incur

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

external punishment are treated with metal or wood. Those who incur
internal punishment are devoured by the conflict of emotions. It is only
the pure and perfect man who can succeed in avoiding both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[90:1](mcm14.htm#fr_22) A natural basis of
government.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[90:2](mcm14.htm#fr_23) To aid man's progress
through life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Random Gleanings](mcm15)
