[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gate17)  [Next](gate19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

## THE GATE OF AQEBI.

### THE THIRD DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

THE boat of the sun having passed through the Second Division of the
Tuat arrives at the gateway which leads to the THIRD DIVISION. This
gateway is unlike the first, which has already been described, for its
opening is protected by an outwork, similar to that which protects the
door of a fortified building. The outwork is guarded by nine gods, in
the form of mummies, who are described as the "second company of the
gods," and in this wall, which completely divides the Second Division
from the Third, is an opening, which leads to a corridor that runs
between two walls, the tops of which are protected by rows of pointed
stakes. At the entrance to the corridor stands a god, in mummied form,
called AM-AUA, and at the exit is a similar god called SEKHABESNEFUNEN,
each is said to "extend his arms and hands to Ra." At each side of the
angle, near

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

 

<span id="img_10100"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/10100.jpg)  
The Gate of the serpent Aqebi.

 

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

the entrance to the corridor, is a serpent, who ejects flames from his
mouth; the flame from the one sweeps along the corridor, at the end of
which it is met by the flame from the other serpent which sweeps along
the inside of the inner wall. The flames of these serpents are said to
be for Ra. The gateway leading to the Third Division is called
SEPTET-UAUAU, and the door thereof, which opens inwards, is guarded by
the serpent standing on his tail, who is called AQEBI, and faces
outwards. The texts referring to the entrance of Ra through this gateway
read:--

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

"\[When\] this god cometh to this gateway, to enter in through this
gateway, the gods who are therein acclaim this great god, \[saying\],
'Let this gateway be unfolded to KHUTI, and let the doors be opened to
him that is in heaven. Come then, O thou traveller, who dost journey in
Amentet.' He who is over this door openeth \[it\] to Ra. SA saith unto
AQEBI, 'Open thy gate to Ra, unfold thy door to KHUTI. He shall illumine
the darkness, and he shall force a way for the light in the habitation
which is hidden.' This door is closed after the great god hath entered
through it, and there is lamentation to those who are in their gateway
when they hear this door close \[upon them\]."

Along the middle of the THIRD DIVISION, we see the boat of the sun being
drawn along by four gods, as before; the god Ra stands in a shrine,
similar to that already described, and his companions are SA and HEKAU.
The rope by which the boat is towed along is fastened to the two ends of
a very remarkable object, in the form of a long beam, each end of which
terminates in a bull's head. The accompanying text describes it as "his
boat," and from the fact that the four gods who tow the boat are seen
again at the other end of the beam-like object, with the towing-rope in
their hands, it is clear that the boat of Ra, and the god himself, were
believed to pass *through* it, from one end to the other. The object is
supported on the

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

shoulders of eight gods, in mummied form, who are called "Bearers of the
gods," at each end, immediately behind the bull's head, stands a bull,
and at intervals seven gods, who are called "the

 

<span id="img_10400"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/10400.jpg)  
The Gods of the Third Division of the Tuat towing the Boat of Ra.

<span id="img_10401"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/10401.jpg)  
The Eight Bearers of the Boat of the Earth and its Seven Gods.

 

gods who are within," are seated upon it. At the end of this Division
stand four mummied forms, with their elbows projecting, and their hands
crossed on their breasts. The text

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

which refers to the passage of the boat of the sun reads:

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

"This great god is towed along by the gods of the Tuat, and this great
god advanceth to the Boat of the Earth, which is the bark of the gods.
Ra. saith unto them:--'Hail, ye gods who bear up his Boat of the Earth,
and who lift up the Bark of the Tuat, may there be support to your forms
and light unto your Bark. Holy is he who is in the Boat of the Earth. I
make to go back the Bark of the Tuat which beareth my forms (or,
attributes), and verily I travel into the hidden habitation to perform
the plans which are carried out therein.' ENNURKHATA, ENNURKHATA
\[saith\], 'Praised be the Soul which the Double Bull hath swallowed,
and let the god be at peace with that which he hath created.'"

The effect of the above words is to allow the Sun-god and his boat to
pass through the double bull-headed

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Boat of the Earth without any let or hindrance,
and when he has done this,--

"These gods (i.e., the four gods at the other end of the Boat of the
Earth) say to Ra:--'Praised be Ra, whose Soul hath been absorbed by the
Earth-god! Praised be the gods of Ra who hath rested \[therein\].' This
Boat of its Tuat rejoiceth, and there are cries from them after Ra hath
passed them as he journeyeth on his way. Their offerings are the plants
of the year,

 

<span id="img_10700"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/10700.jpg)  
The Tuat-gods address the Utau.

 

and their offerings are given to them when they hear the words of those
who draw along, this great god. The gods of the Tuat (?) who \[draw\]
the holy Boat in the earth say unto the UTAU, whose arms are hidden:--'O
ye UTAU Of the earth, whose duty it is to stand (?) near his habitation,
whose heads are uncovered, and whose arms are hidden, may there be air
to your nostrils, O UTAU, and may your funeral swathings be burst open,
and may you have the mastery over

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

your meats, and may you have peace (or, crest) in that which I have
created. Their food is of bread cakes, and their bread is made of the
red grain, the draughts which they drink are of \[cool\] water, and
their meat is given unto them because of the whiteness (or, brilliance)
of their apparel in the Tuat."

 

<span id="img_10800"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/10800.jpg)  
The-Twelve holy Gods who are in the Tuat.

 

On the right hand side of this Division of the Tuat the boat of the Sun
passes twelve shrines, each of which has its doors thrown wide open, and
so permits us to see a god in mummied form standing inside it these gods
are described as "the holy gods who are in the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Tuat." Along the front of the twelve shrines
stretches an enormous serpent, the duty of which is to protect those who
stand in them. Beyond the shrines is a long basin or lake of boiling
water, with rounded ends, in which stand up to their waists twelve
mummied gods, with black heads, who either have white bodies, or are
arrayed in white apparel; in front of each god grows a large ear of
wheat. These gods are described as "the gods in the boiling lake." The
texts which relate to both groups of beings are as follows:--

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

"\[Those who are in\] their shrines are the members of the god whose
shrines the serpent SETI guardeth. Ra saith unto them:--'Open ye \[the
doors of\] your shrines, so that my radiance may penetrate the darkness
in which ye are! I found you weeping and lamenting, with your shrines
tightly closed, but air shall be given to your nostrils, and I have
decreed that ye shall have abundance to overflowing \[in all things\].'
And these gods say unto Ra:--'Hail, Ra, come thou into our lake, O thou
great god who never failest.' The *Shennu* gods who are before and
behind him pay homage to him, and they rejoice in Ra when he traverseth
\[their\] region, and when the great god journeyeth through the secret
place. Their food consisteth of loaves of bread, their drink is made
from the red \[barley\], and their cool waters come from \[their
cisterns of\] water, and the serpent of fire, SETI, giveth unto them the
things whereon they live there. The door which shutteth them in closeth
after this god hath passed through their midst, and they utter cries of
grief when they hear their doors shut upon them."

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

The following refers to the lake of water in this Division:--

"\[Here is\] the lake of water which is in the Tuat, and it is
surrounded by the gods who are arrayed in \[their\] apparel, and who
have \[their\] heads uncovered. This lake is filled with green herbs.
The water of this lake is boiling hot, and the birds betake themselves
to flight when they see the waters thereof, and when they smell the
fœtid smell which is in it. Unto these gods saith Ra:--'O ye gods whose
duty it is

 

<span id="img_11200"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/11200.jpg)  
The Gods of the Boiling Lake.

 

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

\[paragraph continues\] \[to guard\] the green herbs of your lake, whose
heads core uncovered, and whose limbs are covered with garments, may
there be air to your nostrils, and may offerings be made to you of the
green herbs, and may your meat be from your lake. The water thereof
shall be yours, but to you it shall not be boiling, and the heat thereof
shall not be upon your bodies.' These \[gods\] say unto Ra:--'Come thou
unto us, O thou who sailest in thy boat, whose eye is of blazing fire
which consumeth, and hath a pupil which sendeth forth light! The beings
of the Tuat shout with joy when thou approachest; send forth thy light
upon us, O thou great god who hast fire in thine eye.' Their food
consisteth of loaves of bread and green herbs, and their drink (or,
beer) is of the *kemtet* plants, and their cool water is from \[their
cisterns of\] water. And food shall be given unto them in abundance from
this lake."

On the left of the path along which the boat of Ra passes in this
Division of the Tuat are two groups of beings. In the first of these we
see the god TEM, in the form of an aged man, with bent shoulders,
leaning upon a staff; coiled up before him in voluminous folds, with its
head flat upon the ground, is the monster serpent APEP. Behind Apep
stand nine men, with their arms hanging by their sides; these are called
the "TCHATCHA who repulse APEPI," In the second group is TEM,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

in a similar attitude, and before him stand nine gods, each holding the
symbol of life in the right hand, and the sceptre in the left; the nine
gods are called "Nebu khert," i.e., Lords of destinies.

 

<span id="img_11400"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/11400.jpg)  
The Tchatcha who repulse Apep.

 

The texts which refer to these groups read:--

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

The first group shows us what "TEM hath done for Ra, and how he hath
protected the god by words of magical power, and hath overthrown the
serpent SEBA. \[TEMU saith:--\] 'Thou art prostrate, and thou shalt
never more rise up; thou art enchanted by \[my enchantments\], and thou
shalt never more be found. The word of my father is *maat* against thee,
and my word is *maat* against thee; I have destroyed thee for Ra, and I
have made an end of thee for KHUTI.'

"The company of the gods of Ra who repulse APEP say:--'Thy head is slit,
O Apep, thy folds are gashed, thou shalt never more envelop the boat of
Ra, and thou shalt never again make a way into the divine bark. A flame
of fire goeth out against thee from the hidden place, and we have
condemned thee to thy

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

dire doom.' They (i.e., the nine gods of the company of Ra) live upon
the food of Ra, and upon the cakes of KHENT-AMENTI, for offerings are
made on their behalf upon earth, and libations of cool water are made
unto them by the lord of food (or, as lords of food) before Ra."

 

<span id="img_11700"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/11700.jpg)  
The Lords of Destinies(?).

 

To the second group of nine gods "TEM saith:--'Inasmuch as ye are the
gods who possess life and sceptre (i.e., authority), and who have
mastery over your sceptres, drive ye back the serpent SEBA from KHUTI,
gash ye with knives the foul and evil serpent AF.' These are the gods
who work enchantments on APEP, who open the earth to Ra, and who

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

shut it against APEP in the gates of KHENTI-AMENTI. They are those who
are in the hidden place, and they praise Ra, and they destroy his
enemies, and they protect the great one against the serpent AFU, and
they utter cries of joy at the overthrow by Ra of the enemy of Ra. They
live upon the meat of Ra, and on the cakes offered to KHENTI-AMENTI.
Offerings are made on their behalf upon earth, and they receive
libations through \[their\] word being *maat* in Ament, and holy are
they of arm in their hidden place. They utter cries to Ra, and they make
lamentation for the great god after he hath passed by them, for when he
hath departed they are enveloped in darkness, and their circle is closed
upon them."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Gate Of Tchetbi. The Fourth Division of the
Tuat](gate19)
