[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gate21)  [Next](gate23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

## THE GATE OF SET-EM-MAAT-F.

### THE SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT--*continued*.

THE pylon which gives access to the SIXTH DIVISION of the Tuat has
already been described. The monster serpent which stands on his tail and
guards the gateway is called SET-EM-MAAT-F, and the two lines of text
which refer to his admission of Ra read:--

"He who is over this door openeth to Ra. SA saith to
SET-EM-MAAT-F:--'Open thy gate to Ra, unfold thy doors to KHUTI, that he
may send light into the thick darkness, and may make his radiance
illumine the hidden habitation.' This door is shut after this great god
hath passed through it, and there is lamentation to those who are in
this gateway when they hear this door close upon them" (see [p.
169](#page_169).md).

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

The scenes and texts which illustrate the Sixth Division of the Tuat
cannot be obtained in a complete state from the sarcophagus of Seti I.,
and recourse must therefore be had to other documents. In the following
pages, however, the fragments of the texts and scenes from the
sarcophagus are first given, and these are followed by the complete
texts as they are found in the tomb of Rameses VI., as published by
Monsieur E. Lefébure in the third volume of the *Mémoires* of the French
Archæological Mission at Cairo.

The fragmentary texts and scenes from the sarcophagus of Seti I. may be
thus described:--

In the middle register are:--

1\. Two of the four gods of the Tuat whose duty it is to tow along the
boat of the Sun through this Division.

 

<span id="img_16900"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/16900.jpg.md)  
The Serpent Set-em-maat-f.

 

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

2\. The god TEM, in the form of an aged man, with bent shoulders, and
leaning on a staff.

3\. The jackal-headed standard called Ra, to which are tied two
"enemies," who probably represent the damned.

4\. The two UTCHATS, which appear to be keeping watch on the "enemies."

5\. The jackal-headed standard called TEM, with two "enemies" tied to
it.

6\. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called AFAT.

7\. The jackal-headed standard called KHEPER, with two "enemies" tied to
it.

8\. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called, or MET <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md).

9\. The jackal-headed standard called SHU, with two "enemies" tied to
it.

10\. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called SENT.

11\. The jackal-headed standard called SEB, with two "enemies" tied to
it.

12\. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called AQA-SA.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

13\. The jackal-headed standard called SAR, (Osiris). <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)

14\. A mummied form, with projecting elbows, called AA-KHER (?) <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_21.md).

15\. The jackal-headed standard called HERU.

16\. A god holding a sceptre called SHEF-HRA.

The text which refers to the above-mentioned gods reads:--

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

 

<span id="img_17200"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/17200.jpg.md)  
Fragment of the Sixth Division of the Tuat, from the Cover of the
Sarcophagus of Seti I.

 

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

 

<span id="img_17300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/17300.jpg.md)  
Fragment of the Sixth Division of the Tuat, from the Cover of the
Sarcophagus of Seti I.

 

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

"\[This great god is towed along by the gods in the Tuat, and those who
tow Ra along say, 'Rise up, O disk,\] . . . . . . . . . . . . god,
verily get thee forth to the standards of Seb.' Tem saith unto the
standards:--'Keep ward over the enemies, and bind ye fast those who
shall be smitten. O ye gods who are behind the standards, and who are in
the following of Seb, I give ye the power to bind fast the enemies and
to keep ward over the wicked. Let them not go forth from under your
hands, let them not slip through your fingers. O enemies, ye are
reckoned for slaughter according to the decree which \[was given\] to
you by him that with his body, and created the Tuat by his members(?).
He hath passed the decree for

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

you to be punished, and he taketh count of you and what ye do . . . . .
. . '"

The upper register is much mutilated on the cover of the sarcophagus of
Seti I.; on it we see:--

1\. Five upright male figures, each of whom holds a large loaf of bread,
with both hands on his head; when the scene was complete these figures
were twelve in number, as we learn from the variants published by
Champollion, <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)and they are called
HETEPTI-KHEPERU.

2\. Six upright male figures, each of whom holds the feather of Maat
with both hands on his head; when the scene was complete these figures
were twelve in number, and they are called AUTU-MAAMU-KHERU-MAAT <span
id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_23.md).

The text which remains reads:--

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

"\[These are they who have offered up incense to the

 

<span id="img_17600"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/17600.jpg.md)  
Fragment of the Cover of the Sarcophagus of Seti I. in the British
Museum.

 

gods, and whose doubles have been washed, maat, they have been reckoned
up and they are maat

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

in the presence of the great god, who destroyeth iniquities. Osiris
saith unto them:--'Ye are *maat* of *maat*. Be ye at peace \[because of
what\] ye have done, O ye who are in the forms of those who are in my
following, and- who dwell in the house of him whose souls are holy. Live
ye on what ye live there, and have the mastery over the cool waters
which are in your Lake . . . . .'"

 

<span id="img_17700"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/17700.jpg.md)

 

A few years ago I purchased from a native at Luxor a fragment of the
cover of the sarcophagus of Seti I. (see [p. 176](#page_176).md); this is
now in the British Museum (No. 29,948), and it gives the following:--

1\. Three male figures, each of which bears a loaf on his head.

2\. The following fragmentary text: "Their bread cakes are ordered for

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

"them by their gods; their *kau* are in their hands, and they enter into
their abodes at the pylon which destroyeth its gods. The god SAR
(Osiris) saith unto them:--'Your bread shall be to you from that which
cometh forth from your mouths, O ye HETEPTI-KHEPERU. . . . . .'"

In the lower register are:--

1\. Five male figures, who are occupied in tending very large ears of
corn; when the scene was complete these figures were twelve in number,
and they were called, "Those who work about the plants of grain in the
fields of the Tuat."

2\. A man holding a sickle; he is one of the seven "reapers," of which
this section of the scene originally consisted.

The text which relates to those who tend the grain reads:--

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

"\[They perform the works in connection with the grain, and they embrace
the god of wheat (NEPRA) which is eaten (?). Their grain becometh
glorious in the land through the light of Ra, when he appeareth, and
sendeth forth heat, and maketh his way by them. The lord of joy of heart
saith unto them:--'Let your grain be glorious, and let the young shoots
of your grain germinate, and let your offerings be for Ra\] . . . .
there . . . . Ra. Let NEPER germinate, and let SAR (Osiris) be the
source of food of the gods in "the Tuat . . . . . . . AMENTI . . . .
behold, in the fields of the Tuat.' They gather together their grain,
and they say unto Ra:--'Let the fields of the Tuat be green with young
plants. May Ra shine upon the members of SAR (Osiris). When thou dost
shine the young plants come into being, O great god, thou creator of the
grain.' Their offerings of food are of grain, and their drink offerings
are of *tcheser*, and their libations are made with cool water.
Offerings are made unto them on the earth of the grain of the fields of
the Tuat."

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

Of the reapers it is said:--

"These are they who have their scythes, and who reap the grain in their
fields. Ra saith to them:--'Take ye your scythes, and reap ye your
grain, for it is granted to you . . . . . . your habitations, and to
join yourselves \[to\] me in the Circle of the Hidden Forms. Hail to
you, O ye reapers!' Their food is of bread, and their drink is of
*tcheser*, and their libations are made with cool water. Offerings are
made unto them upon earth as being those who hold scythes in the fields
of the Tuat."

The text which describes the middle register of the Sixth Division as it
appears in the tomb of Rameses VI. reads:

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

"This great god is being towed along by the gods of the Tuat, and those
who tow Ra along say:--'Be

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

exalted, O Aten (i.e., Disk), who art at the head of . . . . . the
Light, the head . . . . Look ye at the abodes of the Tuat. Your eyes are
to you, O gods, observe ye Ra, the Power in Akert. This great god
decreeth your destinies. This great god cometh forth to the standards of
Seb, which reckon up the enemies after the weighing of words in Amentet.
Behold, Sa saith unto this god \[when\] he cometh forth to the standards
of Seb . . . . . . the head of Ra, the great god . . . . verily, get
thee forth to the standards of Seb. Tem saith unto the standards:--'Keep
ward over the enemies, and bind ye fast those who are to be smitten. O
ye gods who are in the following of the standards, and who are in the
following of Seb, I give ye power to bind fast the enemies, and to keep
ward over the wicked (or, those who are to be smitten). Let them not
come forth from under your hands, let them not slip through your
fingers. O ye enemies, ye are doomed to slaughter, according to the
decree of Ra concerning you. His person is the body of Akert, and he
hath created the Tuat of his frame work. He hath issued the decree for
you to be put into restraint, he hath ordered your doom which shall be
wrought upon you in the great hall of Ra . . . . . . . the gods weep
\[and\] lament, he setteth the gods to ward you, and the enemies and
those who are to be smitten in the Tuat are condemned to these
standards."'

In the upper register are twelve gods, each of whom

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

stands upright, and has the feather of Maat on his head, and twelve
gods, each of whom stands upright, and has a large loaf on his head.
These gods are described as "MAATI gods bearing Maat," and the HETEPTIU
gods bearing provisions. The text reads:--

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

"Offerings of incense to their gods, libations of cool water to their
doubles, and fillings of the mouth . . . . . . by his sustenance
afterwards by their offerings of drink and their offerings of bread.
Come

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

forth to them their gods and their doubles. Their hands are to them, and
they go to their cakes through the pylon of . . . . . and to its gods.
SAR saith unto them:--'Your bread is to you, \[according to\] your
utterances, and the peace cakes of Kheper, and loaves of bread. Ye shall
have the mastery over your legs, and ye shall have satisfaction in your
hearts, and your gods shall present unto you your *khenfu* cakes and
unto your doubles their provisions, which consist of bread, and their
drink, which shall be of *tcheser* ale, and their libations shall be of
cool water, and offerings shall be made unto them upon earth as the
lord\[s\] of offerings in Amentet. For they have done what was right
whilst they were upon earth, and they have fought on behalf of their
god, and they shall be called to the enjoyment of the land of the House
of Life with *maat*. That which is theirs by right shall be allotted to
them in the presence of the Great God, who doeth away iniquity.' Then
shall Osiris say unto them:--'*Maat* be to you, O ye MAAT gods, and
peace be unto you by reason of what ye have done in following after me,
O dwellers in the House the soul of which is holy. Ye shall live your
life upon that whereupon those who live there feed, and ye shall have
dominion over the cool waters of your land. I have decreed for you that
ye shall have your being in all of it with maat, and without sin (or,
defects).' Their bread shall be *maat* cakes, their drink shall be of
wine, and their libations

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

shall be of cool water. And there shall be offered unto them upon earth
the offerings which must be made from their land."

In the lower register are the figures of twelve men, each of whom tends
a monster ear of corn (?), or a tree, under the superintendence of a god
who leans on a staff, and a group of reapers, each holding a sickle.

The text, which is mutilated in places, reads:

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

"They perform. their work in connection with the grain, and they embrace
(i.e., cultivate) the divine grain (or, NEPRA), and the spirits feed
upon their grain in the land of the god of light (KHU), who cometh forth
and passeth by them, and \[NEB-AUT-AB, i.e., the Lord of joy of heart,
saith unto them:--'Let your grain be glorious\], and let your ears of
wheat germinate, and let your offerings be for Ra. 'Your *khenfu* cakes
are in the Tuat, your offerings are to you, the offerings which are,
yours by *maat* are

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

decreed (?) for you. Herbs . . . . . . among you. SAR germinate . . . .
. and they say unto Ra:--'Let plants spring up in the Fields of the
Tuat, and let Ra shine upon the members of SAR. When thou dost shine the
young plants come into being, O great god, thou creator of the Egg.'
Their food offerings are of grain, their drink is of *tcheser* ale, and
their libations are made with cool water. Offerings are made unto them
upon earth of the grain from the Fields of the Tuat."

Of the reapers it is said:--

"These are they who have their sickles and who reap the grain in their
Field. Ra saith unto them:--'Take ye your sickles, and reap ye your
grain, for it is granted unto you . . . . . . your habitations, and to
join yourselves to the Circle of the Hidden of Forms. Hail to you, O ye
reapers!' Their food is of bread-cakes, and their drink is of *tcheser*
ale, and their libations are made with cool water. Offerings are made
unto them upon earth as being those who reap the grain in the Fields of
the Tuat."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[170:1](gate22.htm#fr_20.md) The names are supplied
from Champollion, *Notices*, p. 502.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[171:1](gate22.htm#fr_22.md) The names are supplied
from Champollion, Notices, p. 502.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[175:1](gate22.htm#fr_23.md) *Notices*, ii., p.
501.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[175:2](gate22.htm#fr_24.md) Supplied from
Champollion, *Notices*, ii., p. 502.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Gate Of Akha-En-Maat. The Seventh Division of the
Tuat.](gate23.md)
