[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gate08)  [Next](gate10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# THE SEVENTH HOUR.

The majesty of this great god taketh up his position in the secret place
of Osiris, and the majesty of this great god sendeth forth words into
this to the gods who dwell therein. This god maketh to himself other
forms for this hidden place in order to drive out of his path the
serpent fiend APEP by means of the words of power of Isis, and the words
of power of SEMSU (?).

RUTI-ASAR is the name of the gate of this City through which this god
passeth.

TEPHET-SHETA is the name of this City.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

This great god maketh his way over the road of Ament in the holy boat,
and he passeth in it over this road which is without water, without
being towed along. He maketh his way by means of the words of power of
Isis, and by means of the words of power of SEMSU (?), and the
utterances of this great god himself \[act as\] magical protectors, and
perform the slaughters of Apep in the Tuat, in this Circle, in his
windings in the sky.

Whosoever shall make \[a copy of\] these \[pictures\] according to the
similitudes which are in writing at the northern side of the Hidden
Palace in the Tuat, they shall act as magical protectors for him that
maketh them in heaven and in earth. And whosoever knoweth them shall be
a soul of souls with Ra. And whosoever shall make (i.e., recite) the
words of power of Isis and the words of power of SEMSU, shall make to be
driven back the Apep of Ra in Amentet. Whosoever shall do \[this\] in
the Hidden Palace of the Tuat, and whosoever shall do \[this\] upon
earth, \[the result is\] the same. Whosoever knoweth this shall be in
the Boat of Ra, both in heaven and upon earth; but he that hath no
knowledge of this representation shall not know how to drive back
NEHA-HRA (i.e., Stinking-Face).

Now the ridge of earth of NEHA-HRA in the Tuat is four hundred and fifty
cubits in length, and he filleth it with the undulations of his body.
The regions which belong to him are made (i.e., kept) for him, and the
great god doth not make his way over him when he

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

maketh him to turn aside out of the way for him, from the secret place
of Osiris, when this god maketh his way through this city in the form of
the serpent MEHEN.

Whosoever shall know this upon earth, the serpent NEHA-HRA shall not
drink his water, and the soul of him that knoweth it shall not be evilly
entreated by the gods who are in this Circle; and whosoever knoweth it
the crocodile AB-SHAU shall not devour his soul.

KHESEF-HAI-HESEQ-NEHA-HRA is the name of the hour of the night which
guideth this great god through this Circle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eighth Hour](gate10)
