[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc06)  [Next](osc08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (4) MAUNDAY THURSDAY (OR SHERE THURSDAY).

There seems to be much dispute between antiquarians as to the origin of
both "Maunday" and "Shere," and of course the spelling has the usual
vagaries. For instance The British Apollo (1709) says:--"Maunday is a
corruption of the Latin word Mandatum, a command. The day is therefore
so called, because as on that day our Saviour washed his disciples'
feet, to teach them the great duty of being humble. And therefore he
gives them in command to do as he had done, to imitate their Master in
all proper instances of condescension and humility."

On the other hand "Maunday Thursday," says a writer in The Gentleman's
Magazine (1779), "is the poor people's Thursday, from the Fr. maundier,
to beg. The King's liberality to the poor on that Thursday in Lent \[is
at\] a season when they are supposed to have lived very low. Maundiant
is at this day in French a beggar." Which are we to believe? The
preponderating weight of evidence seems to be in favour of the former.

In reference to "Shere," one authority says it is so called "for that in
old Fathers' days the people would that day shere theyr hedes and clippe
theyr berdes and pool theyr heedes, and so make them honest agenst
Easter Day." But another writer in The Gentleman's Magazine (1779) finds
a different origin for the word. "Maundy Thursday, called by Collier,
Shier Thursday, Cotgrave calls by a word of the same sound and import,
Sheere Thursday. Perhaps, for I can only go upon conjecture, as sheer
means purus mundus, it may allude to the washing of the disciples' feet
(John xiii. 5, et seq.), and be tantamount to clean. Please to observe
too, that on that day they also washed the Altars: so that the term in
question may allude to that business."

Here again one feels there is no other course open than to accept the
word of the earlier authority. As to the events of the day, I cannot do
better than transcribe a section from The Gentleman's Magazine for
1731:--

"Thursday, April 15, beind Maunday Thursday, there was distributed at
the Banquetting House, Whitehall, to forty-eight poor men, and
forty-eight poorwomen (the king's age forty-eight) boiled beef and
shoulders of mutton, and small bowls of ale, which is called dinner;
after that, large wooden platters of fish and loaves, viz. undressed,
one large old ling, and one large dried cod; twelve red herrings, and
twelve white herrings, and four half quarter loaves. Each person had one
platter of this provision after which was distributed to them shoes,
stockings, linen and woollen cloth, and leathern bags, with one penny,
two penny, three penny, and four penny pieces of silver, and shillings;
to each about four pounds in value. His Grace the Lord Archbishop of
York, Lord High Almoner, performed the annual ceremony of washing the
feet of a certain number of poor in the Royal Chapel, Whitehall, which
was formerly done by the kings themselves, in imitation of our Saviour's
pattern of humility, etc. James the Second was the last king who
performed this in person."

But some Catholic monarchs still persevere in this pious act, even to
the washing of beggars' feet. In England, the king's Maundy is given at
Westminster Abbey at a specially convened service, and those who receive
it are carefully chosen from London parishes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (5) Shrove Tuesday](osc08)
