[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc12)  [Next](osc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (10) BIDDENDEN CAKES.

Hasted, in his History of Kent, speaking of Biddenden, tells us that
"twenty acres of land, called the Bread and Cheese Land, lying in five
pieces, were given by persons unknown, the yearly rents to be
distributed among the poor of this parish. This is yearly done on Easter
Sunday, in the afternoon, in six hundred cakes, each of which have the
figures of two women impressed on them, and are given to all such as
attend the church; and two hundred and seventy loaves, weighing three
pounds and a half a-piece, to which latter is added one pound and a half
of cheese, are given to the parishioners only, at the same time. There
is a vulgar tradition in these parts that the figures on the cakes
represent the donors of this gift, being two women, twins, who were
joined together in their bodies, and lived together so till they were
between twenty and thirty years of age. But this seems without
foundation. The truth seems to be that it was the gift of two maidens of
the name of Preston--and that the print of the women on the cakes has
taken place only within these fifty years, and was made to represent two
poor widows, as the general objects of a charitable benefaction. An
engraving of one of these cakes will be found in Hone's Every Day Book."

These cakes or loaves are still given out on Easter Sunday, and in Sir
Benjamin Stone's Pictures of National Life and History there is a
photograph of the people receiving their cakes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (11) Easter Eggs](osc14)
