[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc52)  [Next](osc54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (12) LOOKING-GLASS OMENS.

To let a mirror fall and be broken is even now regarded as unfortunate,
though not so ill-starred an accident as among the people of earlier
days, who believed that the party to whom the mirror belonged would lose
his best friend.

In the Mémoires de Constant, premier Valet de Chambre de I'Empereur sur
la Vie privée de Napoleon, (Paris, 1830), Buonaparte's superstition
respecting the looking-glass is particularly mentioned:--"During one of
his campaigns in Italy he broke the glass over Josephine's portrait. He
never rested till the return of the courier he forthwith despatched to
assure himself of her safety, so strong was the impression of her death
upon his mind."

The origin of this superstition is very simple. Looking-glasses are and
always have been implements of divination; to break one is therefore
accounted most disastrous, because it is the destruction of a means of
knowing the will of the gods. In his Greek Antiquities, Potter
says:--"When divination by water was performed with a looking-glass, it
was called Catoptromancy: sometimes they dipped a looking-glass into the
water, when they desired to know what would become of a sick person: for
as he looked well or ill in the glass, accordingly they presumed of his
future condition. Sometimes, also, glasses were used, and the images of
what should happen, without water." We need not go to Greek antiquity
for divination by looking-glasses: a taxi-cab to several streets in the
West End of London would bring us to the rooms of seers and seeresses,
who will tell fortunes by Indian mirrors and the common or garden
crystal gazing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (13) Stumbling and Falling](osc54)
