[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas &
Legends](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](osc57)  [Next](osc59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### (17) THE HOWLING OF DOGS.

The author of Arcana Microcosmi (1652) affirms with a curiously quaint
confidence that "dogs by their howling portend death and calamities is
plaine by historie and experience." Shakespeare in his Henry vi. dares
to use the custom as an accompaniment of birth.

"The owl shriek'd at thy birth, an evil sign!  
The night-crow cry'd aboding luckless time,  
Dogs howl'd, and hideous tempests shook down trees."

The British Apollo (1708) answering the question "Whether the dogs
howling may be a fatal prognostic, or no," says: "We cannot determine,
but 'tis probable that out of a sense of sorrow for the sickness or
absence of his master, or the like, that creature may be so disturbed."
Another writer concludes:--"I have some little faith in the howling of a
dog, when it does not proceed from hunger, blows, or confinement. As odd
and unaccountable as it may seem, those animals scent death, even before
it seizes a person.

This is superstition in excelsis. Animals--horses for instance--have
been seen to tremble when they came near a dead human body, even though
the body was invisible to them; but scenting death is quite a different
thing. And yet there is reason to believe that this alleged power is the
basis of the popular belief in the howling of dogs. Even in the Odyssey
the dogs of Eumacus are described as terrified at the sight of Minerva,
though she was then invisible to Telemachus. If so far back in the ages
the canine tribe were endowed, in human thought at least, with such
vision, it can be understood how their supposed distressful howling
should presage death, especially in houses where somebody is lying ill.
But the real truth probably lies in this: that there are influences in
the atmosphere which act upon dogs in a way which causes them to howl,
but which we do not understand. Willsford, in his Nature's Secrets, says
that when "dogs tremble and wallow upon the earth . . are signs of rain
and wind for certain." This may be as much a superstition as the other,
but there is no doubt that cattle have a physical sensitiveness to
coming storms which men are destitute of, and drovers in the Far West
watch their stock during dangerous weather seasons for this very reason.
That somebody should die after the continued howling of a dog is not a
remarkable phenomenon; the remarkable phenomenon is the number of people
who live after listening to many howlings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (18) Ear-Tingling](osc59)
