[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csg07)  [Next](csg09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKKM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Comte de St. Germain*, by Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### MASONIC TRADITION

SONNET PHILOSOPHIQUE

ATTRIBUÉ AU FAMEUX ST. GERMAIN

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

CURIEUX scrutateur de la nature entière,  
J’ai connu du grand tout le principe et la fin.  
J’ai vu l’or en puissance au fond de sa minière,  
J’ai saisi sa matière et surpris son levain.

J’expliquai par quel art l’âme aux flancs d’une mère,  
Fait sa maison, l’emporte, et comment un pépin  
Mis contre un grain de blé, sous l’humide poussière,  
L’un plante et l’autre cep, sont le pain et le vin. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

Rien n’était, Dieu voulut, rien devint quelque chose,  
J’en doutais, je cherchai sur quoi l’univers pose,  
Rien gardait l’équilibre et servait de soutien.

Enfin, avec le poids de l’éloge et du blâme,  
Je pesai l’éternel, il appela mon âme,  
Je mourus, j’adorai, je ne savais plus rien. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md)

</div>

ONLY a mystic could write, and none but mystics can gauge, words so
potent in their meaning, treating as they do of those great mysteries
that are unfolded, in their entirety, only to the Initiated. The "Veil
of Isis" ever hides the earnest

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

student of the Great Science from the vulgarly curious; hence in
approaching the philosophic and mystic side of this mysterious life the
difficulties of research become even more complicated by reason of that
veil which hides this Initiate from the outer world. Glimpses of
knowledge rare among men; indications of forces unknown to the
"general"; a few earnest students, his pupils, striving their utmost to
permeate the material world with their knowledge of the unseen spiritual
life; such are the signs that surround the Comte de St. Germain, the
evidences of his connection with that great Centre from which he came.
No startling public movement springs up, nothing in which he courts the
public gaze as leader, although in many societies his guiding hand may
be found.

In modern Freemason literature the effort is made to eliminate his name,
and even, in some instances, to assert that he had no real part in the
Masonic movement of the last century, and was regarded only as a
charlatan by leading Masons. Careful research, however, into the Masonic
archives proves this to be untrue; indeed, the exact contrary can be
shown, for M. de St. Germain was one of the selected representatives of
the French Masons at their great convention at Paris in 1785. As one
account says: "The Germans who distinguished themselves on

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

this occasion were Bade, von Dalberg, Forster, Duke Ferdinand of
Brunswick, Baron de Gleichen, Russworm, von Wöllner, Lavater, Ludwig
Prince of Hesse, Ross-Kampf, Stork, Thaden von Wächter. . . . The French
were honourably represented by *St. Germain*, St. Martin,
Touzet-Duchanteau, Etteila, Mesmer, Dutrousset, d’Hérecourt, and
Cagliostro." <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md)

The same category of names, but with more detail, is given by N.
Deschamps. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) We find Deschamps
speaking of M. de St. Germain as one of the Templars. An account is also
given of the initiation of Cagliostro by the Comte de St. Germain, and
the ritual used on this occasion is said to have been that of the
Knights Templar. It was in this year also that a group of Jesuits
brought the wildest and most disgraceful accusations against M. de St.
Germain, M. de St. Martin and many others, accusations of immorality,
infidelity, anarchy, etc. The charges were levelled at the
Philaletheans, or "Rite des Philalètes ou Chercheurs de la Vérité,"
founded 1773 in the Masonic Lodge of "Les Amis-Réunis." Prince Karl of
Hesse, Savalette de Lange (the Royal Treasurer), the Vicomte de Tavanne,
Count de

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gebelin, and all
the really mystic students of the time were in this Order. The Abbé
Barruel <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md) indicted the whole body,
individually and collectively, in terms so violent and on charges so
unfounded that even non-Masons and anti-Mystics protested. He accused M.
de St. Germain and his followers of being Jacobins, of fomenting and
inciting the Revolution, of atheism and immorality.

These charges were carefully investigated and rejected as worthless by
J. J. Mounier, a writer who was neither Mystic nor Mason, but only a
lover of honest dealing. Mounier says: "There are accusations so
atrocious, that before adopting them a just man must seek the most
authentic testimony; he who fears not to publish them, without being in
the position to give decided proofs, should be severely punished by law
and, where the law fails, by all right-minded people. Such is the
procedure adopted by M. Barruel against a Society that used to meet at
Ermenonville after the death of Jean Jacques Rousseau, under the
direction of the Charlatan St. Germain." <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65.md)

This view appears to be well corroborated, and

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

is upheld by various writers; in fact, the proof is conclusive that M.
de St. Germain had nothing to do with the Jacobin party as the Abbé
Barruel and the Abbé Migne have tried to insist.

Another writer says: "At this time Catholic Lodges were formed in Paris;
their protectors were the Marquises de Girardin and de Bouillé. Several
Lodges were held at Ermenonville, the property of the first-named. Their
chief aim was 'd’établir une communication entre Dieu et l’homme par le
moyen des êtres intermédiaires.'" <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md)

Now both the Marquis de Girardin and the Marquis de Bouillé were staunch
Royalists and Catholics; it was the latter, moreover, who aided the
unhappy Louis XVI. and his family in their attempted escape. Again, both
of these Catholic nobles were personal friends of M. de St. Germain;
hence it hardly appears possible that the assertions of the Abbés
Barruel and Migne had any veracious foundation, since the establishing
of "Catholic Lodges" certainly does not appear atheistical in tendency,
nor the close friendship of true Royalists alarmingly revolutionary.
According to the well-known writer Éliphas Lévi, <span
id="fr_67"></span>[2](#fn_67.md) M. de St. Germain was a Catholic in
outward religious observance. Although he was the founder of the Order
of St. Joachim in Bohemia, he separated himself from

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

this society as soon as revolutionary theories began to spread among its
members.

Some of the assemblies in which the Comte de St. Germain taught his
philosophy were held in the Rue Platrière; other meetings of the
"Philalètes" were held in the Lodge "des Amis-Réunis" in the Rue de la
Sourdière.

According to some writers, there was a strong Rosicrucian
foundation--from the true Rosicrucian tradition--in this Lodge. It
appears that the members were studying the conditions of life on higher
planes, just as Theosophists of to-day are doing. Practical occultism
and spiritual mysticism were the end and aim of the Philaletheans; but
alas, the karma of France overwhelmed them, and scenes of bloodshed and
violence swept them and their peaceful studies away.

A fact that disturbed the enemies of the Comte de St. Germain was the
personal devotion of his friends, and that these friends treasured his
portrait. In the d’Urfé collection, in 1783, was a picture of the mystic
engraved on copper, with the inscription:--

"The Comte de St. Germain, celebrated Alchemist," followed by the words:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Ainsi que Prométhée, il déroba le feu,  
   Par qui le monde existe et par qui tout respire;  
La nature à sa voix obéit et se meurt.  
   S’il n’est pas Dieu lui-même, un Dieu puissant l’inspire."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

This copper-plate engraving was dedicated to the Comte de Milly, an
intimate friend of M. de St. Germain, a well-known man of the period,
and Chevalier de l’Ordre Royal et Militaire de St. Louis, et de l’Aigle
Rouge de Braunschweig. This unlucky portrait, however, produced a
furious attack from Dr. Biester, the editor of the *Berlinische
Monatschrift*, in June, 1785. Amongst some amusing diatribes, the
following is worthy of notice, if only to show how inaccurate an angry
editor can be. As we have already seen, M. de St. Germain was in the
year 1785 chosen representative at the Masonic Conference in Paris.
Nevertheless, Herr Dr. Biester, in the *same* year, opens his remarks
with the astonishing statement: "This adventurer, who died *two years
ago* in Danish Holstein"!

Our editor then proceeds to clinch the argument as follows: "I even know
that tho’ he is dead, many now believe that he is still living, and will
soon come forth alive! Whereas he is dead as a door-nail, probably
mouldering and rotting as any ordinary man who cannot work miracles, and
whom no prince has ever greeted."

Ignorance alone must excuse our editor from the charge of being a
literary Ananias; but indeed in our own days critics of matters occult
are just as ignorant and equally positive as they were a

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

century ago, no matter what their learning in other respects.

And indeed there was some justification for the statements of Herr Dr.
Biester, for a more recent writer says:--

"The church register of Eckernförde shows St. Germain died on February
27th, 1784 in this town in whose church he was entombed quite privately
on March 2nd. In the church register we read as follows: "Deceased on
February 27th, buried on March 2nd, 1784 the so-called Comte de St.
Germain and Weldon--further information not known--privately deposited
in this church." In the church accounts it is said: "On March 1st, for
the here deceased Comte de St. Germain a tomb in the Nicolai Church here
in the burial-place sub N. 1, 30 years time of decay 10 Rthlr. and for
opening of the same 2 Rthlr., in all 12 Rthlr." Tradition tells that the
landgrave afterwards got St. Germain buried in Slesvig in the
Friederiksberg churchyard there in order to consult his ghost in late
hours of the night. On the third of April the mayor and the council of
Eckernförde gave legal notice concerning his estate. In that it is said:
"As the Comte de St. Germain, known abroad, as also here, under the name
of Comte de St. Germain and Weldon, who during the last four years has
been living in this country, died recently here in Eckernförde, his

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

effects have been legally sealed, and it has been found necessary as
well to his eventual intestate heirs, as until now nothing has been
ascertained concerning a left will . . . . etc. . . . Therefore all
creditors are called upon to come forward with their claims on October
14th." <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md)

This passage shows definitely that M. de St. Germain was well known
under the name of Welldown (it is written in very many different ways).

But--as to the death--we have much evidence that he did not die: Madame
d’Adhémar says speaking of M. de St. Germain:--

"He is believed to have deceased in 1784, at Schleswig, when with the
Elector of Hesse-Cassel; the Count de Châlons, however, on returning
from his Venetian embassy in 1788, told me of his having spoken to the
Comte de Saint-Germain in the Place Saint Marc the day before he left
Venice to go on an embassy to Portugal. I saw him again on one other
occasion." <span id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69.md)

And *again from a Masonic source* we get the following statement:--

"Amongst the Freemasons invited to the great conference at Wilhelmsbad
15th Feb. 1785 we

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

find St. Germain included with St. Martin and many others." <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md)

And again from a thoroughly Catholic source: the late Librarian of the
Great Ambrosiana Library at Milan says:--

"And when, in order to bring about a conciliation between the various
sects of the Rosicrucians, the Necromantists, the Cabalists, the
Illuminati, the Humanitarians, there was held a great Congress at
Wilhelmsbad, then in the Lodge of the "Amici riuniti" there also was
Cagliostro, with St. Martin, Mesmer and Saint-Germain." <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71.md)

Evidence there is on both sides, and "Church records" are not always
infallible; how many a *cause célèbre* has arisen from a fictitious
death. If the Comte de St. Germain wished to disappear from public life,
this was the best way to accomplish his wish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[128:1](csg08.htm#fr_60.md) Referring to occult
embryology.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[128:2](csg08.htm#fr_61.md) *Poëmes Philosophiques
sur l’Homme*. Chez Mercier. Paris, 1795.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[130:1](csg08.htm#fr_62.md) *Magazin der
Beweisführer für Verurtheilung des Freimaurer-Ordens*, i., p. 137; von
Dr. E. E. ECKERT, Leipzig, 1857.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[130:2](csg08.htm#fr_63.md) *Les Sociétés Secrètes
et la Société, ou Philosophie de l’Histoire Contemporaine*, ii., p. 121.
Paris, 1881.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[131:1](csg08.htm#fr_64.md) *Mémoires sur
l’Histoire du Jacobinisme*, ii., p. 554. Paris, 1797.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[131:2](csg08.htm#fr_65.md) *De l’Influence
attribuée aux Philosophes, aux Franc-maçons et aux Illuminés, sur la
Révolution de France*, p. 154. Tübingen, 1801.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[132:1](csg08.htm#fr_66.md) *Der Signatstern*, v.,
art. 19. Berlin, 1809.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[132:2](csg08.htm#fr_67.md) *Histoire de la Haute
Magie*, pp. 419, 420. Paris, 1860.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[136:1](csg08.htm#fr_68) BOBÉ (Louis.md), Johan
Caspar Lavater's Rejse til Danmark i Sommeren 1793, viii., p. 156.
Copenhagen, 1898.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[136:2](csg08.htm#fr_69.md) ADHÉMAR, *op. cit.*,
1., p. 229.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[137:1](csg08.htm#fr_70.md) *Freimaurer
Brüderschaft in Frankreich*, Latomia, Vol. ii., p. 9.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[137:2](csg08.htm#fr_71.md) CANTÙ CESARE, *Gli
Eretici d’Italia*. Turin, 1867, Vol. iii., Disc. lii., p. x, 402.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Masonic Work and Austrian Traditions](csg09.md)
