[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csg05)  [Next](csg07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKKM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Comte de St. Germain*, by Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### POLITICAL WORK

THE earliest definite hint of any political work on the part of the
Comte de St. Germain is from the pen of Madame d’Adhémar. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42.md)

When sketching the portraits of those who were received into intimacy by
Louis XV. at Versailles, she says: "The King was also much attached to
the Duchesse de Choiseul, *née* Crozat; her simplicity, her frankness,
more virtues than were necessary to make a success at Versailles, had
triumphed over the drawback of her birth, and she was frequently present
at the suppers in the smaller apartments. One man also had long enjoyed
this favour, the celebrated and mysterious Comte de St. Germain, my
friend who has not been rightly known, and to whom I shall devote some
pages when I have to speak of Cagliostro. From 1749, the King employed
him on diplomatic missions and he acquitted himself honourably in them."

This passage would remain incomprehensible, unless we glance briefly at
the history of the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

period. Dark and stormy is the scene on which we enter; difficult indeed
is it to disentangle the knotted web of European politics which enmeshed
the various nations. Austria and France had signed in 1756 an offensive
and defensive alliance, especially directed against England and Prussia;
Russia was with them; during the Seven Years' War the throne of Prussia
tottered more than once, until the Austrians were defeated at Torgau in
1760. Poland, that "Niobe of Nations," was watching the clouds gather
slowly on her horizon; racked within by strife stirred up by Russia, she
struggled vainly against the stronger Powers; her day was slowly ending.
England, at war in America and with France, striving also to conquer
India, was also a centre of discord. All Europe was in dissension.

Into this arena of combat the Comte de St. Germain was asked to step by
the King of France, in order to make that peace which his
Ministers--involved in their own plans--could not, or would not, make.

Louis XV. was practically the originator of the whole system of secret
diplomacy, which in the eighteenth century seems to stand out as a new
departure in the diplomatic political world. The Gordian knot which
could not be disentangled, Louis XV. tried to cut; hence we find the
King of France employing secret agents, men

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

who could be trusted with delicate missions, men foredoomed to bear the
blame of failure, fated never to be crowned with the palm of success.

Outside the various Foreign Offices, or beyond the pale of their secret
archives, it is very little known that the Comte de St. Germain had any
diplomatic mission whatsoever. In many histories and memoirs there is no
mention of this phase of his life; therefore it is necessary to cite
such writers as are available to bear their testimony on this point.

Not least amongst these stands Voltaire, the sceptic, who in his
voluminous correspondence with Frederick of Prussia says, April 15th,
1758: "Your ministers are doubtless likely to have a better outlook at
Breda than I; M. le Duc de Choiseul, M. de Kaunitz, and M. Pitt do not
tell me their secret. It is said to be only known by a M. de St.
Germain, who supped formerly at Trent with the Council Fathers, and who
will probably have the honour of seeing your Majesty in the course of
fifty years. He is a man who never dies, and who knows
everything." <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)

The allusion "supped at Trent" is a reference to the gossip which
originated from Lord Gower's impersonation and misrepresentation of M.
de St. Germain, of which mention has already been

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

made. The important point in this letter is that Voltaire refers to a
political connection of M. de St. Germain with the Prime Ministers of
England, France and Austria, as if he were in the intimate council of
these leaders. The Baron de Gleichen gives some details in his memoirs,
and as he became later deeply interested in the mystical work of the
Comte de St. Germain, his version is of much value, giving as it does an
insight into some of the complications in France. He writes: "The
Marshal \[de Belle-Isle\] was incessantly intriguing to get a special
treaty of peace made with Prussia, and to break up the alliance between
France and Austria, on which rested the credit of the Duc de Choiseul.
Louis XV. and Madame de Pompadour wished for this special treaty of
peace. . . . The Marshal drew up the instructions; the King delivered
them himself with a cipher to M. de St. Germain." <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)

Thus, then, is the mission duly signed and sealed by the King himself,
but, as we shall see, even the royal protection could not avert the
suspicion and distrust which so unpleasant a position naturally
incurred, and when M. de St. Germain arrived at the Hague he came into
collision with M. d’Affry, <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45.md) the
accredited Ambassador from France.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Before entering on the ambassadorial despatches there are a few words
from Herr Barthold to be noticed, giving an interesting account of this
diplomatic mission; he--after criticising somewhat severely, and with
good reason, the unreliable statements about our philosopher made by the
Marquise de Créqui and the Markgräfin von Anspach--goes on: "But of this
mysterious mission of the Adept, as financier to the crown and
diplomatic Agent, to which he was initiated, not at the ministerial
desk, but in the laboratory of Chambord, she makes no mention. Nor has
this point--so essential to the understanding of the way business was
conducted in France, both in Cabinet and State, at this period--ever
been much commented on. About this time we find St. Germain at the
Hague, evidently on a private mission, where the Comte d’Affry was
French Ambassador, but the two had no relations with each other.
Voltaire, who is generally a good reporter, ascribes the Comte's
appearance to the Secret Treaty of Peace." <span
id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46.md) The date mentioned by this author is not
quite accurate, as we shall see.

That the Duc de Choiseul was profoundly

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

annoyed when this information reached him, is to be understood; his pet
schemes were in jeopardy, his intrigues against England were on the eve
of failure; it appears that M. d’Affry "bitterly reproached M. de
Choiseul for having sacrificed an old friend of his father, and the
dignity of an Ambassador, to the ambition of making a Treaty of Peace
under his very eyes without informing him of it, through an obscure
foreigner. M. de Choiseul immediately sent back the courier, ordering M.
d’Affry to make a peremptory demand to the States-General to deliver up
M. de St. Germain and, that being done, to send him bound hand and foot
to the Bastille. The next day M. de Choiseul produced in Council the
despatch of M. d’Affry; he then read his own reply; then, casting his
eyes haughtily on his colleagues, and fixing them alternatively round on
King and on M. de Belle-Isle, he added: 'If I did not give myself time
to take the orders of the King, it is because I am convinced that no one
here would be bold enough to desire to negotiate a Treaty of Peace
without the knowledge of Your Majesty's Minister for Foreign Affairs!'
He knew that this Prince had established, and always maintained, the
principle, that the Minister of one department should not meddle with
the affairs of another. It turned out as he had foreseen. The King cast
down his eyes like

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

a guilty person, the Marshal dared not say a word, and M. de Choiseul’s
action was approved; but M. de St. Germain escaped him. Their
Highnesses, having made good their assent, despatched a large body of
guards to arrest M. de St. Germain, who, having been privately warned,
fled to England. I have some grounds for believing that he soon left it
again to go to St. Petersburg." <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47.md)

No better account could be given than this, by one present at the French
Cabinet Council, of the way in which Louis XV., weak and irresolute,
allowed his arrangements to be cancelled without a word. Passing,
however, rapidly on to follow the events at the Hague, we next have some
interesting despatches from M. de Kauderbach, Minister from the Saxon
Court at the Hague, wherein he recounts much that has already been given
in these pages in praise of the Comte de St. Germain, of his powers and
knowledge and then goes on to say: "I had a long conversation with him
on the causes of the troubles of France, and on the changes in the
choice of Minister in this kingdom. This, Monseigneur, is what he said
to me on the subject: 'The radical evil is the monarch's want of
firmness. Those who surround him, knowing his extreme good nature, abuse
it, and he is surrounded only by

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

creatures placed by the Brothers Pâris, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) who alone cause all the trouble of France.
It is they who corrupt everything, and thwarted the plans of the best
citizen in France, the Marshal de Belle-Isle. Hence the disunion and
jealousy amongst the Ministers, who seem all to serve a different
monarch. All is corrupted by the Brothers Paris; perish France, provided
they may attain their object of gaining eight hundred millions!
Unhappily the King has not so much sagacity as good nature; he is not,
therefore, aware of the malice of the people around him who, knowing his
lack of firmness, are solely occupied in flattering his foible, and
through it are ever preferably listened to. The same defect as to
firmness is found in the mistress. She knows the evil and has not
courage to remedy it.' It is he then, M. de St. Germain, who will
undertake to cure it radically; he takes upon himself to put down by his
influence and operations in Holland the two names so prejudicial to the
State, which have hitherto been regarded as indispensably necessary.
Hearing him speak with so much freedom, one must look upon him either as
a man sure of his ground, or else as the greatest fool in the world. I
could entertain your Excellency much longer with this singular man and
with his knowledge of physics,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

did I not fear to weary you with tales which must seem rather romantic
than real." <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49.md)

The Saxon diplomatist, from whose despatches these extracts are
gathered, very shortly changed his friendly tone, on finding that the
Duc de Choiseul did not favour the plans of Louis XV.; the
self-respecting diplomat then began to disparage the man whom so lately
he had lauded as a prodigy, hence the next despatch is amusingly
different in tone, and runs as follows:

"April 24th, 1760. I have this moment heard that the courier whom the
Comte d’Affry received last Monday brought him an order to demand from
the State the arrest and extradition of the famous St. Germain as a
dangerous character, and one with whom his most Christian Majesty has
reason to be dissatisfied. M. d’Affry, having communicated this order to
the *Pensionnaire*, this Minister of State reported it to the Council of
Deputy Commissioners for the province of Holland, an assembly of which
the Comte de Bentinck is President. The latter gave the man warning, and
made him start for England. The day before his departure, St. Germain
was four hours with the English Minister. He boasted of being authorised
to make peace."

Later on, in another despatch, this wary diplomatist

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

returns once more to the attack. "The adventurer gave himself here the
airs of a secret negotiator, selected by the Marshal de Belle-Isle, from
whom he showed letters in which there were in fact some traces of
confidence. He wished it to be understood that the principles of the
Marshal, differing from those of M. de Choiseul, and more in accordance
with the inclination of Mme. de Pompadour, were warmly in favour of
peace; he darkened the picture, painting in the strongest colours the
cabals, the difficulties and the dissension that he declared reigned in
France, and by these flatteries he thought to gain the confidence of the
English party. On the other hand he had written to the Marshal de
Belle-Isle, that M. d’Affry knew not how to appreciate or carry out the
plans of the Comte de Bentinck-Rhoon, who was a man of the best
intentions in the world, and desired only to make himself useful to
France in order to promote the success of her negotiations with England.
These letters were sent back to M. d’Affry, with a command to forbid St.
Germain to meddle with any transactions, on pain of expiating his
rashness for the rest of his days in a dungeon on his return to
France." <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50.md)

Truly ludicrous is the difference in the tone of these documents; M. de
St. Germain was endeavouring

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

to carry out the wishes of the King, and trying to help an exhausted
country; these efforts for peace were frustrated by de Choiseul, who had
his own schemes to forward with Austria. Nothing more natural could have
occurred than that the new helper should be attacked by the opposite
party.

It is evident, from the paper cited, that M. de St. Germain was in the
confidence of the Marshal de Belle-Isle--who also wanted peace--for the
Saxon Ambassador uses the phrase "some traces of confidence," when
speaking of the correspondence he had seen and the evidence of
confidence he was forced to admit. From this distance of time we can see
that the picture of France sketched by M. de St. Germain was by no means
too dark: France impoverished, rushing wildly on to greater ruin, the
end of which was to be a scene of blood and butchery. He who had the
power of seeing the evil days that were drawing so steadily nigh, could
he paint that picture too darkly, when endeavouring to stay the ruin of
fair France?

But we must take up some other threads of this tangled skein. The King
of Prussia was, at this period, in Freyberg, and his own agent, M.
d’Edelsheim, had just arrived in London to confer with the English
Ministers; the following account is given later by Frederick II. of the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

condition of affairs: "On his arrival in that city \[London\], another
political phenomenon appeared there, a man whom no one has been able to
understand. He was known under the name of the Comte de St. Germain. He
had been employed by France, and was even so high in favour with Louis
XV., that this Prince had thought of giving him the Palace of Chambord"
(De l’hiver de 1759 à 1760). <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

The mission of M. d’Edelsheim is not clearly stated, but we find that
not only did M. de St. Germain have to leave London, failing to bring
about the peace so sorely desired, but that the Prussian agent fared
even worse; the details are given by Herr Barthold <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52.md): "The Prussian negotiator . . . returning
from London *viâ* Holland to fetch his luggage from Paris, was induced
to remain a few days with the Bailly de Froulay, and then, receiving a
*Lettre de Cachet*, he was put into the Bastille. Choiseul assured the
prisoner that it was only by these means that he could silence the
suspicions of the Imperial Minister, Stahremberg, but this '*scene
indécente*' was simply a trap to get hold of the Baron's papers.
Choiseul, however, found nothing and told him to decamp, advising him on
his leaving Turin

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

not to re-enter the kingdom. Frederick takes care not to find fault with
his agent, who through over-zeal had drawn discredit on himself in
Paris; on the other hand, one may conclude that it was he who, through
an article in the London *Chronicle*, succeeded in frustrating St.
Germain's project."

In this extraordinary maze of secret negotiations it is difficult to
find the truth, for in the work just cited we hear that St. Germain was
seen in the Bois de Boulogne in May, 1761. When the Marquise d’Urfé
informed the Duc de Choiseul of his presence in Paris that Prime
Minister replied: "Je n’en suis pas surpris, puisqu’il a passé la nuit
dans mon cabinet." <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md) This informant
proceeds: "Casanova is therefore satisfied that de Choiseul had only
pretended to be annoyed with M. de St. Germain, so as to make it easier
for him to be sent to London as agent; Lord Halifax however saw through
the plan."

This would indeed be one method of cutting the political entanglement of
France!--an intrigue of a pronounced sort arranged by the King,
apparently without the knowledge of his chief Minister, in order to
arrive at a peace for which the whole country pined. In this difficult
situation the Marshal de Belle-Isle selected the Comte de

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> St. Germain as the
messenger of peace. Alas! missions of peace rarely result in anything
but discomfort and slander for the bearer of the message, and the
history of the world recorded one more failure, a failure caused by the
ambitions of the political leaders.

Leaving now the condition of affairs in France and passing on to
England, we find some very interesting correspondence between General
Yorke, the English representative at the Hague, and Lord Holdernesse in
London. By especial permission from the Foreign Office we have been
kindly permitted to make use of these extracts. The full correspondence
is too lengthy to print in the limited space permissible in these pages.
The first despatch is from General Yorke to the Earl of Holdernesse; it
is dated March 14th, 1760, and gives the full account of a long
interview between the Comte de St. Germain and himself. The former
claims, he says, to have been sent by France to negotiate concerning the
Peace, but says that Mons. d’Affry is not in the secret. The answer to
this document comes from "Whitehall, March 21st, 1760," and is from Lord
Holdernesse to General Yorke; in this he directs the latter "to tell M.
de St. Germain that by the King's orders he cannot discuss the subject
with him unless he produces some authentic proof of his being employed
with the consent and knowledge

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

of the French King." In the next despatch, dated Whitehall, March 28th,
1760, "the King directs that the same answer should be returned to Mons.
d’Affry as has already been given to M de St. Germain. The King thinks
it probable that M. de St. Germain was authorised to talk to General
Yorke in the manner he did, and that his commission is unknown to the
Duc de Choiseul."

The insight of George III. in this case is remarkable, unless in his
private correspondence with Louis XV. some hint as to the real condition
of things may have been given by one king to the other. In any case the
fact remains that owing to M. de Choiseul the Treaty of Peace was not
arranged; and, as we have seen, M. de St. Germain passed on from England
to Russia. Turning now to some other witnesses, we find

M. Thiébault in his memoirs saying: "While this singular man was at
Berlin, I ventured one day to speak of him to the French envoy, the
Marquis de Pons Saint-Maurice; I privately expressed to him my great
surprise that this man should have held private and intimate relations
with persons of high rank, such as the Cardinal de Bernis, from whom he
had, it was said, confidential letters, written at the time when the
Cardinal held the portfolio for Foreign Affairs, etc.; on this last
point the envoy made me no

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

reply." <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54.md) This passage implies other
diplomatic missions, of which no details are to be found.

Another writer, who has also been quoted, makes an important statement
to the effect that when M. de St. Germain was in Leipzig the Graf
Marcolini offered him a high public position at Dresden. Our philosopher
was at Leipzig in 1776, under the name of Chevalier Weldon, and did not
at all conceal the fact that he was a Prince Ragotzy. This informant
says: "The Lord High Chamberlain, Graf Marcolini, came from Dresden to
Leipzig and made to the Comte--in the name of the Court--certain
promises; M. de St. Germain refused them, but he came in 1777 to
Dresden, where he had much intercourse with the Prussian Ambassador, von
Alvensleben." <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55.md) This statement can be
corroborated by the writer of the life of Graf Marcolini, which has been
carefully compiled from the secret archives of the Saxon Court (with
especial permission) by the Freiherr O'Byrn.

The Graf Marcolini was a man renowned for his integrity and upright
character; his biographer says: "Considering the strong opposition shown
by the Graf Marcolini to the swindling in the Schröpfer affair, the
sympathy he extended

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

to the Comte de St. Germain on his arrival in Saxony is all the more
wonderful. . . . Graf Marcolini repaired to Leipzig with the intention
of interviewing St. Germain on hearing of his arrival under the name of
Welldoun, October 1776 . . . the meeting resulted in the Graf offering
St. Germain an important post in Dresden if he would render a great
service to the State; the 'Wonder Man' however refused these
offers." <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md)

Nowhere are to be found the details of any of these diplomatic missions;
we can only gather the fragments and, piecing them together, the fact
stands clearly proved, that from Court to Court, among kings, princes,
and ambassadors, the Comte de St. Germain was received and known, was
trusted as friend, and by none feared as enemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[94:1](csg06.htm#fr_42.md) *Souvenirs sur
Marie-Antoinette*, i., p. 8

<span id="fn_43"></span>[96:1](csg06.htm#fr_43.md) VOLTAIRE, *Œuvres*.
Lettre cxviii., ed. Beuchot, lviii., p. 360.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[97:1](csg06.htm#fr_44.md) GLEICHEN (C. H. Baron
de) *Mémoires*. Paris, 1868, xi., p. 130.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[97:2](csg06.htm#fr_45.md) Ludwig Augustin d’Affry,
a Swiss, born 1715 at Versailles, <span id="page_98">p. 98</span>
Ambassador at the Hague in 1755, became in 1780 Colonel of the Swiss
Guard, died in 1793 at his castle Barthelemy in Waadt.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[98:1](csg06.htm#fr_46.md) BARTHOLD, *Die
Geschichtlichen Persönlichkeiten*. Berlin, 1846, ii., p. 81.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[100:1](csg06.htm#fr_47.md) GLEICHEN (C. H. Baron
de) *Mémoires*, xi., pp. 131, 132.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[101:1](csg06.htm#fr_48.md) The Brothers
Pâris-Duverney were the great financiers, the bank monarchs, in the time
of Louis XV.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[102:1](csg06.htm#fr_49.md) TAILLANDIER,
SAINT-RENÉ, *Un Prince Allemand du XVIII. Siècle. Revue des deux
Mondes*, lxi., pp. 896, 897.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[103:1](csg06.htm#fr_50.md) TAILLANDIER, *op.
cit.*, p. 897.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[105:1](csg06.htm#fr_51.md) FREDERIC II., Roi de
Prusse, *Œuvres Posthumes*. Berlin, 1788, iii., p. 73.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[105:2](csg06.htm#fr_52.md) BARTHOLD, *op. cit.*,
pp. 93. 94.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[106:1](csg06.htm#fr_53.md) BARTHOLD, *Op. cit.*,
p. 94.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[109:1](csg06.htm#fr_54.md) THIÉBAULT, D., *op.
cit.*, iv., p. 84; 3rd ed.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[109:2](csg06.htm#fr_55.md) HEZEKIEL, G.,
Abenteuerliche Gesellen, i., p. 46. Berlin, 1862.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[110:1](csg06.htm#fr_56.md) O'BYRN, F. A., Camillo,
*Graf Marcolini: Eine Biographische Skizze*. Dresden, 1877.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. In The ''Mitchell Papers''](csg07.md)
