[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csg02)  [Next](csg04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKKM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Comte de St. Germain*, by Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### HIS TRAVELS AND KNOWLEDGE

<span class="small">THE pure cult of Nature in the earliest patriarchal
days . . . became the heirloom of those alone who could discern the
noumenon beneath the phenomenon. Later, the Initiates transmitted their
knowledge to the human kings, as their divine Masters had passed it to
their forefathers. It was their prerogative and duty to reveal the
secrets of Nature that were useful to mankind. . . . No Initiate was one
if he could not heal--aye, recall to life from apparent death (coma)
those who, too long neglected, would have indeed died during their
lethargy. Those who showed such powers were forthwith set above the
crowds, and were regarded as Kings and Initiates. *The Secret Doctrine*,
iii. 263.</span>

LET us now trace, as far as we can with any detailed information, the
steps of M. de St. Germain in some of his extended travels. That he had
been in Africa, India and China we gather from various hints he gives
us, and also from facts stated by many writers at different times. That
such travels should seem aimless and trivial to the same writers is not
a matter of surprise, but to students of mysticism, and especially those
to whom the "Great Lodge" is a fact and a necessity in the spiritual
evolution of mankind, to those students the widely extended travels of
this "messenger" from that Lodge

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

will not be surprising; rather they will seek below the surface, and try
to understand the mission and the work that he came to do among the
children of men.

We must bear in mind, moreover, that in the ancient world the arts and
sciences were regarded as divine gifts; the gifts of the gods. "Kings of
the 'Divine Dynasties,' they gave the first impulse to civilization, and
directed the mind with which they had endued men, to the invention and
perfection of all the arts and sciences." <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md)

Conceited in their shallow ignorance the generality of mankind scorn the
gifts and turn away from the givers. Some few centuries ago such givers
and teachers were silenced at the stake, like Giordano Bruno, and many
others whom time has now justified in the eyes of men. Then, later,
after the reaction of free thought in the eighteenth century we find
Mesmer and the Comte de St. Germain giving up, not their lives, but
their good names and characters in trying to help those to whom they
were sent by the Great Lodge.

Let us now take up the thread of these travels, and in order to make
them as clear as possible follow them in the order of their dates.

These range, as we have seen in our last

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

chapter from 1710 to 1822. We shall, however, not be able to deal very
fully with each period, for M. de St. Germain often disappeared for many
months at a time. The earliest records we can gather are as follows:--

"There appeared at the Court <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) in
these days an extraordinary man, who called himself Comte de St.
Germain. At first he distinguished himself through his cleverness and
the great diversity of his talents, but in another respect he soon
aroused the greatest astonishment.

"The old Countess v. Georgy who fifty years earlier had accompanied her
husband to Venice where he had the appointment of ambassador, lately met
St. Germain at Mme. de Pompadour's. For some time she watched the
stranger with signs of the greatest surprise, in which was mixed not a
little fear. Finally, unable to control her excitement, she approached
the Count more out of curiosity than in fear.

"'Will you have the kindness to tell me,' said the Countess, 'whether
your father was in Venice about the year 1710?'

"'No, Madame,' replied the Count quite unconcerned, 'it is very much
longer since I lost my father; but I myself was living in Venice at the
end of the last and the beginning of this century; I had the honour to
pay you court then,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

and you were kind enough to admire a few Barcarolles of my composing
which we used to sing together.'

"'Forgive me, but that is impossible; the Comte de St. Germain I knew in
those days was at least 45 years old, and you, at the outside, are that
age at present.'

"'Madame,' replied the Count smiling, 'I am very old.'

"'But then you must be nearly 100 years old.'

"'That is not impossible.' And then the Count recounted to Mme. v.
Georgy a number of familiar little details which had reference in common
to both, to their sojourn in the Venitian States. He offered, if she
still doubted him, to bring back to her memory certain circumstances and
remarks, which . . . .

"No, no,' interrupted the old ambassadress, 'I am already convinced. For
all that you are a most extraordinary man, a devil.'

"'For pity's sake!' exclaimed St. Germain in a thundering voice, 'no
such names!'

"He appeared to be seized with a cramp-like trembling in every limb, and
left the room immediately.

"I mean to get to know this peculiar man more intimately.

"St. Germain is of medium height and elegant manners; his features are
regular; his complexion

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

brown; his hair black; his face mobile and full of genius; his carriage
bears the impress and the nobility common only to the great. The Count
dresses simply but with taste. His only luxury consists of a large
number of diamonds, with which he is fairly covered; he wears them on
every finger, and they are set in his snuffboxes and his watches. One
evening he appeared at court with shoebuckles, which Herr v. Gontaut, an
expert on precious stones, estimated at 200,000 Francs.

"A matter worthy of remark is that the Count speaks French, English,
German, Italian, Spanish and Portuguese equally perfectly; so much so
that when he converses with any of the inhabitants of the above
countries in their mother tongue, they are unable to discover the
slightest foreign accent. The Learned and the Oriental scholars have
proved the knowledge of the Count St. Germain. The former found him more
apt in the languages of Homer and Virgil than themselves; with the
latter he spoke Sanscrit, Chinese, Arabic in such a manner as to show
them that he had made some lengthy stay in Asia, and that the languages
of the East were but poorly learned in the Colleges of Louis The Great
and Montaigne.

"The Comte de St. Germain accompanied on the piano without music, not
only every song but

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

also the most difficult *concerti*, played on various instruments.
Rameau was much impressed with the playing of this dilettante, and
especially struck at his improvising.

"The Count paints beautifully in oils; but that which makes his
paintings so remarkable is a particular colour, a secret, which he has
discovered, and which lends to the painting an extraordinary brilliancy.
In his historical pieces, St. Germain always introduces into the dress
of the women, sapphires, rubies and emeralds of such brilliant hue that
they seem to have borrowed their beauty from the original gems. Vanloo,
who never tires in his admiration of the surprising colouring, has often
requested the Count to let him participate in his secret; the latter,
however, will not divulge it.

"Without attempting to sit in judgement on the knowledge of a
fellow-being, of whom at this very moment that I am writing, both court
and town have exhausted all surmises, one can, I think, well assert that
a portion of his miracles is due to his knowledge of physics and
chemistry in which sciences he is well grounded. At all events it is
palpable that his knowledge has laid the seeds for him of sound good
health; a life which will--or which has overstepped the ordinary time
allotted to man; and has also endowed him with the means of preventing

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the ravages of time from affecting the body. Among other statements,
concerning the Count's astounding qualities, made to the Favourite by
Mme. v. Georgy after her first meeting with the Count after this lapse
of years, was that during her first stay in Venice, she received from
him an Elixir which for fully a quarter of a century preserved unaltered
the youthful charms she possessed at 25. Elderly gentlemen, whom Mme. de
Pompadour questioned concerning this peculiar incident, gave the
assurance that this was the truth, adding that the standing still in
youthful appearance of Mme. v. Georgy supported by the testimony of
these old men would make it appear still more probable.

"One evening at a party St. Germain accompanied several Italian airs for
the young Comtesse afterwards so celebrated under the name of Comtesse
de Geniis, then aged ten years.

"When she had finished singing, the Count said to her: 'in five or six
years you will have a very beautiful voice, which you will preserve a
long time; in order to perfect the charm you should also preserve your
beauty; this will be your happy fate between your 16th and 17th year.'

"'But, Count,' answered the child, while allowing her pretty fingers to
glide over the notes, 'that does not lie in any one's power.'

"'Oh yes,' answered the Count carelessly,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'only tell me
whether it would give you pleasure to remain at that age?'

"'Truly that would be charming.'

"'Well I promise it you.' And St. Germain spoke of other matters.

"Encouraged by the friendliness of this fashionable man, the Countess'
mother ventured to ask him if Germany was his Fatherland.

"'Madame,' said he, sighing deeply, 'there are some things of which one
may not speak. Suffice it to know that at seven years of age I was
wandering in woods, and that a price was set upon my head. On my
birthday my mother, whom I was not to see again, bound her portrait
round my arm; I will shew it to you.'

"At these words St. Germain threw up his sleeve and chewed the ladies
the miniature of an exceptionally beautiful woman, but represented in
rather a peculiar costume.

"To what date does this dress belong?' asked the young Countess. Without
answering this question, the Count put down his sleeve again, and
brought forward another topic. Every day one was surprised by a fresh
miracle in Count St. Germain's company. Some little time previously he
had brought Mme. de Pompadour a *bonbonnière* which was universally
admired. It was worked very beautifully in black enamel, and on the lid
was an agate. The Count begged

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the Marquise to place the *bonbonnière* near the fire; a few minutes
later she went to take it away. How great was the astonishment of all
present: the agate had disappeared, and in its place was to be seen a
pretty shepherdess in the midst of her flock.

"After the bonbonnière had again been placed near the fire, the
shepherdess disappeared, and the agate re-appeared." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)

This episode was written down in 1750, but the facts mentioned took
place in 1723. It must be carefully noticed that all the personal
friends of M. de St. Germain were in high position, chiefly Austrians
and Hungarians, all men of high birth and noble family, his own kith and
kin; among them we find Prince Kaunitz, Prince Ferdinand Lobkowitz, Graf
Zobor, Graf Maximilian Joseph von Lamberg, men of public position, and
well known families.

From 1737 to 1742, our mystic was at the Court of the Shah of Persia,
and it is here that he probably acquired his knowledge of diamonds and
precious stones, for according to his own very credible statement, it
was here that he began to understand the secrets of Nature; but his
arduously acquired knowledge leads us to infer a long period of careful
study. These hints

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

we gather from F. W. von Barthold <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) in
his interesting work, and they confirm the statement made by another
writer that M. de St. Germain had been pursuing his researches in
Persia.

We next find him in England, during the Jacobite Revolution of 1745,
suspected as a spy, and arrested. Two interesting extracts can here be
quoted.

The first is from Horace Walpole's <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17.md)
amusing letters to Sir Horace Mann, the British Envoy at Florence.
Writing on Dec. 9th, 1745, Walpole, after relating all the excitements
produced by the Revolution, says: "The other day they seized an odd man
who goes by the name of Count St. Germain. He has been here these two
years, and will not tell who he is or whence, but professes that he does
not go by his right name. He sings and plays on the violin wonderfully,
is mad, and not very sensible."

The second reference to this stay in England may be found in Read’s
*Weekly Journal or British Gazetteer*, May 17th, 1760, and is as
follows:

"The author of the Brussels' Gazette tells us that the person who styles
himself Comte de St. Germain, who lately arrived here from Holland,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

was born in Italy in 1712. He speaks German and French as fluently as
Italian, and expresses himself pretty well in English. He has a
smattering of all the arts and sciences, is a good chemist, a virtuoso
in musick, and a very agreeable companion. In 1746 \[1745 according to
Walpole\], he was on the point of being ruined in England. One who was
jealous of him with a lady, slipt a letter into his pocket as from the
young Pretender (thanking him for his services and desiring him to
continue them), and immediately had him taken up by a messenger. His
innocence being fully proved on his examination, he was discharged out
of the custody of the messenger and asked to dinner by Lord H.
\[Probably William Stanhope, Earl of Harrington, who was Secretary of
the Treasury and Treasurer of the Chamber at this date; he died 1760.\]
Those who know him will be sorry (says M. Maubert) to hear that he has
incurred the Christian king's displeasure."

This last paragraph alludes to what occurred at a later period.

After this date, 1745, it seems that M. de St. Germain went to Vienna,
and spent some time, in that city, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md)
and in 1755 went to India, for

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the second time, as we gather from a letter of his written to the Graf
von Lamberg, to which we shall refer again later on.

"I am indebted," he writes, "for my knowledge of melting jewels to my
second journey to India, in the year 1755, with General Clive, who was I
under Vice Admiral Watson. On my first journey I had only a very faint
idea of the wonderful secret of which we are speaking; all the attempts
that I made in Vienna, Paris and London, are worthless as experiments;
the great work was interrupted at the time I have mentioned."

Every writer, adverse or favourable, mentions and lays stress on the
wonderful power of improving precious stones that was possessed by M. de
St. Germain. Indeed almost every sort of art seems to have been more or
less known to him, judging by the many testimonies that we have on these
points.

Our next date, 1757, brings us to the period which is best known to the
public. M. de St. Germain was introduced at Paris by the then Minister
of War, Maréchal and Comte de Belle-Isle;

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

but as we have seen from the records already cited, neither M. de St.
Germain nor his family were unknown to Louis XV. Hence we do not wonder
at the cordial and gracious reception with which he met, nor can we be
astonished that the king assigned him a suite of rooms at his royal
Château of Chambord. Here there was a laboratory fitted up for
experiments, and a group of students gathered round our mystic. Among
these we find the Baron de Gleichen, and Marquise d’Urfé and also the
Princess of Anhalt-Zerbst, mother of Catherine II. of Russia. Madame de
Genlis, <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) speaking of him at this
period, says:--

"He was well acquainted with physics, and was a very great chemist. My
father, who was well qualified to judge, was a great admirer of his
abilities in this way. . . . He had discovered a secret respecting
colours which was really wonderful, and which gave an extraordinary
effect to his pictures. . . . M. de St. Germain never would consent to
give up his secret." Madame du Hausset relates in her memoirs an
interesting instance of his knowledge of precious stones.

"The King," says she, "ordered a middling-sized diamond which had a flaw
in it, to be

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

brought to him. After having it weighed, his Majesty said to the Comte:
'The value of this diamond as it is, and with the flaw in it, is six
thousand livres; without the flaw it would be worth at least ten
thousand. Will you undertake to make me a gainer of four thousand
livres?' St. Germain examined it very attentively, and said, 'It is
possible; it may be done. I will bring it to you again in a month.'

"At the time appointed the Comte de St. Germain brought back the diamond
without a spot, and gave it to the King. It was wrapped in a cloth of
amianthos, which he took off. The king had it weighed immediately, and
found it very little diminished. His Majesty then sent it to his
jeweller by M. de Gontaut, without telling him of anything that had
passed. The jeweller gave him nine thousand six hundred livres for it.
The King, however, sent for the diamond back again, and said he would
keep it as a curiosity. He could not overcome his surprise, and said M.
de St. Germain must be worth millions, especially if he possessed the
secret of making large diamonds out of small ones. The Comte neither
said that he could or could not, but positively asserted that he knew
how to make pearls grow, and give them the finest water. The King paid
him great attention, and so did Madame de Pompadour. M. du Quesnoy

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

once said that St. Germain was a quack, but the King reprimanded him. In
fact, his Majesty appears infatuated with him, and sometimes talks of
him as if his descent were illustrious."

One fact in this Parisian period must not be omitted; it appears from
statements made by Madame du Hausset, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md) Herr von Barthold and the Baron de
Gleichen, that a young Englishman, at that time resident in Paris, Lord
Gower by name, used to amuse himself and other idle people by passing
himself off as M. de St. Germain, so that most of the silly and foolish
tales about him, which ran riot in the gossiping "salons" of the period,
originated in the sayings of this idle young fellow. Various details of
his doings are to be found, but they are not worth further notice,
beyond the fact that M. de St. Germain had to bear the blame for
utterances which did not originate with him. Says Heer van
Sypesteyn: <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21.md) "Many of the wild stories
had probably nothing to do with M. de St. Germain and were invented with
the object of injuring him and making him ridiculous. A certain Parisian
wag, known as 'Milord Gower,' was a splendid mimic, and went into Paris
salons to

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

play the part of St. Germain--naturally it was very exaggerated, but
very many people were taken in by this make-believe St. Germain.

Meanwhile our philosopher worked on with those whom he was able to help
and teach in various ways. In 1760 we find him sent by Louis XV. to the
Hague on a political mission: the circumstances are variously told by
different writers. In April, 1760, we find M. de St. Germain passing
through East Friesland to England. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)
Next, in The London Chronicle of June 3rd, 1760, we have a long account
of a "mysterious foreigner," who had just arrived on England’s shores.
It is also said by one writer that he was well received at Court, and
many papers of the period mention him as a "person of note" to whom
marked attention was paid. <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23.md)

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

In the British Museum there are pieces of music composed by the Comte de
St. Germain on both his visits, for they are dated 1745 and 1760. It was
said everywhere, by enemies as well as by friends, that he was a
splendid violinist; he "played like an orchestra."

There is one most interesting souvenir of M. de St. Germain, which we
have had the good fortune to see. It is preserved in the library of the
grand old castle of Raudnitz in Bohemia, the property of Prince
Ferdinand von Lobkowitz.

Amongst the MSS. wad other treasures of that rare collection we found a
book of music composed by M. de St. Germain, from which, by the gracious
permission of the present Prince, we have had traced the inscription and
autograph. It runs thus:--

"Pour le Prince de Lobkowitz, Musique Raisonée, selon le bon sens, aux
Dames Angloises qui aiment le vrai goût en cet art.

"Par . . . de St. Germain."

The first letter, or letters, of the signature are quite undecipherable,
although they have been most carefully traced for us by the librarian at
Raudnitz.

We next have to pass on to St. Petersburg where, according to the words
of the Graf Gregor Orloff to the Margrave of Brandenburg-Anspach,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> M. de St. Germain
had "played a great part in their revolution." <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24.md)

He is mentioned as having been in St. Petersburg by another writer, or
rather in an anonymous book, the translation of the title of which runs:

"A few Words about the First Helpers of Catherine II." (xviii. Bk. 3, p.
343, 1869).

The writer has other details in her possession, but as they are at
present unverified and come rather as fragments, it is better to wait
for more accurate information, which she hopes to procure. Various
hints, however, lead us to suppose that M. de St. Germain passed some
time in Russia. As we have noticed already the Princess of
Anhalt-Zerbst, the mother of Catherine II., was very friendly to him;
indeed he passed much time at her house in Paris.

In 1763, however, we get a deeply interesting account of our philosopher
in the shape of a letter from the Graf Karl Cobenzl to the Prince
Kaunitz, the Prime Minister. The details it gives are so interesting
that it is better to quote it in full:--

"BRUSSELS, *April 8th*, 1763.

"GRAF KARL COBENZL TO KAUNITZ.

"It was about three months ago that the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

person known by the name of the Comte de St. Germain passed this way,
and came to see me. I found him the most singular man that I ever saw in
my life. I do not yet precisely know his birth; I believe, however, that
he is the son of a clandestine union in a powerful and illustrious
family. Possessing great wealth, he lives in the greatest simplicity; he
knows everything, and shows an uprightness, a goodness of soul, worthy
of admiration. Among a number of his accomplishments, he made, under my
own eyes, some experiments, of which the most important were the
transmutation of iron into a metal as beautiful as gold, and at least as
good for all goldsmith's work; the dyeing and preparation of skins,
carried to a perfection which surpassed all the moroccos in the world,
and the most perfect tanning; the dyeing of silks, carried to a
perfection hitherto unknown; the like dyeing of woollens; the dyeing of
wood in the most brilliant colours penetrating through and through, and
the whole without either indigo or cochineal, with the commonest
ingredients, and consequently at a very moderate price; the composition
of colours for painting, ultra-marine is as perfect as is made from
lapis lazuli; and finally, removing the smell from painting oils, and
making the best oil of Provence from the oils of Navette, of Colsat, and
from others, even

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

the worst. I have in my hands all these productions, made under my own
eyes; I have had them undergo the most strict examinations, and seeing
in these articles a profit which might mount up to millions, I have
endeavoured to take advantage of the friendship that this man has felt
for me, and to learn from him all these secrets. He has given them to
me, and he asks nothing for himself beyond a payment proportionate to
the profits that may accrue from them, it being understood that this
shall be only when the profit has been made. As the marvellous must
inevitably seem uncertain, I have avoided the two points which appeared
to me to be feared, the first, the being a dupe, and the second, the
involving myself in too great an expenditure. To avoid the first, I took
a trusty person, under whose eyes I had the experiments made, and I was
fully convinced of the reality and the cheapness of these productions.
And as to the second, I referred M. de Zurmont (which is the name that
St. Germain has taken) to a good and trustworthy merchant at Tournay,
with whom he is working, and I have had advances made which mount up to
very little, through Nettine, whose son, and the son-in-law of
Walckiers, are the persons who will carry on these manufactures, when
the profits of the first experiments place us in a position to establish

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

them, without risking anything of our own. The moment for deriving the
profit is already close at hand". <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

From another source, also, we hear of de St. Germain at Tournay, namely,
from the memoirs of Casanova.

"Casanova on the road to Tournay was informed of the presence of M. le
Comte de St. Germain, and desired to be presented to him. Being told
that the Comte received no one, he wrote him to request an interview,
which was granted under the restriction of coming *incognito*, and not
being invited to partake of food with him. Casanova found the Comte in
the dress of an Armenian with a long beard."

In this interview, M. de St. Germain informed Casanova that he was
arranging a *Fabrique* for the Graf Cobenzl <span
id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26.md).

From 1763, the date at which we have now arrived, up to 1769, we only
get the details of one year in Berlin, and this account comes from the
memoirs of M. Dieudonné Thiébault, who gives the following interesting
sketch:

"There came to Berlin and remained in that city for the space of a year
a remarkable man, who passed by the name of the Comte de St.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Germain. The Abbé
Pernety was not slow in recognising in him the characteristics which go
to make up an adept, and came to us with wonderful stories."

The author then goes on to relate that the Princess Amélie went to call
on him, and he also remarks that the old Baron Knyhausen was always
addressed by M. de St. Germain as "my son." Says our author:--

"Madame de Troussel was also anxious to see him. The Abbé Pernety
arranged the matter for her, and the Comte came to her house one evening
to supper. They chanced to make mention of the 'Philosopher's Stone,'
and the Comte curtly observed that most people who were in pursuit of
that were astonishingly illogical, inasmuch as they employed no agent
but fire, forgetting that fire breaks up and decomposes, and that
consequently it was mere folly to depend upon it for the building up of
a new composition. He dwelt much upon this, and finally led the
conversation back to more general topics. In appearance M. de St.
Germain was refined and intellectual. He was clearly of gentle birth,
and had moved in good society; and it was reported that the famous
Cagliostro (so well known for his mystification of Cardinal Rohan and
others at Paris) had been his pupil. The pupil, however, never reached
the level of his

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

master and, while the latter 'finished his career without mishap,
Cagliostro was often rash to the point of criminality, and died in the
prison of the Inquisition at Rome. . . . In the history of M. de St.
Germain, we have the history of a wise and prudent man who never
wilfully offended against the code of honour, or did aught that might
offend our sense of probity. Marvels we have without end, never anything
mean or scandalous." <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

The exact date of this visit to Berlin we cannot accurately give, but it
comes in before the stay in Venice, where he was found by the Graf Max
von Lamberg, <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28.md) at this time
Chamberlain to the Emperor Joseph II., and in his book we have some most
interesting details. The Graf finds M. de St. Germain under the name of
Marquis d’Aymar, or Belmare, making a variety of experiments with flax,
which he was bleaching to look like Italian silk; he had established
quite a large place, and had about a hundred workers. It would appear
that he then travelled with the Graf von Lamberg, for in a paper
published at Florence *Le notizie del Mondo* (July, 1770), under the
heading "News of the World," we find the following paragraph:--

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

"TUNIS, July 1770.

"The Comte Maximilian de Lamberg, <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md)
Chamberlain of M.M.L.L. II. and RR. having paid a visit to the Island of
Corsica to make various investigations, has been staying here since the
end of June, in company with the Signor de St. Germain, celebrated in
Europe for the vastness of his political and philosophical knowledge."

No further details are given of this journey, but we hear of M. de St.
Germain being in Mantua in the year 1773.

One important point which belongs to the year 1770 has been omitted. M.
de St. Germain was at Leghorn when the Russian fleet was there; he wore
a Russian uniform, and was called Graf Saltikoff by the Graf Alexis
Orloff. It was, moreover, in this year that he returned to Paris, on the
disgrace of the Prime Minister, his enemy, the Duc de Choiseul.

"All his abilities, especially his extraordinary kindness," says Heer
van Sypesteyn (*op. cit.*), "yes, even magnanimity, which formed his
essential characteristics, had made him so respected

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

and so beloved, that when in 1770, after the fall of the Duc de
Choiseul, his arch enemy, he again appeared in Paris, it was only with
the greatest expressions of sorrow that the Parisians allowed him to
depart. . . . M. de St. Germain came to the Hague after the death of
Louis XV (May 10th, 1774), and left for Schwalbach in 1774. This was the
last time he visited Holland. It cannot be ascertained with accuracy how
often he was there. . . . It is stated in a German biography that he was
in Holland in 1710, 1735, 1742, 1748, 1760 and 1773."

This last date brings us to the period that we have already noticed, the
stay at Triesdorf and at Schwalbach, where many alchemical and other
experiments were carried on by the Markgraf and the Comte. The former we
hear was proud of his medical knowledge, and obtained from the English
Consul at Leghorn a copy of the prescription for the "Russian Tea" or
"Aqua Benedetta," made by M. de St. Germain, which was used in the
Russian fleet, then in the Archipelago, to preserve the health of the
troops under the severe heat.

From 1774 until 1776 we have the visit to Triesdorf; in 1776 we hear of
our mystic in Leipzig, and the following year in Dresden; with these
periods we shall have to deal in our next paper. About 1779 we hear of
M. de St. Germain at

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hamburg; thence he
goes to Prince Karl of Hesse and stays with him for some time as his
loved and honoured guest. They began various experiments together,
experiments which were in all cases to be of use to the human race.
Writing of the knowledge and alluding to the early education of M. de
St. Germain by the Duc de Medici, the Prince says:

"This House (Medici), as is well known, was in possession of the highest
knowledge, and it is not surprising that he should have drawn his
earlier knowledge from them; but he claimed to have learned that of
Nature by his own application and researches. He thoroughly understood
herbs and plants, and had invented the medicines of which he constantly
made use, and which prolonged his life and health. I still have all his
recipes, but the physicians ran riot much against his science after his
death. There was a physician, Lossau, who had been an apothecary, and to
whom I gave 1,200 crowns a year to work at the medicines which the Comte
de St. Germain taught him, among others and chiefly his tea, which the
rich bought and the poor received gratis. . . . After the death of this
physician, disgusted by the talk I heard on all sides, I withdrew all
the recipes, and I did not replace Lossau." <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

Looking back at the record of all the powers and abilities possessed by
this great man, one point comes out clearly: either he was following
some definite plan, a plan not known to the general world, or he
wandered from place to place without aim, without family, without human
ties--a sorrowful life, truly, for so gifted a mortal, if this were so.
But since he appeared always contented, though knowing more than those
with whom he came into contact, always giving, and never in need, ever
helping, but never claiming aid--surely with such evidence it becomes
obvious to even the critical sceptic that some power, some plan, must
have guided the footsteps and life of the Comte de St. Germain. Indeed,
one of the writers before quoted says:

"Sometimes he fell into a trance, and when he again recovered, he said
he had passed the time while he lay unconscious in far-off lands;
sometimes he disappeared for a considerable time, then suddenly
re-appeared, and let it be understood that he had been in another world
in communication with the dead. Moreover, he prided himself on being
able to tame bees, and to make snakes listen to music." <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md)

The author seems unaware that the ordinary Yogis of India have this
power over snakes; and doubtless M. de St. Germain learned his

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

knowledge in India. The power, also, of communicating with the dead has
had more light thrown on it in this nineteenth century, thanks to those
who follow in the footsteps of M. de St. Germain and who are aiding in
the same great work. Nevertheless, although the above-quoted writer is
sceptical on these points, he awards a tribute of honest merit to our
philosopher worth noticing, when writing:--

"However this may be, St. Germain was in many respects a remarkable man,
and wherever he was personally known he left a favourable impression
behind, and the remembrance of many good and sometimes of many noble
deeds. Many a poor father of a family, many a charitable institution,
was helped by him in secret . . . not one bad, nor one dishonourable
action was ever known of him, and so he inspired sympathy everywhere,
and not least in Holland."

Thus clearly stands out the character of one who by some is called a
"messenger" from that spiritual Hierarchy by whom the world’s evolution
is guided; such is the moral worth of the man whom the shallow critics
of the earth call "adventurer."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[26:1](csg03.htm#fr_13) BLAVATSKY (H. P..md). *The
Secret Doctrine*, ii., p. 380. London, 1893.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[27:1](csg03.htm#fr_14.md) The Court of Louis XV.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[33:1](csg03.htm#fr_15.md) Taken from "*Chroniques,
de l’Œil de Bœuf*." Written down by the widowed Countess v. B. . . . .

<span id="fn_16"></span>[34:1](csg03.htm#fr_16) BARTHOLD (F. W. von.md),
*Die Geschichtlichen Persönlichkeiten in Jacob Casanova's Mémoiren*,
Vol. ii., Berlin 1846.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[34:2](csg03.htm#fr_17.md) *Letters of Horace
Walpole, Earl of Orford, to Sir Horace Mann*, ii., pp. 108, 109. London,
1833.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[35:1](csg03.htm#fr_18.md) "He had lived as a
prince in Vienna from 1745 to 1746, was very well received, and the
first minister of the Emperor \[Francis I.\], Prince Ferdinand von
Lobkowitz, was his most <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> intimate friend.
The latter introduced him to the French Maréchal de Belle-Isle who had
been sent by King Louis XV. on a special embassy to the Court at Vienna.
Belle-Isle, the wealthy grandson of Fouquet, was so taken with the
brilliant and witty St. Germain, that he persuaded him to accompany him
on a visit to Paris." *Historische Herinneringen*, van C. A. van
SYPESTEYN; ’sGravenhage, 1869.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[37:1](csg03.htm#fr_19) GENLIS (Comtesse de.md),
*Mémoires Inédits pour servir à Histoire des XVIII. et XIX. Siècles*, p.
88. Paris, 1825.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[39:1](csg03.htm#fr_20) HAUSSET (Madame du.md),
*Mémoires*, p. 148, seq.; Paris, 1824.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[39:2](csg03.htm#fr_21.md) *Op. cit.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[40:1](csg03.htm#fr_22.md) HEZEKIEL 1. *op. cit.*

<span id="fn_23"></span>[40:2](csg03.htm#fr_23.md) Gazette of the
Netherlands. Jan. 12th, 1761.

The Hague, Jan. 2nd.

"Letters from Paris state that when starting for this country, to which
he came without asking permission of the King, M. de St. Germain
returned his Red Ribbon: but it is practically certain that he has an
understanding with the King of Denmark.

"The 3rd.

"The so-called Count of St. Germain is an incomprehensible man of whom
nothing is known: neither his name nor his origin, nor his position; he
has an income, no one knows from whence it is derived; acquaintances, no
one knows where he made them; entry into the Cabinets of Princes without
being acknowledged by them!"

<span id="fn_24"></span>[42:1](csg03.htm#fr_24.md) *Curiositäten der
Literarisch-historischen Vor and Mitwelt*, pp. 285, 286. Weimar, 1818.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[45:1](csg03.htm#fr_25) ARNETH (A. Ritter von.md),
*Graf Philipp Cobenzl and seine Mémoiren*, p. 9, note. Wien, 1885.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[45:2](csg03.htm#fr_26.md) CASANOVA (F. Seingalt
de), *Mémoires:* vi., p. 76.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[47:1](csg03.htm#fr_27) THIÉBAULT (D..md), *Mes
Souvenirs de Vingt Ans de Séjour à Berlin*, iv., p. 83. Paris, 1813.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[47:2](csg03.htm#fr_28) LAMBERG (Graf Max von.md),
*Le Mémorial d’un Mondain*, p. 80. London, 1775.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[48:1](csg03.htm#fr_29.md) Some interesting matter
concerning the Comte de St. Germain is printed in a most interesting
book lately published, *Casanova et son temps*, by E. Maynial. One
entirely new and most interesting fact is given by him: a correspondence
has been found at Prague between the Comte de Lamberg and M. de St.
Germain and is now in the hands of a well known Austrian writer, who is
putting it in order; no doubt before long M. Gugitz will publish these
documents.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[50:1](csg03.htm#fr_30.md) HESSE-CASSEL, *Op.
cit.*, p. 135.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[51:1](csg03.htm#fr_31) SYPESTEYN (J. van.md)
*Historische Herinneringen*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Coming Danger](csg04.md)
