[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csg09)  [Next](csg11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKKM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Comte de St. Germain*, by Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

### APPENDICES

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### APPENDIX I

#### DOCUMENTS CONCERNING THE APARTMENT IN CHAMBORD OFFERED TO THE COMTE DE SAINT GERMAIN BY LOUIS XV. (1758).

NATIONAL RECORD OFFICE.

BOX--OLD REGIME--BLOIS AND CHAMBORD (WORKS) 1747-1760, O'.--1326.

*Letter from M. Collet, Manager of the Castles of Chambord and of Blois,
to the Marquis de Marigny, Director general of the Buildings*.

"Chambord, May 10th, 1758.

"Sir,

"I take advantage of the opportunity kindly offered me by the Comte de
St. Germain to accompany him to Paris in order to make some arrangements
concerning him as well as to transact some business which must be
finished by the end of next week. I hope that during those few days you
will allow me to wait upon you. . . .

*M. de Marigny to M. Collet*.

"Marigny, May 19th, 1758.

"Sir,

"I willingly give you permission to profit by the opportunity you have
in accompanying the Comte de St. Germain to come to Paris and stay here.
. . ."

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

*M. Collet to the Marquis de Marigny*.

"Chambord, Dec. 4th, 1758.

"Sir,

". . . the Comte de St. Germain arrived at Chambord on Saturday last
with two gentlemen. He will stay for five or six days and then goes to
Paris, having the kindness to take me with him. I hope as soon as I
arrive to have the honour, Sir. . . ."

*M. Collet to the Marquis de Marigny*.

"Chambord, May 8th, 1758.

"Sir,

". . . the Comte de St. Germain arrived here on Saturday last, this
being his second visit to Chambord: I had two rooms prepared for some of
his people as well as three more with kitchens and offices on the ground
floor for his accommodation. I have had no alterations made in this part
of the Castle but only urgent repairs."

Th*e Abbé de la Pagerie to M. de Marigny*.

"Blois, Aug. 12th, 1758.

"Sir,

"Not being fortunate enough to live sufficiently near to you to pay my
respects, I make up for it by writing in order that I may recall myself
to your memory. I am most grateful for the civilities with which you
have honoured me which will ever remain dear in my memory. I fully
appreciate them and none can be more devoted to you than myself.

"I often see M. Begon who has the honour to be known to you, he is quite
engrossed in his building operations which are very fine. M. de St.
Germain who arouses the curiosity of the whole country is constantly
expected: I have met him twice at dinner parties. He seems to

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

be a man of great knowledge and guided by principle. . . . Poor M. de
Saumery, the Governor of Chambord cannot last much longer, his leg is in
a terrible state. . . .

*Answer of M. de Marigny to the Abbé de la Pagerie*.

"Versailles, Sept. 2nd, 1758.

"I have received, Sir, the letter of the 12th inst. which you did me the
honour of writing to me. It is a fact that the King has granted to M. de
St. Germain lodgings in the Castle of Chambord, and you are right in
saying that he is a man of worth. I had the opportunity of convincing
myself of the fact in various interviews which I have had with him, and
real benefits are to be derived from his superior knowledge. . . .

<span class="small">The following correspondence took place with regard
to some dwellings round the Castle of Chambord.</span>

*M. de Saumery, Governor of the Castle, to the Marquis de Marigny*.

"Paris, April 15th, 1759.

" . . . I consider that these out-houses will do as lodgings for the use
of the workmen that the Comte de St. Germain will bring here for the
establishment of his Manufactory."

<span class="small">(On April 5th, 1759, an order had been given that
the said outhouses were to be rented for the benefit of the King, it
therefore does not seem that M. de St. Germain had the use of
them.)</span>

T*he Marquis de Marigny to the Comte de St. Florentin*.

"Versailles, Sept. 8th, 1760.

"Sir,

"I have the honour to inform you of an affair which took place in the
Court of Chambord Castle at half past

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

ten p.m. on the 26th ult., the principal actor in it being Sieur
Barberet (or Barberes), who is lodging there in the service of M. de St.
Germain. This latter has spent the year in Holland and went from thence
to England. . . ."

<span class="small">(It was an attempt by this man to stab M. Collet
with his sword.)</span>

*The Comte de St. Florentin to the Marquis de Marigny*.

"Versailles, Sept. 15th, 1760.

"I am writing to M. de Saumery, Governor of Chambord, to know why Sieur
Barberes who is in the service of M. de St. Germain remains in the
Castle?"

<span class="small">(The Sieur de Barberes appears to have tried to
reserve for his own use two gardens to which he had no title. M. de
Saumery seems to have secretly supported him in opposition to M.
Collet.)</span>

*M. Collet to the Marquis de Marigny*.

<span class="small">(Still with regard to the Barberes affair.)</span>

"Chambord, June 16th, 1760.

"The Sieur Barberes is still here. He is causing his followers to spread
a report that M. de St. Germain is in Paris and may be here within the
fortnight, and that what has been said about him will not be forgotten
and that the Gazette has purposely said what it has. . . .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix II. Correspondence Between The Duc De Choiseul And The
Comte D’Affry...](csg11.md)
