[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csg14)  [Next](csg16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0022NGKKM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Comte de St. Germain*, by Isabel Cooper-Oakley, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

### APPENDIX VI

#### ADDITIONAL MITCHELL PAPERS, VOL. XV. LORD HOLDERNESSE'S DESPATCHES, ETC., 1760. 6818, PLUT. P. L. CLXVIII., 1 (12).

(BY BLACKMORE)

*Hble. Maj. Gen. Yorke*.

<span class="small">(Secret.)</span>

Whitehall, March 21st, 1760.

Sir,

His Majesty commands me to acquaint you, that you are at liberty to read
my secret letter of this date to Count de St. Germain as often as he
desires it, and even to let him take such precautions as he may think
necessary to assist his Memory, in order to avoid all mistakes, in
conveying His Majesty's sentiments to the Court of France. HOLDERNESSE.

 

*Right Honourable Earl of Holdernesse*.

<span class="small">(Secret.)</span>

The Hague, March 25th, 1760.

My Lord,

I received this afternoon by Blackmore, the messenger, the honour of
your Lordship's secret letter of the 21st instant; it is unnecessary
perhaps for me to say that His Majesty's gracious approbation of my
conduct, in my conversation with Count St. Germain, was a great
consolation to me, and I return your Lordship my humble

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

thanks for the early information you have been so good as to give me of
it, for you will easily imagine some anxiety must attend the touching
upon such delicate points.

As I have now His Majesty's clear and ample instructions, I shall lose
no time in carrying them into execution, and have taken measures this
evening to let M. St. Germain know at Amsterdam, that I had some
particulars to acquaint him with in consequence of our former interview.
I shall not fail to explain very clearly what your Lordship prescribes,
and endeavor to bring him still closer to the point than I thought it
decent to insist upon before I knew His Majesty's sentiments; of all
that passes your Lordship shall be immediately informed, and in the
meanwhile I have the honour to remain with the greatest respect. . . .
JOSEPH YORKE.

 

*Hon. Gen. Yorke*.

<span class="small">(Secret.)</span>

Whitehall, March 28th, 1760.

Sir,

His Majesty is of opinion, as well from the tenor of your several
letters, as by other advices that have been received, that the Duc de
Choiseul is the least inclined to pacific measures of any of those who
are in credit at the Court of Versailles; and this in consequence of his
predilection for the alliance of the House of Austria; but that finding
the pacific party too prevalent to be openly withstood, he has
acquiesced in authorising Mr. d’Affry to talk in the manner he has done,
in order, at least, to have a share in the negociation for peace, if
that measure shall ultimately be determined, or to delay or disappoint
the measure itself, which he has endeavoured to do, by naming a person
whom he imagined could not be accepted here, and by even delaying the
departure of

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

that person, till the arrival of Mr. de Fuentes, which cannot be in less
than two months. But notwithstanding the notion which is entertained of
Mons. de Choiseul’s intentions, the King thinks it proper that the
overture made by Mr. d’Affry should not be discouraged, but that pretty
much the same answer should be returned to him as has already been given
to Mr. St. Germain, as you will observe by my other letter of this date,
there being no other difference but what relates to the new hint thrown
out by Mr. d’Affry, of sending a person to London. You will observe, the
King has no objection to it, if a proper person is chosen, but His
Majesty is determined not to receive one of his own subjects in quality
of negotiator from France, and of all others, Mr. Dunn would be the most
unfit for such a commission, and most obnoxious here. The precedent of
Mr. Wall is not analogous to the present case; but were it so, His
Majesty would still be at liberty to make this exception. It still
appears to His Majesty probable enough that Count St. Germain was
authorised to talk to you in the manner he has done, and that his
commission is unknown to the Duc de Choiseul: but as that minister will,
in all likelihood, communicate the answer returned to Mr. d’Affry to a
formal proposal, made, by order of his Court, to those persons who have
employed St. Germain, His Majesty thought proper that there should be an
exact uniformity in the answers given to both; as it is not the King's
intention to neglect either of these channels, you will therefore seek
the earliest opportunity of having an interview with Mr. d’Affry; and as
my other letter is wrote in an ostensible manner, you may read it all to
him, and even suffer him to take a note of what is underlined in it.

HOLDERNESSE.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

*To the Earl of Holdernesse*.

<span class="small">(Secret.)</span>

The Hague, March 28th, 1760.

My Lord,

Count St. Germain came to me yesterday morning in consequence of my
having acquainted him of my being desirous to speak to him; I was very
free in explaining to him the impossibility there was of entering any
farther into conversation with him, without he could produce an
authentic authority from, or in the name of, His Most Christian Majesty,
for negotiating upon the affair, which had made the subject of our last
conversation. I told him that I was avowed and he was not, and therefore
all he said might be disavowed at once; whilst what came from me would
bear the respectable mark of the character the King honoured me with. I
was as strong as possible upon this point, by way of introduction to the
communication I had leave to make to him, by the orders contained in
your Lordship's *secret* letter of the 21st inst.; and added that,
though it was evident there was more than one opinion at the Court of
France, yet, we could not treat with different persons, some of whom
were authorized and some not: that, as he knew the public step the King
had made, in opening a congress to His enemies, and since that, the
unprecedented mark of generosity His Majesty had showed in permitting me
to enter into *pourparlers* with M. d’Affry, it was needless to
expatiate upon the inutility and impropriety of farther measures on our
part, if he did not meet with a proper return.

Having premised this, I told him that out of regard to the person whose
letters he had communicated to me formerly. and from conviction that he
was sincere in desiring to advance so salutary a work, I had the King's

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

permission to communicate to him His Majesty's further sentiments about
a reconciliation with the Court of France: which ought to convince every
well-meaning person how sincere and how pure His Majesty's sentiments
are.

I accordingly communicated to him your Lordship's despatch, and at his
desire permitted him to minute down the latter part of it: *It is
therefore His Majesty's pleasure*, to the end.

Thus as we went in consequence of my orders; but as an incident had
happened since my last letter in relation to Count St. Germain, which M.
d’Affry (who knows nothing as yet of his conversation with me) had
talked of very freely, I was desirous to know how he told the story,
which is as follows: On Sunday, M. d’Affry received a courier from the
Duc de Choiseul, with orders to say that M. St. Germain was charged with
nothing from the Court of France, that he (d’Affry) should let him know,
that he should not frequent his house and even forbid him to come there.

This M. d’Affry acquainted St. Germain with, on Wednesday, upon his
waiting upon him in the name of the French King; but upon the latter's
desiring to see the order, because he could not imagine it came from His
Most Christian Majesty, M. d’Affry retracted that part and said it was
not absolutely from the King, but from the Duc de Choiseul, as Secretary
for Foreign Affairs. This was accompanied with great protestations of
regard, and at the same time, a desire to have some further conversation
with him the next day, which St. Germain declined, as unwilling to
expose the Ambassador to any second breach of orders, which he had
already broke thro’, by letting him in. M. d’Affry let drop, that this
order was occasioned by a letter St. Germain had wrote

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

to Mme de Pompadour, which as he phrased it, *lui avait fait une diable
d’affaire à Versailles*, tho’ he denied knowing anything of the contents
of the letter. St. Germain appealed to the proofs he had given him upon
his arrival, of his not being unavowed, declared his being perfectly
easy about the effect of any letter he had wrote, and in a manner set
the Ambassador at defiance, and took leave of him abruptly;
notwithstanding which M. d’Affry sent after him again yesterday, and
exprest his uneasiness at not having seen him, fearing he might be
indisposed; whether he has been there since, I don't know. This new
episode in the romance of Count St. Germain did not much surprise me,
nor should I wonder, tho’ he pretends to fear nothing, if some time or
other a powerful French Minister puts a stop to his travelling. I was,
however, curious to know what he proposed to do, in consequence of it,
and in what manner to proceed, in the business he had undertaken. Here I
think, for the first time, I caught him wavering a little: whether that
proceeded from any apprehension of the Duc de Choiseul’s resentment, or
from what he pretends,. the indifference for business on the part of the
French King, and the indecision of the Lady, I won't pretend to say: but
I found him in some doubt, whether he should not work, to bring the Duc
de Choiseul himself, with the system he supposed to be revelled in the
breasts of those in whose names he speaks.

It was not my business to lead him in such an affair, and therefore I
only threw out that that seemed to me a delicate affair at a distance,
and might embarrass those who protected him. I pushed him after that to
inform me in what manner he intended to make use of what I had leave to
show him, and whether he intended to go himself to Versailles. This he
declined for the present,

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

as he said, he might be sent back again immediately, and should only
give more umbrage; but he would send a servant of his with three
letters, one to marshal Belleisle, one to Mme de Pompadour, and a third
to the Comte de Clermont, Prince of the Blood, whom he mentioned for the
first time, as his intimate friend, and as one, who had the French
King's confidence, independently of his ministers, and who was a fast
friend to the coming to an immediate accommodation with England. To
remove all suspicion of his deceiving me, he did, in reality, produce a
letter from that Prince to him, of the 14th inst., wrote in the most
friendly and cordial terms, lamenting his absence, and wishing strongly
for his speedy return. From the two last mentioned persons he made no
doubt of receiving answers; from Mme de Pompadour, he did not, he said,
expect it, because it was a maxim with her, not to *write* upon state
affairs, tho’ it was absolutely necessary to inform her, that he was
strengthened, and able to work on her side.

All this is very plausible, but the effect is still to be proved. In the
meantime, it is plain, that these French ministers counteract each
other, and consequently are in different systems; which is to prevail,
don't depend upon us, but it can't be deterimental to His Majesty's
service, that his sentiments should be known to the Court of France, by
any channel they think fit to receive them thro’.

M. d’Affry's compliments, after his acquainting St. Germain with the Duc
de Choiseul’s orders, are as extraordinary as the rest, especially as he
knows very well his connexion with marshal Belleisle, and had seen the
French King's passport to him. All this mystery will be unveiled by
degrees, and I shan't fail to inform your Lordship of the further lights
I can collect; I let Mr.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

St. Germain know that he or any other person, duly authorised, was equal
in England, the chief objection we had at present, and what stopt the
whole, was the want of a proper and sufficient credential. . . .

JOSEPH YORKE.

 

*To the Earl of Holdernesse*.

<span class="small">(Secret.)</span>

The Hague, April 8th, 1760.

My Lord,

It is rather to show my attention to all the material letters your
Lordship honoured me with, on the 28th past, than from anything very
particular I have to trouble you with, that I take the liberty to
acknowledge by themselves the honour of your Lordship's secret letters
of that date, and of the 1st instant.

I must acquaint you, however, that I spoke very plainly to Mr. d’Affry
upon the subject of Mr. Dunn . . . and explained to him in the strongest
and fullest manner why it would be impossible to receive him as a
negotiator from the Court of France.

I must do the French Ambassador the justice to say, that he entered into
the reasons alleged, but endeavoured to persuade me that the Duc de
Choiseul could not mean to propose a man, whom he had not conceived a
good opinion of; but that he hoped upon the representations he should
now make to him, in form, that that would be waived.

Mr. St. Germain is still at the Hague, but has not as yet produced
anything new from France, and it is highly probable that after the noise
his first letters made, nobody will care to risk a direct correspondence
with him, which may cross the Duc de Choiseul’s measures; Mr. d’Affry
pretends that that French Minister is

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

desirous of Peace, because His Most Christian Majesty is, and that it is
serving his Master according to his wishes. Indeed, the reserve the
French Ambassador observes towards the Ministers of their Allies here,
the awkward uneasiness he shewed lest they should know we had met, and
several expressions he let drop about them and their Courts, would
incline me to think, that Peace is the object of France, and that the
pacific party is the most prevalent: but for the proof of that we must
wait for the answer to the Communication I have just made, which is so
fair and so confidential, that if they don't come into it, there cannot
remain the least doubt hereafter of their determination to try the fate
of the Campaign.

I am infinitely obliged to your Lordship for encouraging me with the
assurance of His Majesty's approbation of my conduct, and I humbly
recommend myself to the indulgence of His Majesty and of His Servants,
in the course of this delicate affair. . . .

JOSEPH YORKE.

 

*From Mr. Mitchell to Lord Holdernesse*.

Head Quarters at Freyburg,  
Thursday, March 27th, 1760.

My Lord,

Twice I had the honour of your Lordship's Courier of the 4th by Badmore,
and of the 14th by a Prussian Courier; I have communicated the same to
His Prussian Majesty's friendship, and unreserved confidence. He said he
would follow the King's example. . . .

The King of Prussia thinks, that nothing certain can be concluded from
all that has passed between Gen. Yorke and the French Ambassador, to the
4th inst., but he added he was in daily expectation of hearing something

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

from France, that might be depended upon; that he already had had
accounts, that the person sent from the Court of Gotha had been well
received: that the Bailli de Froulay, immediately upon reading his
letter, went to Versailles; and that he had promised to the emissary, to
procure him a permission for sending of expresses and couriers and
passports for himself to return, when it should be thought proper: he
concluded with saying that so soon as he had any certain notice of what
was passing at *Paris*, he would send a courier directly to England.

The King of Prussia was pleased then to give me some account of a most
extraordinary conversation, which Count St. Germain had had with General
Yorke, on the 15th, at the Hague, the particulars of which need not be
mentioned, as your Lordship will have them more authentically: he
observed that though the manners were of the most uncommon kind, yet
Gen. Yorke had done . . . to give your Lordship an immediate account of
what had passed, that it was very probable the Count may have been
employed in this secret commission by the marshal Belleisle, without the
knowledge of the other French Ministers as the Cabinet is extremely
divided. He asked me if I was acquainted with this St. Germain, who, as
he was informed, had been some time in England. I answered I had seen
him there, but did not imagine he would ever become a negotiator. His
Prussian Majesty answered that he heard the Count had found a way to
insinuate himself into the good graces of the French King, whom he had
amused with some experiments in Chemistry, and that the French King had
made him a present of the *Château de Chambord*. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md)

A. MITCHELL.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

*Letter from Mr. Mitchell to Lord Holdernesse*.

Freyburg, April 9th, 1760.

My Lord,

His Prussian Majesty mentioned me a letter from Monsieur de Bouillé,
lately intercepted, in which that minister says that the French Court
are inclined to peace; that the disputes in Canada will be settled to
the liking of the English; to whom, likewise, Minorca will be restored,
and Cape Breton to the French, but he hesitates much about the cession
of Guadeloupe. He also said that Count d’Affry had, by order of the Duc
de Choiseul, disavowed to the allied ministers, everything that Count
St. Germain had said to General Yorke; and that the Court of Vienna, at
the solicitation of the French Ambassador, had at last consented to send
Ministers to the congress; but Kaunitz hinted they should be empowered
to do nothing.

A. MITCHELL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[228:1](csg15.htm#fr_86.md) Compare with Appendix
I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix VII. Miscellaneous Papers From English Record
Office](csg16.md)
