[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# TEMIYA JÂTAKA VATTHU

### (Jâtaka 541)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

 

###### \[London, The Royal Asiatic Society\]

#### \[1893\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

###### {circumflexes represent macrons in this file}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

> ART. IX.--*Temiya Jâtaka Vatthu*. From the Burmese. By R. F. ST.
> ANDREW ST. JOHN, M.A., Wadh. Col. Oxon.

THIS Jâtaka stands No. 541 in the Ceylon list under the title of
Mûgapakkha or "The dumb cripple." The Burmese, however, prefer to call
it by the name of the Prince, he is the hero of the story. It is the
first of the ten greater Jâtaka, and, unlike the Bhûridatta, contains
little or no folk-lore, but illustrates the value of asceticism.

   According to the Nidâna-kathâ, p. 57, of Professor Rhys Davids'
"Birth Stories," this Jâtaka is said to be a state in which the Buddha
acquired "The Perfection of Resolution," according to these words:--

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top">266.</td>
<td>Father and mother I hated not, reputation I hated not.<br />
But omniscience was dear to me, therefore was I firm in duty.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   This is the eighth perfection or Pârami called "Adhi.t.t.hânam" or
fixity of purpose.

   The Mâhâ Janaka which I translated in the Indian Magazine, and which
has also been translated by Mr. Taw Sein Ko, is on the same subject.

   There is one point to which I would draw special attention. At page
53 of the "Birth Stories" it is stated in the Nidâna-kathâ:--

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top">252.</td>
<td>   So the men, perfect in every part and destined to Buddhahood,<br />
   Traverse the long road through thousands of millions of ages.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top">253.</td>
<td>   They are not born in Hell nor in the space between the worlds;<br />
   They do not beoome ghosts torn by hunger and want.<br />
   And they do not become small animals even tho' born to sorrow.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

|       |                                                                            |
|-------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 257\. |    Though they dwell in heaven they are not born to the unconscious state. |

   Yet in this Jâtaka it is related that the Bodhisat had been 8000
years in the Ussada Hell.

   There is also another point which requires explanation.

   These last *ten* are always called the great Jâtaka, but they are not
all longer than the others.

   For instance, Kha.n.dahâla (545), or, as the Burmese call it, Canda
Kumâra, is quite short, and the Sivi Râjâ (502?) is long.

   The style of the Sivi, which is on the Pârami of Alms-giving, is also
similar to some of those in the last ten.

   These longer Jâtaka, and some of a similar character, should, I
think, be classified separately from those which appear to be folk-lore
tales of an earlier date, adapted to Buddhism by Gotama himself or the
early teachers.

   The drift of this Jâtaka also appears to be directed against the
Brahminical idea that a man ought to be the father of a family and enjoy
life prior to becoming an ascetic, and though the chief discourse is on
the duties of friendship, the end of the story points out that the
ascetic life can not be embraced too soon, and that now is the time, now
is the day of salvation.

   The Burmese version here translated was written in the year A.D.
1787, during the reign of Bo-Dawe, or Badun-min, the grandson of
Aloung-pharâ, when he was engaged in building the huge unfinished pagoda
at Mingun (*vide* Phayre's Hist. p. 218). It was printed in Rangoon, at
the Hanthâwati Press, in A.D. 1888.

   I have endeavoured to render the only Pali gâtâ given faithfully to
the meaning, though the translation may be somewhat free and the metre
different.

 

TEMI ZÂT-TAWE-GYEE, *alias* MÛGAPAKKHA JÂTAKA VATTHU.

   On a certain occasion the Sangha of disciples and Rahans (Araham)
were in the hall of assembly praising the Lord's (Gotama Buddha)
"perfect abnegation of the world" <span id="page_359">p. 359</span>
(nikkhama-pâramî). The Lord came forth from his cell (gandha ku.ti,
perfumed chamber), and seating himself on his dais said: "My children,
what were you conversing about just before I came out?" and his
disciples answered: We were praising your 'Great Abnegation,' and unable
to do so sufficiently."

   On hearing this the most excellent Lord said: "My children and
disciples ye do well in praising that great renunciation made by me who
can now never incur a bad transmigration, and who have arrived at the
summit of all things after being brought to a right frame of mind
through beholding 'the four warnings' (nimitta); but much more ought ye
to praise that most excellent virtue (pârami) which enabled me, in a
former birth, when I was the son of a king, of whom the Brahmans had
prognosticated that I should become a universal monarch, at a very early
age, to renounce that kingdom, through being terrified by words spoken
by my father to certain thieves."

   On the request of his disciples he then related the following
Jâtaka:--

 

CHAPTER I.

   Long ago in the city of Bârâ.nasi, in the kingdom of Kâsi, a prince
reigned called the Râjâ of Kâsi. He was a giver of offerings, a man of
strong religious feelings, ever open-handed and ready to assist,
self-denying, not harsh to his relations and attendants, long-suffering,
slow to anger, not oppressive, straightforward and tender, ever acting
in accordance with the "ten laws" which ought to guide the conduct of
kings. His concubines numbered sixteen thousand, and his chief Queen was
Candâ, the daughter of Madda Râjâ of the city of Sâgala,<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> in the country of Madda, one of the
most lovely of women.

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Sâkala or Sangala in the Panjab.\]

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

   She did everything that her lord and master desired, and delighted in
making religious offerings, never neglecting the fast days. However,
notwithstanding all this, not one of the royal ladies from the
Aggamahesi (chief queen) downwards was blest with an offspring, and the
people of Bârâ.nasi murmured and said: "Our Râjâ has no heir to carry on
his royal line, and we know not whether the person whose lot it may be
to succeed to the throne of our protector may be well disposed: let us
assemble in the plain in front of the palace and represent to the Râjâ
that it is his duty to pray for a son." So they came together to the
gate of the palace and cried, saying: "O most excellent and glorious
Lord, who ever reignest in accordance with the 'ten laws,' the sun that
rises and casts its beams over the eastern continent and with its light
dispels the darkness, for twelve hours passes towards the northern
continent; when night arrives the circle of the moon, when full, like a
lesser sun, lightens us with its rays; so, too, in this city of
Bârâ.nasi, we, who are enlightened by your majesty's glorious
brightness, see no signs of a son who shall brighten us like the moon,
and are filled with doubt and anxiety: we, therefore, beg that you will
offer up prayer for a son."

   The King hearing their cry asked his ministers the meaning thereof,
and they told him, whereupon the King said: "My people, it is well; in
accordance with your supplications I will cause my Queen to pray for a
son; be not afraid, a son will be born." Having thus comforted and
dismissed his subjects, he sent for Queen Candâ and all his ladies, and
said: "Royal ladies, the people of the country demand an heir apparent
and I have none to give them, go, therefore, and pray for a scion of
royal race; let each one pray to her especial deity."<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

   The 16,000 ladies, therefore, made supplications and offerings to
their various deities, but no son or daughter was

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. It is odd that it never occurred to any one that the fault was most
probably the King's.\]

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span> born to any one of them, and report
was accordingly made to the King.

   Then the King sent for Candâ Devi, and said: "O Lady, if the abode be
not pure what glorious being will enter therein? If our actions be not
excellent neither a Deva nor any other glorious being will attach
himself: by the virtue of original merit, however, and by being
thoroughly imbued with religious feeling, such as fasting and other good
practices, your prayers will be fulfilled,"

   Queen Candâ therefore, on the next day of the full moon, kept a most
solemn fast, and at night, instead of lying on a couch, lay on the
floor, meditating on the purity with which she had performed her
religious duties. At break of day she made the following prayer:--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"That I've kept my fast unbroken<br />
May a son born be the token."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Thereupon, through the power of the Queen's merit, Sakka's throne, the
"Pu.n.dukambala" stone, became hard,<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> and looking round to see the reason he
perceived that it was on account of Candâ Devi's prayer.

   He then considered whether there was in Tâvatismâ any Deva worthy to
be her son, and saw the Bodhisat Deva.

   Now the Bodhisat, before he became a Deva in Tâvatismâ, in his third
state of existence, had reigned in Bârâ.nasi for twenty years, and owing
to his merit being interfered with, had not acted strictly in accordance
with the "ten laws," so, for eight thousand years after the reckoning of
men, he had been boiled in the hell called Ussada,<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> and from that hell went to Tâvatismâ.
At this moment the Bodhisat had been in Tâvatismâ 16,000,000 years,
which is the space of a Deva's lifetime, and on account of unexpended
merit was about to transfer himself to the Yâma Deva region, which is
still higher. Sakka therefore repaired to the palace of the Bodhisat,
with the intention of asking him to become the son of Candâ Devi, and
said: "O Deva,

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Sometimes the throne becomes hard and at others hot.

2\. Childers offers no expanation of this word. It is one of the lesser
Hells.\]

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span> who art even equal to me in glory, if
thou goest to the upper Deva regions, as it is now thy purpose, the
advantage will not be great, but if thou wouldst go to the country of
men thou wilt probably obtain immense merit and be a benefit to others.
Just now, in the country of Kâsi, the Queen Candâ has prayed for a son
endowed with the most excellent desire to perform good works." Sakka
thus prevailed on him to take birth with Queen Candâ, and, at the same
time, caused five hundred other Devas, who were near their time of
change, to take birth as sons of the nobles of Kâsi, so as to be his
companions.

   The Bodhisat having consented, passed instantly from Tâvatismâ and
took birth in the womb of Candâ Devi. At the same instant, like the
flash of a "varajina," the Queen knew that she had conceived a son in
answer to her prayer, and informed the King.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

   The King, overcome with joy, ordered that she should be guarded most
carefully.

   In the course of ten months (lunar) she brought forth a son, and on
the day of his birth the whole of the country was overcast with clouds,
and there was an abundant rain.

   Now all the people were assembled together before the gate of the
palace to express their congratulations, and the King, in his delight,
cried out: "I have gotten a son; rejoice all of you," and the nobles and
people, equally delighted, answered: "Mahâ râjâ, were we not all as
tillers of the earth without seed, and were we not bowed to the ground
with fear lest food should be wanting; now that we have been wetted by
this auspicious shower, felt its cooling influences, and obtained a
royal heir, destined to obtain great merit, who indeed will not
rejoice?"

   The King then sent for the Senapati (commander of the army) and said:
"A son has been born unto me, and therefore, just as kings of the
universe, when they obtain a very precious thing, guard it with
innumerable attendants, so

<span class="small"></span>

\[1 The "varajina " is a kind of celestial weapon that can penetrate
through anything with its flash. I can find no mention of it in
Childers. It is evidently a form of vajira, the thunderbolt of Indra.\]

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span> my son must have a guard of companions
to be brought up with him. If, after searching through all the houses of
the nobility, you find any that have been born this day, let a list of
them be made and set before me." So search was made, and a list of five
hundred noble children was sent in. Suitable dress and ornaments were
presented to each, and they were well looked after.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

   And for the youthful Bodhisat they searched out 240 young wetnurses
with good breasts of milk, pleasant and sweet; four were appointed for
each hour of the sixty hours of the day and night; one to hold the baby,
one to wash it, one to dress it, and the other to fondle and play with
it.<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup>

   Now this is a list of women who are not faultless--

   1. *The tall woman*. A child that is suckled by a tall woman, being
at some distance from her breast when lying in her arms, lengthens its
neck by stretching up.

   2. *The over-short woman*. The flesh of her breast is constantly
pressing on the child's face when it is sucking and its neck becomes
short.

   3. *The thin woman*. The flesh of the breasts being lean her bones
hurt the child.

   4. *The fat woman*. Her flesh is always in a state of quivering and
the child's legs become weak and tremulous.

   5. *The long-breasted woman*. Her breast is constantly pressing on
the child's nose and it becomes flattened.

   6. *The black woman*. Her milk is too cold.

   7. *The white woman*. Her milk is too hot.

   8. *The woman who coughs*. Her milk is acid and pungent.

   9. *The woman who has a difficulty in breathing*. Her milk is bitter.

   The King provided also an infinity of various articles for the
child's use, and bestowed great gifts on Candâ Devi.

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. This custom is often mentioned. Was it universal in India? Can it
be connected with the slaughter of the innocents?

2\. Nari, commonly used for an hour, is really the sixtieth part of
twenty-four hours, and the same as Pali nâ.li, a measure for holding
water, and used in measuring time. It contains four pâda, according to
the Burmese. Childers is not decided on the point. That *nâri* should
become *nâ.li* is natural, as the Burmese cannot pronounce the letter r,
and substitute y or l for it. It is not easy to see how *nâ.li* became
*nâri*.\]

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

   When the naming day arrived all the Brahmans who were skilled in
omens were assembled and fed, and the King thus addressed them: "O
Parohits, after examining my son's characteristic marks, tell me plainly
whether he will be free from calamities; let nothing be concealed from
me."

   The Brahmans, after careful examination, answered: "O Râjâ, your son
is undoubtedly possessed of the signs of future greatness. There is no
cause of danger apparent. He ought to be a universal ruler." On hearing
this the King was delighted, and, having overwhelmed them with gifts,
said: "Sirs, I am about to give a name to my son; on the day of his
birth there was an omen of great happiness to all creatures, for the
whole country of Kâsi was overspread with clouds and a gentle rain fell
upon it; from myself downwards all the nobles and people were wet by the
rain; and since he was born, when the hearts of all my people were
saturated with peace, he must not be called after a family name like
others, let him be named Temiya (fr. *temeti* 'to moisten')."

   About one month after this, the nurses, after washing and dressing
the prince, carried him to the King, who took him in his arms and sat
under the palace portico. Just then four thieves who had been arrested
were brought before the King, and he, in order to terrify evil-doers,
said: "As for you, thorns of the country, you villains, one of you shall
receive a thousand stripes with rods covered with shark's teeth; one
shall be sent to prison in irons; the third shall be done to death by
gashing with spears; and the fourth shall be impaled."

   The little prince, on hearing this order given in a terrible voice,
thought thus: "This manner of deciding cases is not right. I have
evidently not freed myself from the fringe of my third existence. If
through enjoying my father's royal estate I again fall into Hell by
doing some bad act, the burden will be too heavy for me."

   On the third day after the passing of this decision Prince Temiya was
put to sleep under the shade of a white <span id="page_365">p.
365</span> umbrella, and after a little woke up. Turning his eyes
upwards he gazed at it and saw that it was a royal umbrella. Thereupon
remembering that he had been obliged to undergo the pains of Hell
through having been King, he was filled with dread, and, with the sound
of the terrible decision still ringing in his ears, fearing that he
would have to become king, he thought thus: "How is it that I have been
born in the house of this cruel thief-slaughterer?" Then, by means of
his accumulated knowledge of former existences, having looked back and
cleared away the haze, he saw that he had come from Tâvatimsâ, and
again, considering as to what existences he had passed through, he saw
that he had been boiled in Hell, and remembered that it was for bad
actions done when he was once King of Bârâ.nasi; fearing that he should
constantly be born again amongst men, on account of those deeds which he
would be obliged to perform when king, he thought, "I see that I am not
free from the five dangers. On account of having enjoyed the pleasures
of royalty for twenty years, I had to undergo that number multiplied by
4000, even 80,000 years in misery, and since in the unpeaceful state of
kingship one has to put down robbers with a harsh and cruel hand, how
can one be pure? How can one cleanse one's self from impurity? Born in
this powerful thief-killer's house, which I have lighted upon, even I,
at the tender age of hardly thirty days, have seen enough to crush my
very heart's flesh, and have heard my father utter words not fit to be
heard. If through a desire to inherit my father's estate I again become
king, I shall a second time fall into the whirlpool and revolve like a
stick of firewood."

   Prince Temiya being thus troubled by his meditations whilst lying
half comatose under the umbrella, the fairy who guarded it, with the
affection of one who had been a mother in long past ages, seeing the
Bodhisat in this pitiable condition took the form of his mother and
said: "My little darling, by what thoughts are you disturbed? Do not be
troubled by thinking about dreadful things; your mother is watching, and
will not every wish be fulfined? Darling, if you <span id="page_366">p.
366</span> really desire to escape from this pomp and vanity do not
disclose your abilities, but simulate feebleness. Though you are not
weak, appear to be so; though not deaf, feign deafness; and though your
mouth is perfect, pretend to be dumb. Keep up these appearances with
determination."

   On hearing the fairy's words Prince Temiya took courage and answered,
"O Fairy, I will indeed follow your advice. In their wish to see me
bloom into regal magnificence, my father and mother desire only their
own welfare and follow not my desires; since they do not plant for their
own advantage and pleasure, and do not clear away the obstacles which
hinder my desires, and since you point out to me the path which leads to
great and undiminished benefits to be sought for in countless
existences, I see the way clear before me, a path, too, which is in
accordance with my own wishes."

   Having thus determined, he refused to take suck, and endured the
pangs of hunger without wailing.

   The nurses not being able to understand his extraordinary condition
informed his mother, and when she saw the little prince not thirsting
for milk, motionless, and with wide, staring eyes, endeavoured to amuse
him; but he remained fixed and immovable, and she could not form any
conjecture as to what was the matter with him, and caused the Brahmans
to examine him.

   Though the Parohits hunted through all their books they could see no
reasons for his state, and informed the King that they thought he had
fixed his mind on some particular object, which would pass off in time.
The child, however, remained in the same condition, and his mother in
great grief cried out: "My darling wants his milk. I will myself suckle
him." However, only when milk was forced down his throat would he take
it. He cried not out as other children, but lay motionless with unclosed
eyes, noticing nothing, and steadily persevering in his determination.

   The nurses consulted together and said: "Our prince remains
immovable, like one who is impotent, dumb, and <span id="page_367">p.
367</span> deaf; but his feet and hands are not those of an impotent
child, nor is his lower jaw like that of one who is born dumb; neither
are the protuberances behind and in front of his ears like those of one
who is deaf; some wise man ought to be able to discover what is the
matter with him." They therefore addressed the King thus: "Your royal
son is more than a month old, and it is not right that other means
should be tried; let us try him with milk for a year, and if there be no
difference we will use other tests." So they kept him for some days
without milk, but the Bodhisat, though enduring terrible thirst, through
fear of Hell, cried not for milk, but bore it patiently,

   Then the Queen, in her agony, caused him to be fed with milk. Thus
they again and again tested him for a whole year.

   At the end of that time the nobles made report to the King, and he
directed that other means should be resorted to.

   *2nd Test*. Now it is the nature of children who are just one year
old to bite everything that comes in their way, whether it be good or
bad: so the prince was laid in the courtyard of the palace surrounded by
his 500 foster-brothers, and all sorts of eatables were spread round
them, so that each might take what he pleased; people were hidden round
about to observe them. The 500 companions, as soon as they saw the
sweetmeats, laid hands on them, and stuffed them into their mouths, but
the Bodhisat thus chastened himself saying: "Child Temiya, from earliest
existences, of which the beginning is not apparent, thou hast eaten,
times and again things both pleasant and sweet; in future existences
also thou shalt doubtless rejoice, but if in the period before thou art
released from the whirlpool of ages thou desirest wealth and hell-fire,
these enjoyments are the entrance to that path; if, however, thou
desirest to escape Hell take not these cakes,"

   So he remained motionless and took them not, nor did be even turn his
eyes towards them.

   His mother and the nurses did all they could to coax him to take
them, but he remained as one who is impotent, deaf, <span
id="page_368">p. 368</span> and dumb. Only when they chewed them and
thrust them into his mouth did he swallow them. Thus they tempted him
again and again for a whole year.

   *3rd Test*. When he was over two years old the nobles again consulted
and said: "When children are two years old, and their teeth are hard,
they try to get all kinds of fruits, sweet or sour." So they tried him
and the other children as before with fruit. But though the other
children ate them and fought tor them, the Bodhisat remained in the same
condition without wavering.

   *4th Test*. Now when children have passed their third year they are
accustomed, after their sex and station, to play with various toys, so,
in accordance with his station, they placed a number of images of
elephants, horses, bulls, goats, birds, etc., made of gold and silver,
in the courtyard; but though the other children readily played with them
and fought for them, the Bodhisat kept himself in subjection and took no
notice.

   *5th Test*. When children have turned four they begin to take
pleasure in various dishes of tood, so all kinds of dishes were set
before the children.

   The Bodhisat, however, chastened his body, saying: "Temiya, in the
past ages thou hast gone through, thou hast enjoyed foods like these
without stint; in some existences they could not be obtained by reason
of famine and poverty, and in some existences thou hast avoided them,
and though it would be impossible to reckon the times thou hast enjoyed
them or not enjoyed them, yet this once also remain firm to thy purpose,
and, by avoiding these good things which are set before thee, attain the
object of thy desire."

   *6th Test*. A large shed was constructed, and the Bodhisat with his
companions placed therein to play; all of a sudden, when they were not
aware, fire was applied to the roof, and it blazed up. All the other
children fled in terror, but the Bodhisat remained immovable, reflecting
that it would be better to scorch in the present than to suffer the fire
of Avici. At the last moment the nurses and attendants <span
id="page_369">p. 369</span> rushed in and dragged him out. This was done
again and again during that year.

   *7th Test*. In the seventh year they determined to try and terrify
him with elephants, trained for the purpose. The other children, seeing
the elephants coming, fled away, screaming, but Prince Temiya remained
undisturbed, thinking it better to die by the violence of the elephant,
rather than undergo the punishment of Hell.

   *8th Test*. The Bodhisat and children were placed in a shed, and all
kinds of poisonous snakes let loose upon them, but still he remained
unmoved.

   *9th Test*. Having failed to terrify him, it was determined to have a
grand performance of dancers, jugglers, wrestlers, etc., with all sorts
of musical instruments, but Temiya took no apparent notice of it, saying
to himself, "Temiya, when thou wast suffering in Hell did'st thou for
one instant enjoy happiness? If thou dost not look at this entertainment
thou wilt not be more miserable than when in Hell, why then be shaken in
thy purpose?"

   *10th Test*. At the end of the ninth year they tried to frighten him
by a display of weapons. So a man was sent into his chamber with his
loins girt and a drawn sword, which he brandished, saying: "No person
who is unfit to be associated with can be allowed to remain in the
palace of the King of Kâsi. They say there is such an one here amongst
you. Where is he that I may at once cut off his head?" All the other
children fled in terror, but the Bodhisat remained without flinching,
even when the man aimed at him with his sword.

   *11th Test*. This test was made by beating enormous drums, to see
whether he was deaf.

   *12th Test*. Persons were sent into his room at night with covered
lanterns, which were suddenly uncovered.

   *13th Test*. The Bodhisat was smeared from hand to foot with
molasses, and exposed so that mosquitos and flies. could settle all over
him, and sting him with their probosces; but he strengthened himself,
saying, "When I was in the Ussada Hell the keepers pierced me with their
spears, <span id="page_370">p. 370</span> the hell-dogs and birds pecked
at me and bit me, but this torture from the flies and mosquitos is far
better; I will bear it bravely."

   *14th Test*. After he was fourteen years old no one was, allowed to
bathe or cleanse him, but he was allowed to lie in his own ordure.
However, he bore up against it patiently. The attendants urged him to
get up and attend to himself, but he continued to endure it, saying,
"Temiya, this stench is easy to bear, but the stench of Hell extends for
a hundred yujanas."

   After he had been left in this state for a long time the attendants
again washed him.

   *15th Test*. A fire was made under his couch, but, though his body
was covered with blisters, he bore it bravely, saying, "This fire is
easier to bear than that of Avici."

   When his father and mother saw him in this terrible state they were
exercised in their minds, and ordered the fire to be removed, and his
mother, sitting near, said: "Dear son Temiya, I know well that thou art
neither deaf nor dumb; thy ears and limbs are not like those of an
impotent person, nor art thou a son born in the ordinary manner, but
conceived after much fasting and prayer: great signs and prodigies were
manifested at thy birth, and the Parohits declared that thou hadst all
the characteristic marks of a universal monarch; if thou still
continuest to pretend to be deaf and dumb we shall be put to great shame
amongst the monarchs of Jambudipa; only give permission and we shall
escape from their revilings; do not break our hearts, but whilst we
three are alone together tell us in secret what it is that thou
desirest." But though his father and mother besought him again and again
with tears and caresses he remained unmoved.

   *16th Test*. Now certain of the Parohits consulted together and said:
"When the deaf and dumb get to this age and come in contact with an
object of desire, they do not fail to long for it, and when they see
that which is beautiful there are none who will not gaze on it. At the
proper time flowers must open, and when youths arrive at maturity they
are given <span id="page_371">p. 371</span> pleasure, and though by
reason of wisdom they may train their desires, yet, when excited by
maturity, they give way; it is probable that he will not be able to pass
over that time, when the heart is with difficulty restrained; we will
therefore tempt him with lovely women."

   The King therefore gave orders that all the most lovely and enticing
dancing girls should be sent for, and informed them that the one who
could seduce him should be made chief queen. They then decorated the
Prince's chamber with all kinds of voluptuous objects and scents, and
having roused him and placed him on a couch, directed that all who were
not required should withdraw. Though the girls danced gracefully and
sang sweet songs provoative of love, the Bodhisat was not moved, but
reflected: "From the day of my birth, for these sixteen years, I have
seen the danger of Hell and desired not the royal estate, now that I am
arriving at the desired haven, were I to unite myself to one of these
lustful devils, it would be to my everlasting shame. All the miseries
which I have endured to obtain advancement will be of no avail if I
cannot overcome this lust which has come to interfere with my purpose;
no one hereafter will be able to escape the law of transmigration
(va.t.tam); but if I first overcome this devil-called lust all those who
come after me will easily be able to follow in the path laid down for
them." So, holding in his breath, he remained motionless as one dead. On
seeing this the girls lost all their joyous demeanour and, without
looking back, fled away.

   Thus, from the time of his birth until he was seventeen years old,
was he tested in various ways.

 

CHAPTER II.

   After this the King sent for the Parohits and said: "O teachers, when
I sent for you at the birth of the Prince, to find out his character by
the various signs, did not you tell me that there was no adverse
circumstance to be guarded <span id="page_372">p. 372</span> against?
But this thing, which you said was perfect answers not when it is
questioned, nor moves a limb; it is like one who is utterly impotent and
not what you foretold."

   The Brahmans answered: "Most excellent King, those teachers who are
skilled in the books of omens are able to read all signs at a person's
birth, but this son of yours was not obtained in the ordinary way, but
after much supplication; if we had foretold that which was bad, all the
royal ladies would have been made miserable, and for this reason we
prophesied good."

   Then said the King, "What will it be best to do?" The Brahmans
answered: "O King, if this unfortunate one be allowed to remain in the
palace some terrible sickness or calamity will come upon yourself and
the queen, or, maybe, to the whole country, let him therefore no longer
remain in the palace, but let him be put into an imperfect horse chariot
and taken out by the western gate, which is that of misfortune, and let
him be buried secretly in the grave yard."

   The King, on hearing this, allowed his fear to get the better of his
love, and kept not his heart steadfast, acting erroneously, so he said:
"O Brahmans, if it be true that there is fear of calamity and misery to
the country and royal household, let it be as you have advised."

   As soon as this was reported to Candâ Devi, she at once, without her
attendants, went straight from the southern palace to the presence of
the King, and prostrating herself before him, thus addressed him: "O
King of righteousness, of the many presents which you gave me I took
only such things as were suitable and returned the rest, now, therefore,
grant me a boon in return. Your son is now of age, grant him the dignity
of Yuvarâjâ, let us behold his glory whilst we two are yet alive." The
King answered: "My Queen, in what way is your son fitted for this
dignity? Do not thus address me when my heart is heavy." The Queen
continued: "O my Lord, why are you so angry with me, and why does your
wrath go out against your very heart's blood?" The King answered: "Lady,
are <span id="page_373">p. 373</span> you still ignorant that your son
is not worthy; that be is base, and imperfect in his members?" "My Lord,
if that were so, I would not dare to supplicate you for his life, if it
be only for seven years; let him not be accounted worthless, for he is
my son." But the King through his fear refused.<sup><span
class="small">\[l\]</span></sup>

   (The Queen continues to supplicate, till at last she got the King to
allow him to be anointed yuvarâjâ for seven days.)

   Having thus obtained her purpose, Candâ Devi ordered the Prince to be
dressed in the royal robes and invested with all the insignia of
royalty, and having placed him on the throne under the royal umbrella,
the King and Queen, surrounded by all the nobles, thus addressed him:
"Dear son, Prince Temiya, we have now handed over to you the sovereignty
of these realms of Kâsi, and since you are now in full possession of the
royal estate, and able to protect your country and people, may you enjoy
your power in happiness unto your life's end."

   Then the Brahmans poured out the water of consecration and uttered
blessings. A proclamation was also issued throughout the city that the
King had made over the sovereignty to the Prince.

   When the city had been cleansed and decorated, the Prince was placed
upon a splendidly caparisoned elephant and with a great company passed
in procession through it. When they returned to the palace he was placed
on a couch, and for the space of six sleepless nights they supplicated
him, saying, "Dear son Temiya, canst thou not assuage our bitter grief?
Ever since thou wast born, for sixteen long years, even until now thy
mother knows not the day that she has ceased to weep: she is wearied and
broken down, and at the point of death, and thou knowest that she is
utterly heart-broken. Thy mother knows that thou art perfect

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. No stanzas are given here, but the Burmese translator remarks:
"This is an amplification of the Queen's "Tena hi Deva detha" and the
Râjâ's "Na sakkâ Devi." The whole passage reads very like Abraham's
Intercession for the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah.\]

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span> in all thy limbs, beautiful to behold,
and in no way defective. Out of pity tell thy mother thy wishes, for if
she know them not how can she fulfil them? If thou hast any pity for her
be her protector, for if such a noble son, as thou art, has no pity for
his mother, how shall less noble sons know how to do that which is right
to their parents? Those who strive for their lives when shipwrecked in
the ocean, being unable to behold their mothers in danger, will swim
with them on their backs, how then, my son, canst thou behold unmoved
the misery of thy mother.

   "The little unfledged vultures in their nest, when oppressed by
hunger, live in the expectation that their mother will bring them their
food, and in the same manner thy mother longingly waits in hope that
thou wilt speak to her. How long thinkest thou that thy mother can
endure? Now that thou hast arrived at a proper age, and hast the
ability, tell her thy purpose and remove her despair."

   Thus for five nights and six days she remained weeping and
supplicating him, but though he was fiiled with compassion for her, yet
in his desire to obtain perfect wisdom, and through fear of constant
transmigrations, from which he desired to release himself and all other
beings, he pretended to have no compassion for his mother, who was only
one individual, and remained immovable and firm in his purpose.

   On the sixth day, his father hearing that there was no change in his
condition, sent for a noble named Sunandâ, who was superintendent of the
chariots, and said: "I am well aware of the defective state of Prince
Temiya, but, through the entreaties of his mother, have endowed him with
the dignity of royalty; and now six days have passed, and it is no
longer right that I should suffer him to remain; as soon as the morrow
dawns place him in a defective chariot drawn by ill-omened horses, and
taking him out by the west gate to the burial ground, dig there a pit,
and having thrown him therein, split his skull with a mattock, and
shovel in the earth. When he has thus become of some benefit to the
earth, go down to the river bank, and, having bathed yourself, return to
the city."

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

   On the same evening Queen Candâ was utterly heartbroken at the news
and said to her son, "Dearest Temiya, all thy mother's love is now in
vain. Thy father has sent for his trusted servant Sunandâ, and, in his
wrath, given orders that at dawn thou shalt be taken out by the west
gate, slain, and buried. This is the last night in which thy mother
shall behold her darling; if thou wilt but take pity on her say but one
word, and my darling shall live and his mother be happy." But though the
Bodhisat saw the terrible grief of his mother, and had great pity for
her, he remained unmoved, thinking that as soon as he had been removed
from the city he would become a good man, and then be able to show to
his parents and family that he could be grateful to them.

   So the morning dawned that was to bring great misery to the Queen but
joy to the Bodhisat.

   But Sunandâ, by the intervention of the Devas, took four auspicious
horses, thinking that they were unlucky ones, and instead of an old
broken chariot took that of the King, and having harnessed them, about
four in the morning, drove in by the eastern gate to the door of the
palace. He then went into the Prince's chamber, and, having taken up the
Prince, made obeisance to the Queen, and said: "Your Majesty, be not
angry, it is by order of the King." Then gently removing the Queen's
hands, with which she still lovingly clasped him, he bore the Prince
away like a bouquet of lotus flowers, and went out to the chariot. The
Queen followed, sobbing and wailing to the palace door, where she fell
down in a swoon.

   At this the Bodhisat, no longer able to endure his grief, turned his
eyes towards his mother, and said to himself, "Alas, I know not whether
my mother will die of grief or not, but if so my heart will be heavy for
the rest of my life." But just as he was on the point of speaking to her
he remembered that if he did so the whole of his diligent perseverance
which he had pursued would become of no avail, so he determined to
endure his grief, comforting himself with the thought that by preserving
silence he <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> would far greatly increase
the benefit of both his parents and himself.

   Sunandâ, having placed the Prince in the chariot, directed its course
to the western gate, but, through the merit of the Bodhisat and the
power of the Devas, the pole of the chariot was, without his knowing it,
directed to the eastern gate, and the Bodhisat passed out by that which
was auspicious. As the chariot passed through it the wheel struck
against the side and gave forth a sound, on hearing which the Bodhisat
rejoiced, saying, "My great purpose is accomplished."

   Sunandâ drove out by the east gate, as he thought, to the burial
ground, and, by the power of the Devas, came to a forest three yujanas
to the east of Bârâ.nasi. Having chosen a suitable spot he drew up the
chariot, and, having taken out the horses, let them graze. He then took
off all the royal jewels and clothes which had been put upon the
Bodhisat during the six days that he had been Yuvarâjâ, and, wrapping a
small cloth round his (the Prince's) loins, commenced to dig the pit.

   Whilst Sunandâ was thus engaged the Bodhisat reflected, "For sixteen
years I have neglected to use my limbs, and know not whether I have any
strength." Then raising himself upon his couch with one hand he stroked
the other, and having tried his arms felt his thighs, etc.; finding them
in proper condition he got out of the chariot, and, as he was doing so,
the Devas caused the earth to swell up so as to reach the floor of the
chariot. Having walked round it two or three times he thought, "I had no
idea I had so much strength, I could go a hundred yujanas (1300 miles)
in a day; verily, if Sunandâ tried to stop me, I wonder whether I should
have strength to overcome him." So taking hold of the chariot by the
hinder part, he lifted it up like a toy, and whirling it round and
throwing it from him, said, "Let as many charioteers as like come on."

   Then, seeing he had no clothes, he thought, "The charioteer has taken
all my clothes, and I appear to be <span id="page_377">p. 377</span>
merely an ordinary man, but as ornaments give character and distinction
I ought to have some to put on."

   The desire of the Bodhisat aroused Sakka, and he, seeing that Prince
Temiya required clothes and ornaments wherewith to cause an impression
on Sunandâ, ordered Visakrom to go and clothe the Prince with the
raiment and ornaments of a Deva. Visakrom<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> immediately went as directed. When
Prince Temiya saw that he was clothed like Sakka himself, he knew that
Sakka had done it.

   He then proceeded to the spot where Sunandâ was digging, and,
standing on the side of the pit, thus addressed him:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Why thus hastily thou diggest,<br />
   Charioteer, I would be told;<br />
Fearing lest another take it,<br />
   Hidest thou thy store of gold?"</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Sunandâ being in a hurry to get the business over replied, without
looking up, in the verses beginning: "Rañño mugo ca pakkhoca putta jâto
acetaso" "A son has been born to our Râjâ who is deaf, dumb, and
impotent, and lest on that account some terrible calamity may befall the
country he has at length, after sixteen years trial, ordered me to put
him out of the way as quickly as possible." On hearing that the Prince
thought, "This charioteer is intent on digging the pit, and will not
look up to see how glorious I am, I must say something to make him look
up"; so he replied, "O charioteer, what is this that thou sayest? I, the
son of Kâsi's Râjâ, am not like other deaf and dumb folk. Why do your
wise ones say that I am? My ears are not deaf nor my mouth dumb; neither
am I impotent in my limbs. Thou hast confessed that the Râjâ has
employed thee. I am not as the Râjâ said, how then canst thou act in
accordance with his orders? If thou actest without proper enquiry thou

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Visakrom is the Bunnese form of Vissakammo, the heavenly architect.
The r in the word shows that the word came to the Burmese from the
Sanscrit before they had Pâli.\]

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span> wilt be a law-breaker. My father chose
thee thinking that thou wast wise, look at my person and consider it may
fare badly with thee if thou heedest not. From my feet to my forehead,
look and see that in form I am perfect, like the stem of a golden
banana. Behold my stalwart arms. Hast thou not heard my soft
clear-sounding voice that is like oil falling on cotton wool?"

   When the charioteer heard the Bodhisat thus praising himself, he
thought, "Who on earth can this be, who is boasting so of his good
qualities?" So, looking up, he saw the Bodhisat with all the glory of
Sakka, and, not knowing whether it was a man or Deva, said: "Comely
youth, from the moment of your arrival you have done nothing but praise
yourself, and you have good reason to do so, for never before have I
seen anyone so splendid. Who are you? Are you the Deva of this place? Or
are you a Gandhappa from Himavanta? If not, perhaps you are Sakka
himself, but I should be glad to know who you really are."

   On hearing this the Bodhisat answered:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Why, Sunandâ, dost thou ask me,<br />
Have I not already told thee?<br />
Neither Deva nor Gandhappa<br />
Am I, but the Prince of Kâsi,<br />
Well thou knowest though thou askest.<br />
Yea, it is thy plain intention<br />
In this pit to kill and hide me,<br />
Me, the son of Kâsi's Râjâ:<br />
Faithless to thy benefactor<br />
Wilt thou slay me, O Sunandâ?"</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   As Sunandâ, however, gave no answer, not believing that it really was
Prince Temiya, the Bodhisat said:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"Should any one beneath a tree<br />
   Take shelter from the sun or rain,<br />
Then break its boughs or pluck its leaves<br />
   That man is base, his friendship vain.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>The Râjâ is a mighty tree,<br />
   And I, his son, a branchlet fair,<br />
The man who harbours 'neath our shade<br />
   Is even thou, O charioteer.<br />
Foulsome the deed didst thou betray me,<br />
And in this lonely forest slay me."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Seeing that Sunandâ was not convinced that he was the Prince, and
that he was acting wrongly, the Bodhisat continued in the following
stanzas:--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>1.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<th>That man hath all at his command,<br />
   Both food and drink and raiment too,<br />
E'en though he journey far from home,<br />
   Who ever to his friend is true.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<th>2.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>In town or hamlet should he roam,<br />
   Although his worldly goods be few,<br />
High is he held in men's esteem<br />
   If ever to his friend he's true.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<th>3.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>Nor thieves nor princes take his store,<br />
   Nor robbers beat him black and blue,<br />
He walks unharmed amongst them all,<br />
   If ever to his friend he's true.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<th>4.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>Peaceful he rests within his walls,<br />
   Honoured by all in council too,<br />
Chief of his clan, I ween, is he<br />
   Who ever to his friend is true.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<th>5.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>He is respected who respects,<br />
   To him who honours honour's due,<br />
Famed and renowned in every land<br />
   Is he who to his friend is true.</th>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>6.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<th>He shines as bright as burning fire,<br />
   Or like the Devs of brilliant hue,<br />
Not wanting in magnificence<br />
   Is he who to his friend is true.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<th>7.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>In all his fields his seeds grow well,<br />
   His flocks and cattle are not few,<br />
Of that he sows he reaps the fruit,<br />
   If only to his friend he's true.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<th>8.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>By fall from lofty rock or tree<br />
   Should he meet death, he reaps his due,<br />
He finds a sure abiding place<br />
   Who ever to his friend is true.<sup><span class="small">[1]</span></sup></th>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<th>9.</th>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<th>As by its roots so firmly held<br />
   No storm the Peepul<sup><span class="small">[2]</span></sup> may subdue,<br />
So by his foes unhurt stands firm<br />
   The man who to his friend is true.</th>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   The Bodhisat having recited the above stanzas in a clear sweet voice
that made the echoes of the forest resound, did not altogether convince
Sunandâ, who came out of the pit and went to look in the chariot. Seeing
neither the Prince nor bundle of clothes in it he became convinced, and
throwing himself at the Bodhisat's feet, besought him to return to the
city, saying, "O Lord, I have greatly erred against thee, pray return.
What advantage can there be in this forest? Return to the city, and be
an ornament to the council chamber."

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Verses 7 and 8 are to be taken in a double sense, that is to say,
"vattam" means both *seed* and *actions*. Pati.t.tham means a sure
foothold in this world or hereafter. There are really 10 couplets, but 5
and 6 are almost the same.

2\. The *Peepul* is the Nigrôdha or Banyan tree.\]

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

   But the Bodhisat replied: "Sunandâ, in this forest I am free. I fear
that if I were king I might fall into hell. I have not been driven out,
but have come of my own free will."

   Sunandâ thereupon said: "O master, since thou hast a heart full of
pity for the poor, if thou desirest not to enjoy the royal estate and
wilt not return to the city, and I go alone, I shall receive
condemnation when I inform thy royal parents of all that has occurred.
The nobles, soldiers, and people, from the highest to the lowest, will
on the other hand, shower blessings on my head if thou wilt return with
me. I pray thee, therefore, to return with me to the city."

   The Bodhisat replied: "Sunandâ, thou thinkest of thyself only, and
hast no regard for me.

   "My father and mother, not knowing my purpose, have made me an
outcast, thinking me unworthy of the royal estate, and through your
assistance I have come into this forest where I feel the delight of the
Moon when it has escaped from the jaws of Rahu. Why should I return? I
will remain here as a recluse, where all my desires shall be fulfilled.
Sunandâ, if those who desire a benefit work diligently their purpose
will be accomplished sooner or later. For the last sixteen years I have
done this, and now, Sunandâ, with your help, I have obtained my desire."

   Sunandâ replied: "Lord, your words are so pleasing to my ears that
they cannot be satisfied, how is it that you could remain silent for
sixteen years, when your father and mother, night and day, besought you
to utter but one word. Was it right not to have compassion for their
misery?"

   Prince Temiya replied: "Sunandâ, my reasons for feigning dumbness,
deafness, and impotence were these. About a month after my birth, when
reclining," etc., etc.

   I therefore preserved silence and endured all those miseries. knowing
that I should receive the reward of Nirvâ.na.

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Death and old age e'er surround us,<br />
   Everywhere decay is rife;<br />
Why should man when born in this world<br />
   Be the slave of lust and strife?</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   On hearing these words Sunandâ thought, "The Prince by birth is of
the highest of the three castes; in the matter of wealth he is lord of
all, and in person as glorious as the rising sun; there is no Deva or
man who can compare with him, and yet he casts aside all the
magnificence of his father's kingdom and goes into the forest to become
a recluse; of what advantage will it be to me to return to my former
service; I had better remain with him and become a hermit."

   So he said: "Lord and master, if you will but give permission, I,
too, will become a hermit in this forest and not return to the city."

   The Prince, however, thinking that his father and mother would suffer
further trouble if Sunandâ were not to return, said: "Sunandâ, though,
for your future welfare, I wish to grant your request, it is not right
that you should become an ascetic just yet. You are not your own master,
but have been sent on duty; if you were, to become a recluse now this
chariot and these ornaments would be a debt recoverable from you, and no
debtor can become an ascetic."

   Sunandâ answered: "Lord and master, I will return to the city, but
here, I pray thee, stay, lest, knowing not thy dwelling, when I return,
I may not find thee."

   The Prince answered: "I will do as thou sayest, for I, too, am
desirous of seeing my father and mother; go without fear and inform them
that I am well and that I wish I to ask their pardon. I will remain here
with longing eyes, bending towards them like the stem of a banana, and
await their coming with my feet in contact, my knees close together, and
with my clasped hands enclosing a lotus bud raised respectfully to my
forehead."<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

   So Sunandâ made ready the chariot and returned to Bârâ.nasi.

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. The correct way of making supplication.\]

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

   Now the Queen Candâ Devi, ever since her son had been taken away, had
been unable to rest on account of her grief, and remained at the window
watching for the return of the chariot. As soon as she saw Sunandâ
approaching and driving up to the gate alone, she, wailing and beating
her breasts, addressed him as follows: "O Sunandâ, was my son verily
deaf and dumb when you slew him, did he not utter one word. Tell me
truly, O charioteer; when you cast him into the pit, did he move neither
hand nor foot?"

   Sunandâ, leaving the chariot, came up into the palace, and,
prostrating himself before the Queen, said: "Have pity, O Queen, I will
tell thee all."

   On the Queen replying "The King gave the order, thou hast nothing to
fear," Sunandâ related to her all that had happened, and when he had
made an end of his story the Queen, like one who has been saved from the
water by a Garu.la, being full of great joy, was unable to realize the
good news.

   Sunandâ also informed the King of the Prince's desire that they
should all go out to see him in the forest.

   Now as soon as Sunandâ had gone, Prince Temiya determined that it
would be better for them to find him in the garb of a recluse, and by
the power of his merit Sakka gave orders to Vissakammo to go and build
him a monastery, and provide all that was requisite. So Vissakammo did
as he was ordered, and built a large monastery complete in every
particular, with groves and water-tanks full of lotus plants. He also
provided all that was necessary for the use of the monks.

   When the Bodhisat saw this he said: "Wonderful is the power of
merit." Then going into the monastery and reading the inscription, he
knew that it had been built by Sakka's order. Having put on the monastic
dress and taken his staff, he went out into the groves, where, walking
up and down, he said: "Ah! pleasant! Ah! pleasant!"<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> He then

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Ahosukham.\]

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span> returned into the monastery and spent
the whole of the day in meditating on the "Brahma Vihâra
Kamma.t.thânam."<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

   ln the cool of the evening he went out into the grove, and plucking
leaves from the trees, regaled himself on them. His royal parents at
Bârâ.nasi were so overcome with joy that the King said: "I will myself
go forth and bring him back." So he sent for the Senapati, and ordered
all the chariots, elephants, and men at arms to be prepared, with all
kinds of music. He also directed that the 500 foster-brothers, and as
many as liked besides, should go with him, even to the number of an
"akkhobha.ni."<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup>

   Sunandâ, having made ready the king's chariot, and harnessed thereto
four horses of the breed of Sindo, went in and informed the King that
all was ready, and he, being in haste to get to his son, said: "O
Sunandâ, are the horses fit for the journey? Those that are too fat,
though they be strong, are slow in their paces; those that are too thin,
though swift, may not hold out."

   Sunandâ replied: "O King, fear not that your journey shall be
hindered, I have picked out those that can go."

   Then the King of Kâsi said: "In that case inform the Queen, and let
her women make ready, for I am going forth into the forest to relinquish
my sovereignty to my son. Let the insignia of royalty, viz. the jewelled
yak's tail fans, the armour, the sword, the shoes, and the white
umbrella be

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. The B. V. Kamma.t.thânam contains meditations on friendship, pity,
joy in the prosperity of others, and resignation. The full text is
translated by Prof. Rhys Davids, ["Buddhist Sutras," pp. 272,
273](../../bud/sbe11/sbe1108.htm#page_272).

2\. Certain Pâli stanzas are here given to explain the meaning of the
number "akkhobha.ni"

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">In sixty bundles of bamboo,<br />
   To each let sixty be,<br />
Reduced to dust they make a force<br />
   That's called "akkhobha.ni."</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Another runs thus:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><span class="small">Take of elephants nine thousand,<br />
To each add a hundred horses,<br />
To each horse a hundred chariots,<br />
In each one a hundred virgins,<br />
To each girl a hundred women,<br />
That "akkhobha.ni" is called.</span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Childers gives "akkhohi.ni" 10,000,000; but this makes thirty-six
hundred thousand millions.\]

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span> placed in the chariot." When this had
been done he mounted the chariot, and set forth with a mighty host, and
going out by the east gate arrived quickly at the place where the Prince
was.

   The Queen followed in another chariot, accompanied by her 16,000
ladies, and when they got near the monastery they encamped and erected a
temporary palace.

   Prince Temiya having heard that his father was coming prepared a seat
for him.

   The King on leaving the camp got out of his chariot, and surrounded
by his nobles, went on foot to the monastery, and when they entered the
precincts they raised their hands in adoration, and went up into the
monastery and bowed themselves before the Prince.

   The Prince enquired after his father's health, and that of his
mother, and all the household; on which the King replied: "O, my son, we
are all well and in good health."

   The Bodhisat then, having heard that his worldly affairs were well,
desired to ask after his religious state, and said: "My father, how is
it? Daily dost thou drink that non-intoxicant drink called 'Vigilance?'
Dost thou eschew that drunkenness called 'Sensuality,' which causes
forgetfulness of the law? Treading not the thorny path of wrath, dost
thou travel on the good road of love, patience, and pity? Dost thou also
delight in charity and open-handedness?" To which the Râjâ replied:
"Dear son, I drink nought but the wine 'Vigilance,' and I cause others
also to drink thereof. I eat not that which is false, but that which is
true. I pursue not the path of bad actions, but travel on the road that
is good. I delight also in alms-giving."

   The Bodhisat then asked after the welfare of everyone and the state
of the country, etc., in three stanzas, and then said: "My father, I
trust that your coming to this monastery may not be without profit; in
order that it may not be so I have prepared this seat, pray be seated."
The King, however, refused to sit on it, whereupon the Bodhisat
suggested that the nobles should prepare him a <span id="page_386">p.
386</span> seat of grass like that on which he was seated. Then, going
into the monastery, he brought out his bowl full of leaves mixed with
water and set it before his father, saying: "This is my food, and it is
the excellent food of those who dwell in the forest. Even salt should
not be put to it. For those who desire to be free from the lusts of the
flesh it is most suitable. Eat of it, my father, as much as thou
desirest, for I can obtain it in plenty." The Râjâ answered: "Dear son,
I am not accustomed to a diet of leaves, but eat only of the best
rice.<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> Do you really eat this
my son?" The Bodhisat replied: "Father, I eat these leaves every day,
and it is the food most proper for ascetics."

   When his mother arrived at the monastery, surrounded by all her
ladies, and beheld her son, her heart was filled with delight and she
swooned, but having recovered her senses she embraced his feet, and
having wept, returned to her seat. The Râjâ then showed her the bowl of
leaves, saying: "Lady, see what your son eats."

   The King then said: "Dear son, I am filled with wonder that you
should dwell in this forest alone, and eat of these leaves without even
salt to flavour them, and yet have so handsome an appearance, even more
beautiful than you were before."

   To this the Bodhisat answered: "Father, that which is called beauty
belongs to those who have peace of mind, the beauty of those who are
discontented is destroyed; those who have cares for what has passed or
is about to be, are like those who throw straws into the air. I, who
sleep on this rough bed of grass, find it softer than a couch. I have no
care or fear for these simple articles. I need no guards with swords and
spears. Though I have lived as an ascetic for sixteen years, I am
good-looking, and I have no dread on account of what I may have done.
This day I have eaten, and have no thought for the morrow as to

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. When it is said in Daniel that Nebuchadnezzar did eat grass like an
ox may it not simply mean that he subsisted on herbs and leaves as the
hermits and jogis?\]

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span> what I shall eat or what I shall put
on; I am content with what I have to-day and with what I may obtain
hereafter."

   The King, still hearing himself addressed as *father*, thought, "My
son has not relinquished his love for his parents, I may still be able
to get him to come back to the city," so he said: "Dear son, with a
great company of elephants and chariots have I come to take you back to
the inheritance of your ancestors, and now hand them over to you with
16,000 lovely virgins as your handmaids; suffer the ceremony of
consecration to take place and return to the city as its ruler. Now that
you are of age to enjoy life, do so, and when you are older become a
hermit."

   The Bodhisat answered: "Father, ascetics are to be praised a thousand
times more than those who have done good deeds from their earliest
youth. To avoid wealth that is offered is most excellent, I therefore
reject all this wealth and will do that which is right. I desire not the
royal estate. Young men and maidens before they are married and have
children think that they wiil neither grow old nor die, and, therefore,
embrace not the life of an ascetic, but it should not be so; all beings
are born to perish, and in youth there is no room for delay, for since
sickness, old age, and death, are ever oppressing us, how can one say
that one's own body belongs to one's self or even to one's father or
mother? It is the nature of life to ebb slowly away, and one is like the
fish in the pool whose water dries up from day to day. Where, then, is
the advantage of youth, which is but for a moment? O, my parents, the
world is for ever oppressed; it is ever surrounded."

   His parents, wishing to know more, said: "What is this enemy that is
always oppressing the world? What is it that ever surrounds it? How may
we act so as not to act in vain? To this the Bodhisat replied:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"This world is by death afflicted,<br />
   All are subject to decay;<br />
Know, O Khattiya,<sup><span class="small">[1]</span></sup> each night too,<br />
   Ne'er in vain may pass away."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. The Khattiya is the warrior caste.\]

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

   This verse he explained more fully as follows: "Father, that which
ever oppresses the world is death, and that which surrounds
(accompanies) it is old age; that which passes not in vain is night. The
explanation is this: The life of a being is like the thread in a loom,
and the night is as the weaver that toils unceasingly. By constant
weaving is the thread consumed, and the end of life is like the end of
the night."

   "Again, a being is like a tree on the bank of a river, death and old
age are like the rushing water that wears away the bank, and the water
in its course goes not by in vain. It is like the night that brings old
age, diminishes the strength, and deforms men's beauty."

   On hearing this his father said: "Dear son, since by your preaching I
have obtained a right frame of mind, and have arrived at the time of
life when one is discontented with the world, I will become a hermit;
but you, who still are in the prime of life and able to enjoy it, and
see the right path which enables one to escape from evil, may be able to
reign in accordance with the ten laws, and, in your old age, may become
an ascetic; suffer now your father to remain in the forest, whilst you
return to the city and carry on the dynasty."

   But the Bodhisat replied: "Since riches are destroyed by the five
enemies,<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> one ought not to be
their owner, and, though they may increase, since the owner must die he
must forsake them. If loss must be the end, why take up the royal
estate? If women, too, like wealth, also come to an end, why does my
father offer them to me? Since the beauty, which is to-day, cannot be
relied upon, but is destroyed by old age, why does he praise the
excellence of beauty? If I have escaped from the flood of lust, and
stand on the firm bank, of what use to me are wealth, children, and
beauty? I am ever reflecting on, and never can forget the fact, that
destruction is the end. To me, who am ever meditating on death, what
would be the

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. The five enemies are Rulers, Thieves, Water, Fire, Foes.\]

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span> possession of wealth or the delight of
love? As the fruit that is ripe falls to the earth from its stalk, so
all beings that are subject to rebirth are subject to decay of vital
force. Every moment beings that we have seen in the morning we behold
not in the evening, and those that we behold at eve have disappeared in
the morning. We ought, therefore, to seek with all diligence for release
from hell, the five enemies, decay and death, and strive to be full of
that merit which is the result of charity properly directed. We ought
not to procrastinate, saying, 'To-day it is well, and to-morrow it will
be well also.' And why? Has anyone ever made friends with death, so that
he may know the day and the hour of his dissolution? Even now or
to-morrow death may lay his hand on us. We are ever surrounded by the
great thief, and his ever-watchful host is ready to seize their
oppartunity. O my royal father, how canst thou say to me, 'Now is the
time for enjoyment, now is the time to be an ascetic?' I, who have
avoided these dangers, and separated myself from them like the fruit
that is loosed from its stalk, am not of myself able to rejoin the
world. Do not ask it of me, but do thou, like me, if thou hast any
regard for the law, without further delay, become an ascetic, and pass
thy time in meditation."

   On hearing this the King became urgently desirous of entering on the
life of an ascetic, and said: "Dear son, I beg pardon, I no longer
desire wealth as of greater value than grass or leaves. I put my trust
only in thee; suffer me to become a Rahan."

   Queen Candâ also said: "Dear son, make thy mother a Rahan; I desire
not to return to the city." The whole of those who came with them also
determined to embrace the ascetic life. The King, therefore, sent for
the city magistrates and said: "Return to the city of Bârâ.nasi, and let
it be proclaimed that the King of Kâsi, who has overcome all his
enemies, makes known to all his subjects, within and without, that he,
having overcome all his spiritual enemies at the feet of his son, Prince
Temiya, counts all his wealth as but a bitter taste that he has spat
from his mouth, <span id="page_390">p. 390</span> and that he now
desires that all who wish to partake of that ambrosia, called the "life
of a rahan," should renounce all their worldly goods and come out and do
so."

   So the magistrates did as they were ordered, and the people, with one
accord, throwing open all their treasure houses and concealed treasures,
left them, and came out into the forest. A few drunkards, however,
remained behind. So the city was deserted, and when all the people came
to the forest they became Rahans.

   The Bodhisat caused all who were strong to remain outside, and the
old and infirm were admitted to the monastery.

   The women with children at breast, and the young women, were told off
to separate places, and other monasteries built after the pattern of
that built by Vissakammo.

   Thus they dwelt, living on the fruits that fell from the trees and
listening to the preaching of the law. They were called by the name of
"Sayampatita phalâ hâra," or the "takers-of-self-fallen-fruit."

   When the King of Sâmanta,<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>
which adjoined Kâsi, heard that the King of Kâsi and all his people had
become Rahans, he went with a large army to take possession, and on
entering into the city and seeing the beauty of its palaces and
fortifications he was astonished, and said: "Surely the King of Kâsi
could not have left all these simply to become an ascetic, some great
calamity must have befallen him."

   He ordered, therefore, the drunkards who were left behind to be
brought before him, and said: "Sirs, what calamity has befallen your
sovereign?" The drunkards answered: "O King, no calamity has befallen
our sovereign. His son Temiya, who was his heir, was afraid of
succeeding to the royal estate." They then related to him the whole
story.

   Hearing this the King of Sâmanta thought he had better do likewise,
so, asking by what gate they had gone out, he followed with an his host
and came to the Bodhisat's

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. This is probably *Samatata*, in the delta of the Ganges.\]

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span> monastery. When the Bodhisat saw them
he ascended into the air and preached the law to them. So the King of
Sâmanta and all his host were converted and became Rahans.

   And so it befel the Kings of other countries.

   The elephants and horses having no one to look after them became
wild.

   All these Rahans, when they changed their existence, went to the
Brahma heavens, and the animals went to the Deva heavens.

   The Buddha then summed up the story as follows:

   The fairy is now Upalava.n.na, my chief female disciple; Sunandâ is
Sariputta. The then Sakka is now my nephew Anuruddhâ; Vissakammo is now
Ânandâ; Candâ Devi and the King of Kâsi are the present rulers of the
Sâkya realm, who reign as the chiefs of the Sâkî race in Kappilavastu;
and Prince Temiya is now myself, the Buddha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
