[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index) [Women](../../wmn/index) [Previous](1893-13.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# WOMEN LEADERS OF THE BUDDHIST REFORMATION <span class="small">(*continued*)</span>

### (from *Manoratha Pûra.ni*, Buddhaghosa's commentary on the A.nguttara Nikâya)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

 

###### \[London, The Royal Asiatic Society\]

#### \[1893\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

###### {circumflexes represent macrons in this file}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_763">p. 763</span>

ART. XIX.--*Women Leaders of the Buddhist Reformation*. By MABEL BODE.

<span class="small">(*Continued from page* 566.)</span>

<span id="page_764">p. 764</span>

 

6\. *Nandâ*.<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup>

   In the sixth (Sutta) by the words *yadidam Nandâ ti*, he points out
the Therî Nandâ as the chief of those who practise meditation.

   It is related that this woman was reborn in a noble family at
Ha.msavatî in the time of the Buddha Padumuttara, and later on, when
hearing the Teacher preach the Truth, and seeing him assign to a certain
Bhikkhunî the chief place among those who practise the Meditations, she,
forming a resolve, aspired to the same distinction.

<span class="small"></span>

\[2. Dhammapâla calls this Therî Sundarînandâ.\]

<span id="page_765">p. 765</span>

   Then, after wandering in worlds of gods and men for a hundred
thousand æons, she re-entered existence, born of Mahâpajâpatî Gotamî,
before our Teacher's birth.

   They gave her the name Nandâ. She was also called Rûpananda.

   And afterwards, by reason of her loveliness, she came to be called
Janapada Kalyâ.nî (the belle of the land).

   Now, after our Buddha of the Ten Powers had attained to omniscience,
and had returned to Kapilavatthu, and successively admitted Nandâ and
Râhula into the Order, and then departed; and the great king Suddhodana
had died, Mahâpajâpatî Gotamî, and the mother of Râhula went forth and
entered the Order under the Teacher. She (Rûpanandâ) on seeing (all
this) thought: "Since they renounced the world what have I to do here?"
So, going to Mahâpajâpatî she entered the Order.

   From the day she entered the Order she never went to minister to the
Teacher, having heard it said: "The Teacher finds fault with beauty."
When the time for the exhortation came round, she sent another
Bhikkhunî, and bade her bring word of the discourse.

   The Teacher saw that she was intoxicated with her own loveliness, and
he said: "Let each one come and receive her exhortation for herself.
None of the Bhikkhunîs may send others."

   Then Rûpananda, not seeing any way out of it, went unwillingly to the
exhortation.

   Now, because of this conduct of her's, the Teacher created, by the
power of Iddhi, the form of a woman, who, holding a palm-leaf, seemed to
be fanning him.

   Rûpanandâ seeing this, thought to herself: "For (such) a reason was I
neglectful, and did not come! And, behold, women like this go about
fearlessly near the Master! My beauty is not worth a sixteenth part of
their's! Yet, ignorant of this, I have not come hither all this time!"
And she stood utterly spell-bound gazing at the woman. And the Master
recited to her, who had reached the climax of causes heaped up in former
births, the stanza in <span id="page_766">p. 766</span> the Dhammapada,
which begins: "Of bones is the fortress made"; and then uttered the
Sutta beginning: "*Whether walking or standing still--whether sitting or
lying down*."

   And, she gaining (the knowledge of) decay and death, attained to
Arahatship.

   Now in the commentary on this passage the story is not told in full,
since it is the same as the foregoing history of the Therî Khema.

   Thenceforward Rûpananda held the first place among those who
practised the meditations.

   Afterwards the Teacher, seated at Jetavana, and assigning places to
the Bhikkhunîs in turn, gave to the Therî Nandâ the chief place among
those who practise meditation.

<span id="page_768">p. 768</span>

 

7\. *So.nâ*.

   In the seventh Sutta by the words "*Âraddhaviriyânam*," he points out
So.nâ as the foremost among those who are strenuous in effort.

   They say that this woman re-entered existence in a noble family at
Ha.msavatî, in the time of the Buddha Padumuttara; and afterwards, when
hearing the preaching of the Law, she saw the Master assign to a certain
Bhikkhunî the chief place among those who are strenuous. She, after she
had done homage to the Buddha, aspired to the same distinction.

   And when she had wandered in the worlds of gods and men for twenty
thousand æons, she re-entered existence in a noble family at Sâvatthî,
at the time of the birth of this Our Buddha.

   Afterwards, being herself a householder, and having borne many sons
and daughters, she also established all of them, one after another, in
the lay life (as householders).<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

   From that time forth, thinking: "What can she do against us?" When
she came to see them, they did not even greet her as "Mother."<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> And So.nâ, mother of these many
children, feeling in her own heart their lack of piety towards her,
thought: "What is the good of my living any longer in the world?" And
going forth she entered the Order.

   Now the Bhikkhunîs put penances upon her as one who did not observe
moderation, and whose conduct was

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. .Tîkâ explains she thought "as I have established my sons, they
will look after me. What is the use of a separate estate to me?" And
dividing all her wealth she gave it to them.

2\. .Tîkâ adds that after a few days her eldest son's wife said: "would
that she would give us our half, thinking: 'this is my eldest son!' and
that she would go back to her own house!" And the wives of her other
sons said the same, and her daughters (from the eldest downwards) said
the same, from the time she went to their houses.\]

<span id="page_769">p. 769</span> unseemly. Thereupon her sons and
daughters, seeing her undergoing penance, laughed her to scorn
wheresoever they saw her, saying, "This woman does not, even to this
day, know the Precepts!" When she heard their words, struck with dismay,
she thought: "I must set about a way of self-purification." And
thereafter, wherever she might be, either standing or sitting down, she
repeated over the Dvatti.msâkâra. So, even as she had formerly been
called "the Therî So.nâ, mother of many children," she thenceforward
became known as "the Therî So.nâ, strenuous in effort."

   Now, one day, when the Bhikkhunîs were going to the Vihâra, they said
to her: "So.nâ, heat some water for the company of Bhikkhunîs." And they
went away.

   And then (while pacing to and fro in the hall where the fire was, and
repeating over the Dvatti.msâkâra) she, even before the water boiled,
reached the perfection of spiritual insight.

   And the Master, although seated (far away) in the Perfumed Chamber,
spoke this stanza, which she heard as from a vision:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>   "Nay, let a man live a hundred years without sight of the Perfect Law,<br />
   Better do I call the one-day's life of him who beholds the Perfect Law."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   And she, having, at the end of the stanza, attained to Arahatship,
thought:

   "I have attained to Arahatship! Yet, when they all come back, not
understanding this, they will find fault with me. And if I say nothing,
great blame might be cast on me. I had better do something to show them
a sign."

   And she placed the water-jar hanging over the hearth on the
camp-fire, but did not light the fire beneath it. When the Bhikkhunîs
returned, on looking at the fire-place, and seeing no fire, they said:
"We bade this old woman boil water for the company of Bhikkhunîs; but
lo! to-day she has lighted no fire in the fire-place."

<span id="page_770">p. 770</span>

   And So.nâ said: "Ladies! What do you want with fire? Should you wish
to bathe in water made hot by fire, take water from the jar and bathe in
it."

   They, thinking: "There must be some reason for this!" went and
plunged their hands in the water, and, feeling how hot it was, they
brought a pot; and as they took up water in it, the vessel whence they
took it filled up again.

   Thereupon they were assured that So.nâ had attained to Arahatship.
And all the younger Bhikkhunîs prostrated themselves utterly before her,
falling at her feet and saying: "Oh, noble lady! for so long a time we
have misunderstood, injured, and reviled you--Forgive us!" Thus did they
beseech her forgiveness.

   Moreover, the elder Bhikkhunîs, crouching before her, pleaded for
forgiveness, saying, "Pardon us, noble lady!" And, from that time forth,
the Therî, having in a short time attained the Fruit of the Paths
(though she had entered the Order in her old age), became renowned for
her virtue.

   Afterwards the Master, when seated at Jetavana, and assigning places
to the Bhikkhunîs one after another, put the Therî So.nâ in the foremost
place among those who are strenuous in effort.

<span id="page_771">p. 771</span>

 

8\. *Sakulâ*.

   In the eighth Sutta, by the words *dibbacakkhukânam yadida.m Sakulâ*,
he points out the Therî Sakulâ as the foremost among those who are
gifted with the Higher Vision.

   Now this woman also had been reborn, in the time of the Buddha
Padumuttara, in a noble family at Ha.msavatî. And when she had come of
age, when hearing the Master preach, she saw him exalt a certain
Bhikkhunî to the chief place among those gifted with divine vision; she,
forming a resolve, aspired to the same distinction. And, after wandering
in worlds of gods and men for a hundred thousand æons, she was reborn in
a noble family at Sâvatthî, at the time of the birth of this Our Buddha.

   Later on, hearing the Master preach on the Truth, and becoming filled
with Faith, she entered the Order, and, shortly after, attained to
Arahatship.

   From that time forth she became much practised in the Higher Vision.

   Afterwards the Master, when seated at Jetavana, assigning places to
the Bhikkhunîs one after another, placed this Therî first among those
who have the gift of the Higher Vision.

<span id="page_777">p. 777</span>

 

9\. *Bhaddâ Ku.n.dalakesâ*.<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup>

   In the ninth Sutta by the words *khippâbhiññâna.m*, he points out
Bhaddâ Ku.n.dalakesâ (the curly-haired) as the chief among those
Bhikkhunîs who are swift to reach the Higher Insight.

   This woman also was reborn in a noble family at Ha.msavatî, in the
time of the Buddha Padumuttara. And

<span class="small"></span>

\[3. She is the author of the five verses, 107-11, in the Therî Gâthâ.
The MSS. of Dhammapâla's commentary on that passage spell the name -kesî
at p. 89 of Prof. Ed. Müller's edition, and -kesâ at p. 99.\]

<span id="page_778">p. 778</span> when, on hearing the Master preach the
Law, she had seen him exalt a certain Bhikkhunî to the chief place among
those who are swift to reach the higher insight; she, forming a resolve,
aspired to the same distinction.

   And after wandering in worlds of gods and men for a hundred thousand
æons she was reborn (in the time of the Buddha Kassapa) as one of seven
sisters, in the house of Kiki, the king of the Kâsi country. And for
twenty thousand years, having taken a vow to keep the Ten Precepts, she
lived a life of chastity, and had a dwelling built for the Order of
Bhikkhus. And when she had passed on from world to world of gods and
men, during the interval between the coming of one Buddha and another
she re-entered existence in the family of the Treasurer in the city of
Râjagaha, at the time of the birth of this Our Buddha.

   They gave her the name Bhaddâ. And that very same day, and in the
same city, a son was born to the King's chaplain.

   At the moment he was born all the weapons in the city, beginning from
those at the royal palace, grew wondrous bright.

   And when the chaplain went on the morrow, he asked if the king had
slept pleasantly.

   The king replied: "How should we sleep pleasantly this day, reverend
sir, when all night we were alarmed by seeing the weapons in our palace
glowing bright!"

   "Oh, great king," said the chaplain, "be not disturbed by reason of
this! Not only at your palace did the weapons grow bright, but it was
the same through the whole city."

   "For what reason, reverend sir?"

   "In our house a child was born under the robber's star. He has come
as an enemy to the whole city. This is his sign. There is no special
danger foretold against yourself. But if you wish it, we will put the
child away."

   The king said: "So long as he wrongs us not there is no need of
putting him away."

   The chaplain thought: "My son has come bringing <span
id="page_779">p. 779</span> his name with him!" So he called him Sattuko
("Highwayman").

   And Bhaddâ grew up in the Treasurer's house, while Sattuko, on the
other hand, grew up in the chaplain's house.

   From the time he was able to walk and run about in play, whatever he
used to see in the places here and there where he rambled about, that
did he take, and bring home till he filled his parents' house.

   And his father, moreover, though threatening him with the stocks, was
not able to stop him.

   But later on, when he had come of age, his father, seeing that he
could not possibly be prevented from doing this, gave him two dark-blue
cloths to wear, and put in his hands such tools as he would need for
house-breaking, and said to him: "Earn your own living then, even by
this trade!" and he turned him adrift. And from that day forth he used
to throw his weighted rope over the house-top, and climbing up and
breaking through the joinings of the masonry, he would bear away the
goods stored up in his neighbour's dwellings, even as if he had stored
them there himself. And through the whole city there was not a house he
had not robbed.

   Now one day the king, when going about the city in his chariot, asked
his charioteer:

   "Pray, how is it that there is a breach to be seen in every single
house in this city?"

   "Your highness, in this city there is a robber they call Sattuko, who
breaks down the masonry of the houses and carries off property."

   The king caused the city-watchman to be summoned, and said to him:
"We are told that there is even such a thief as this in the city! Why do
you not lay hands on him?"

   "Your highness, we cannot find this robber."

   And the king said: "If you seize this thief to-day, well and good! If
you don't seize him I will have you impaled."

<span id="page_780">p. 780</span>

   And the watchman said: "So be it, your highness."

   And he sent men about through the whole city. And having seen this
man bearing away goods from a house he had broken into, he handed him
over to the king.

   And the king said: "Take this robber forth by the South Gate and kill
him."

   And the city-watchman, according to the king's command, took the
robber, and had him beaten with a thousand lashes at each place where
four streets met; and so he went on to the South Gate.

   Just then Subhaddâ,<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> the
Treasurer's daughter, having unbolted her lattice, was looking forth
because of the noise of the great crowd; and beheld the robber,
"Highwayman," thus haled along. And, clasping both hands upon her heart,
she went and lay upon her bed, with face bowed down. And since she was
the only daughter of this family, her kinsfolk could not bear to see so
much as a trifling trouble in her face; therefore, when they saw her
lying on her bed, they asked her: "What ails you, dear one?"

   "Did you see that robber led to execution?" said she: "Yes, yes; we
saw him," they answered. "If he is mine I shall live, but if I do not
have him, it will surely be my death!" said she.

   They, failing to pacify her in any way whatsoever, came to the
conclusion "better she should live than die!" So her father went to the
city watchman, and giving him a thousand pieces of gold as a bribe, said
to him:

   "My daughter's heart is bound up in the robber. Set the man free by
any stratagem whatever it may be!" "Very well!" said the watchman, and
consented to the Treasurer's request. So he kept the robber lingering
here and there till nearly sunset, and when the sun was about to set, he
had a certain man brought out of the prison; and he caused Highwayman's
fetters to be struck off, and sent him to the Treasurer's house, then
binding the other

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. This addition of *Su* to the name occurs also in Dhammapâla.\]

<span id="page_781">p. 781</span> man with these fetters he led him
away, dismissing him by the south gate.

   Thereupon the Treasurer's slaves took Highwayman, and went to the
Treasurer's house.

   When he saw him, the Treasurer said: "I will fulfil my daughter's
wish," so he caused Highwayman to be bathed in scented water, and had
him adorned with all his jewels, and sent him to the upper part of the
house.

   And Subhaddâ thinking "My heart's desire is won!" adorned herself
with those jewels that were left over, and went about serving him.

   When he had passed a few days (thus) Highwayman thought: "I will have
those jewels she wears to adorn her. By whatever wiles it may be, I must
get those gems!"

   So at the time when they were sitting happily near one another, he
said to Bhaddâ:

   "There is something I ought to say."

   The Treasurer's daughter, full of contentment, as one who has
received a thousand gifts, answered:

   "Speak freely, my lord!"

   And he said:

   "You thought: 'His life was saved through me.' But when I was taken
prisoner, I prayed to the goddess who dwells on that mountain, whence
they throw down the robbers, and I besought her: 'If my life be saved I
will offer gifts to thee'! It was through her my life was saved. Do you
prepare an offering with all speed."

   Subhaddâ, thinking, "I will do as he wishes," made ready an offering.

   Then, adorning herself with all her jewels, and mounting one bullock
cart with her husband, she went to the mountain where they used to cast
down robbers. And purposing to offer gifts to the goddess, she was about
to climb the mountain, when Sattuko thought to himself:

   "If all our people were to climb the mountain with us, I shall have
no chance of seizing on her jewels!"

   So bidding her take the sacrificial vessel herself, he went on up the
mountain.

<span id="page_782">p. 782</span>

   And while talking with Bhaddâ, he had not a loving word for her, and
she felt by his very manner what his purpose was.

   Now he said to her: "Bhaddâ, take off your Sâ.taka (garment), and
make a bundle here of those jewels you brought up hither upon you."

   "Oh my husband, what wrong have I done?" she said.

   "Why do you suppose I have come to offer gifts? Why I could tear out
this goddess's liver and eat it! I came hither under pretence of
offering gifts because I coveted your jewels."

   But she said, "Whose, Sir, pray, are the jewels, and whose am I? We
know nothing of any such idea as there being any difference between a
thing belonging to you and one belonging to me. Still, all right Sir!
Only fulfil one desire I have. Allow me once more, still dressed in my
finery, to embrace you both face to face, and from behind your back."

   And he consented, saying, "Very well!" And having embraced him face
to face, she made as if she would embrace him from behind, and thrust
him over the precipice. So falling through the air he was crushed to
atoms.

   And the goddess who haunted the mountain, seeing this wondrous deed,
uttered these verses in her praise:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>   'Tis not on all occasions a man alone who is clever.<br />
   A woman can be clever too, with her eyes open on all sides.<br />
   'Tis not on all occasions a man alone who is clever.<br />
   A woman can be clever too, should she give thought for a moment only.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   Then Subhaddâ thought to herself: "I cannot go back to my own home
thus! I will go forth and forsake the world by entering some order."

   So she went to the dwelling of the Niga.n.thas (Jains), and begged
them to admit her into their Order. And they said to her: "With what
manner of ceremony will you be ordained?" She answered: "With your
highest <span id="page_783">p. 783</span> ordination." And saying, "So
be it!" they pulled out her hair with palmyra thorns, and thus ordained
her.

   And when her hair began growing again, it grew in curls, through its
great abundauce, and for this reason she came to be called Ku.n.dalakesâ
(Curly Locks).

   Now when she had mastered all the teaching to be had in that place
where she had been ordained, and saw that there was nothing further to
be learned there, she wandered about in villages and market-towns, and
wheresoever there were learnéd men, there did she acquire their
learning, nay, all of it!

   And, therefore, in many places they were not able to give any answers
to her because she was so learnéd. So having found no one who was able
to dispute with her, whatever village or town she entered, she used to
make a heap of sand beside the gate and plant a Jambu-branch on it, and
tell the children standing near:

   "If any man is able to dispute with me he may trample down this
branch!"

   If in seven days there was no one who trampled it down, she used to
take it away and depart thence.

   At this time Our Blesséd One, reborn into this world, was living at
Jetavana near Sâvatthî.

   Now Ku.n.dalakesâ also arrived at Sâvatthî, and when she came to the
city she planted her branch on a heap of sand in the very same way as
before. And telling the children about it she went into the city.

   Just then the Captain of the Faith, Sâriputto, was entering the city
alone (the company of Bhikkhus having preceded him), and he saw the
mound of sand and the branch.

   "What has this been put here for?" he asked. The children told him
about it, leaving nothing out.

   "If that be so, take it down and trample on it, boys!" said he.

   Some among them, when they had heard the Therâ's words, did not dare
to trample on the branch, but others, that very moment trampled it to
fragments.

<span id="page_784">p. 784</span>

   Ku.n.dalakesâ, having finished her meal, was setting out, when she
saw that the branch was trampled down, and she asked:

   "Whose doing is this?"

   Then they told her that the Captain of the Faith had caused it to be
done.

   And she thought to herself: "He must have known his own strength when
he dared to tell them to trample down my branch! Surely he is some great
man! But as for me, I am insignificant, and I shall not show to
advantage alone! I had better go into the village and tell the people."
And she did so.

   \[It must be understood that all the eighty thousand families in the
city got to know of it according to their districts.\]

   Now the Thera, having finished his meal, seated himself at the foot
of a certain tree. And this woman, Ku.n.dalakesâ, followed by a great
crowd, went to the Thera, and, after greeting him, stood respectfully on
one side and asked him: "Reverend sir, was it you who bade them trample
down my branch?"

   "Yes, it was I who had it trampled down," he answered.

   "So be it, sir! Then let us dispute--you and I together," said she.

   "So be it, Bhaddâ," he replied. "Which of us shall ask questions, and
which shall answer?"

   "It is my right to question?"

   "Ask away, then, on whatever you understand," said he.

   So, the Thera having agreed to it, she questioned him on such matters
as she understood.

   The Thera solved all she put to him. And when she had asked all her
questions she was silent.

   Then the Thera said to her:

   "You have asked me many questions, Now, let me ask you this one
question."

   "Ask it, reverend sir," she said. And he asked her one riddle only:
"What is the one?" Ku.n.dalakesâ answered: "Reverend sir, I do not
know!"

<span id="page_785">p. 785</span>

   "If you do not know even so little as that, how can you know anything
else?"

   And thereupon she fell down at the Thera's feet, saying: "I take you
as my refuge, O reverend sir!"

   "Nay, you must not come to me as a refuge, but to him who is the Lord
and greatest in the world. He dwells at the *Maha-Vihâra*. Go you to him
as your refuge!"

   And she said: "I will do so, sir!"

   And in the evening she went to the Master at the time of the
preaching, and when she had prostrated herself wholly before him she
stood on one side.

   And the Master, by way of leading her to suppress the Sankhâras
(Elements of Being), spoke to her this stanza, which is in the
Dhammapada:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>   "Though there be a thousand verses full of foolish sentences<br />
   Better do I hold one sentence of a verse whereby, on hearing it, one is set at rest."</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   And, at the end of the stanza, even as she stood there she received
the four Gifts of Perfect Understanding, and attained to Arahatship.

   And she prayed that she might enter the Order, and the Master
consented to her ordination. So, going to the home of the Bhikkhunîs,
she renounced the world.

   Afterwards it was talked of, among the four classes of disciples
(Bhikkhus, Bhikkhunîs, and lay disciples, both men and women), how great
must be this Bhaddâ Ku.n.dalakesâ to have attained to Arahatship at the
end of a stanza of four lines. And the Master set forth the reason of
this, and gave the Therî the chief place among those who are swift to
reach the higher knowledge.

<span id="page_786">p. 786</span>

 

10\. *Bhaddâ Kâpilâni*.

   In the tenth Sutta by the words *pubbenivâsâna.m* (dwelling in the
past), he points out Bhaddâ Kâpilâni as the chief among those who
remember former states of existence.

<span id="page_787">p. 787</span>

   They say that this woman, in the time of the Buddha Padumuttara, was
reborn in a noble family at Ha.msavatî. And when, on hearing the Master
preach the Law, she had seen him exalt a certain Bhikkhunî to the chief
place among those who remember former births, she (forming a resolve)
aspired to the same distinction.

   And after wandering in worlds of gods and men for a hundred thousand
æons, she re-entered existence in a noble family at Benares, at a time
when there was no Buddha upon the earth.

   Now there arose a quarrel between her and her brother's wife. And
when the other had given food to a Pacceka Buddha she (Bhaddâ) thought:

   "By giving him food she gets him into her own power." And she took
the bowl from the hand of the Pacceka Buddha, and threw away the food,
and filled it with mud, and gave it to him.

   And the multitude blamed her for a fool, saying, "The quarrel was
between you and your brother's wife, yet you did nothing to her! What
harm has the Pacceka Buddha done to you?"

   And she was put to shame by these words, and took the alms-bowl again
and emptied out the mud, and washed it, and rubbed it with perfumed
powder, and filled it with the four kinds of sweet food, and gave it
into the hand of the Pacceka Buddha, shining with butter of the colour
of the inside of the bloom of the lotus, and she uttered the prayer:
"May my body become bright even as this food in the alms-bowl!"

   All the rest should be understood as before told in the story of the
Thera Mahâkassapo, (only adding that) the Thera took the right-hand road
and went to the Blesséd One at the foot of the Bahu-puttaka Banyan Tree,
and this woman Bhaddâ Kâpilâni took the left-hand road, and, since women
had not then received permission to be ordained in Gotama's Order, went
to the grove of the women who had entered the Order of the Wandering
Ascetics.

   Afterwards at the time when Mahâpajâpatî Gotamî <span
id="page_788">p. 788</span> received the permission for women to enter
(Gotama's) Order, then this Therî went to her, and from her received
both the lower and the higher grade of ordination; and, striving after
Spiritual Insight, attained to Arahatship, and became endowed with
knowledge of her former births.

   So the Master, seated at Jetavana, and assigning places to the
Bhikkhunîs in turn, placed this Therî first among those who remember
their former births.

<span id="page_789">p. 789</span>

 

11\. *Bhaddâ Kaccânâ*.

   In the eleventh Sutta by the words *mahâbhiññappattâna.m* he points
out Bhaddâ Kaccânâ as the chief among those who attained to the Great
Gifts.

   Now, every single Buddha has four followers, who are gifted with the
Great Insight. But the rest of the disciples are not so gifted. For the
rest of the disciples can recall a hundred thousand æons, but, on the
other band, these four, after attaining to the Great Gifts, can remember
innumerable ages, a time longer than a hundred thousand æons.

   Now, under the dispensation of Our Master, those who had the power of
remembrance were the two chief disciples, and also the Thera Bakkula and
Bhaddâ Kaccânâ.

   These four were able to remember thus much. Therefore this Therî came
to be called the chief among those who have attained to the Great Gifts.
The name Bhaddâ Kaccânâ was given to her because her skin was beautiful,
like gold (kañcana); nay, like the very finest of gold. On account of
this she came by the name Bhaddâ Kañcanâ, and afterwards she came to be
called Kaccânâ, which is a synonym for (her more usual designation) 'the
mother of Râhula.'

<span id="page_790">p. 790</span>

   She, too, had re-entered existence in a noble family at Ha.msavatî,
in the time of the Buddha Padumuttara, and afterwards, when she (on
hearing the Master preach the Truth) had seen him exalt a certain
Bhikkhunî to the chief place among those who are endowed with the Great
Gifts, she had aspired to the same distinction.

   And after wandering in worlds of gods and men for a hundred thousand
æons, she was reborn in the household of Suppabuddha, the Sâkya, at the
time of the birth of this Our Buddha.

   And when she came of age she was married to the Bodhisat. Afterwards
she bore a son, who was named Râhula.

   But, on the very day of his son's birth, the Bodhisat went forth. And
when he had attained to perfect wisdom under the Bo-Tree, he, out of
mercy to the world, returned in due course to Kapilavatthu, and
reconciled his kinsfolk.

   Afterwards, on the death ot the great King Suddhodana, Mahâpajâpatî,
the Gotamî, together with five hundred other women, received ordination
from the Master. And both the mother of Râhula and Rûpanandâ, going to
the Therî,<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> entered the Order.

   And it was only from the time of her entering the Order that she
became known as Bhaddâ Kaccânâ.

   Now, afterwards, when she had reached the fulness of Spiritual
Insight and attained to Arahatship, she lived in the practice of the
Spiritual Gifts.

   And, seated once upon a couch, she recalled, in one meditation,
immeasurable ages, more than a hundred thousand æons. And since her
merit in this became renowned, the Master, when seated at Jetavana,
assigning places to the Bhikkhunîs in turn, put this Therî in the chief
place among those who have attained to the Great Gifts.

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. That is to Mahâpajâpatî.\]

<span id="page_793">p. 793</span>

 

12\. *Kisâgotamî*.

   In the twelfth Sutta by the words *lûkhacîvaradharâna.m* ("those who
wear a rough garment"), he points out Kisâgotamî as the chief among
those who wear rags of the three kinds of roughness, taken from a dust
heap.

   Gotamî was the name, of this woman, but as she was (apt to be) soon
wearied, they called her Kisâ Gotamî (the weakling). She, too, in the
time of the Buddha Padumuttara was reborn in a noble family at
Ha.msavatî, and when (while hearing the preaching of the Law) she had
seen the Master exalt a certain Bhikkhunî to the chief place among those
who wear rough garments, she, stoutly resolving, aspired to the same
distinction.

   And, after wandering in worlds of gods and men for a hundred thousand
æons, she was reborn in the time of this Our Buddha, in a poor family at
Sâvatthî. When she came of age she married. And she was treated with
contempt, as being the daughter of poor folk.

   Later on she bore a son, and thereupon she was treated with
deference.

<span id="page_794">p. 794</span>

   But when this child had come to an age to be able to run about hither
and thither in play, it died.

   And she grieved, thinking: "In this very household where I had been
stripped of all advantage and honour, I rose to dignity from the moment
of my child's birth! Surely these people will now try to cast out my
son!"

   So she took her child upon her side, and wandering from door to door,
asked at one house after another, "Give me medicine for my child!" And,
wherever they saw her the people jeered at her, clapping their hands,
and saying, "Where did you ever yet see medicine for a dead child!" And
yet, for all they spoke so, she could not understand.

   Now a certain wise man saw her and thought to himself: "This woman is
distraught through grief for her child. But though no other knows of any
medicine for her, yet the Blesséd One will surely know." And he spoke
thus to her: "Friend, there is no other who knows of any medicine for
your child. (But) He who is greatest of all in the world of gods and men
is dwelling in the Dhura Vihâra. Go then to him and ask him."

   And she, thinking: "This man is telling me the truth," took her son
and went and stood at the back of the assembly, as the Blesséd One was
seated in the seat of the teacher. And she said to him: "Master, give me
medicine for my child?"

   The Master, seeing what destiny (was in store for her), said to her:
"This is well done Gotamî, that you should come hither for medicine! Go
now, enter the town, and starting from one end walk through the whole of
it, and in whatsoever house death has never yet been, there get some
white mustard-seed."

   And she answered: "That will I, master!" and, joyful in heart, took
her way townwards. And at the very first house she said, "The Blesséd
One bids me get white mustard-seed as medicine for my child. Give me
some mustard-seed."

   "Here, then, Gotamî," said they, and brought mustard-seed and gave it
to her. But she would not take it <span id="page_795">p. 795</span>
simply so, and she asked further, "But has anyone ever died in this
house?"

   "What are you saying, Gotamî? The number of those that have died here
can no man count!"

   "Then never mind, I must not accept the mustard-seed," she said, "The
Blesséd one told me not to take it from any house where death has been."

   But when she had gone in this same way to the second and to the third
house, she thought to herself: "It will be the same throughout the whole
city! This thing was surely (fore)seen by the Buddha in his mercy and
love." And her heart was moved within her. And going forth out of the
city, even to the open graveyard, she took her child by the hand,
saying:

   "Little one! I thought death had befallen thee (alone), but lo! it is
the law common to thee and to all mankind!"

   And she put him down in the graveyard, and uttered this verse:

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>   "This is the Law not only for villages or towns--<br />
   Not for one family is this the Law,<br />
   For all the wide worlds both of men and gods,<br />
   This is the Law--that all must pass away!"</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   But when she had thus spoken, she went to the Master. And the Master
said to her: "Did you get any mustard-seed, Gotamî?"

   And she answered: "The work of the mustard-seed is done! (But) be you
(now) a refuge unto me!"

   Then the Master spoke this verse to her (which is in the Dhammapada):
"To him who is wrapt in his children and his possessions, whose mind is
distracted.

   To him comes death, bearing (all) away, even as the flood bears away
the sleeping village."

   And at the end of the verse, even as she stood there, she reached the
Fruit of the Paths, and she prayed that she might enter the Order. And
the Master granted her wish. So, first paying solemn obeisance three
times to the <span id="page_796">p. 796</span> Master, she went to the
home of the Bhikkhunîs and entered the Order.

   And after rising to the higher grade in the Order, it was not long
before, earnest in careful meditation, she perfected her Spiritual
Insight.

   Then the Master, even as in a vision, spoke this verse--

<table data-align="center">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>   Let a man live a hundred years,<br />
   Beholding not the Deathless State,<br />
   'Twere better to have lived a single day<br />
   The life of him who knows the Deathless State.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   And at the end of the stanza she attained to Arahatship. And she
became eminent in the greatest degree in the right observance of the
Eight Requisites, and used to don robes rough in the three (prescribed)
ways.

   Afterwards, when the Master, seated at Jetavana, was assigning places
to the Bhikkhunîs one after another, he gave to this Therî the chief
place among those who wear the rough robe.

<span id="page_797">p. 797</span>

 

13\. *Sigâlakamâtâ*.

   In the thirteenth Sutta by the words *saddhâdhimuttâna.m* (intent
upon Faith) he points out Sigâlakamâtâ as the foremost among those who
are firmly established in the characteristic of Faith.

   They say that in the time of the Buddha Padumuttara this woman was
reborn in a nobleman's bouse at Ha.msavatî. And when (on hearing the Law
preached) she had seen the Master exalt a certain Bhikkhunî to the chief
place among those who are intent upon Faith, she, making a resolve,
aspired to the same distinction.

   And, after wandering in worlds of gods and men for a hundred thousand
æons, she, at the time of the birth of this Our Buddha, was reborn in
the Treasurer's family, in the city of Râjagaha. And having married into
a family of equal rank with her own, she gave birth to a son. They
called him young Sigâlaka. For this reason she came to be named "the
Mother of Sigâlaka."

   One day, when she had been hearing the Master preach the Law, she
received Faith, and entered the Order under him.

   From the time of her entering the Order she became gifted with Faith
to the very utmost.

   And having gone to the Vihâra, to hear the preaching of the Law, she
stood gazing at the bodily perfection of the Blesséd One.

<span id="page_798">p. 798</span>

   The Master, perceiving that she was firmly established in the virtue
of Faith, for her sake preached the very doctrine in such wise as to
fill her with belief. So this Therî also, making Faith the basis,
reached up to Arahatship. And afterwards the Master, when seated at
Jetavana, assigning places to the Bhikkhunîs in turn, gave to this Therî
the chief place among those who are intent on Faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)
