[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Ssuma
Ch'ien](../../cfu/smc/index)  
[Previous](1895-03)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# Ssŭma Ch‘ien's Historical Records. Chapter III.

### trans. Herbert J. Allen.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE

## JOURNAL

###### OF THE

# ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY

###### OF

#### GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND

###### FOR

# 1895

 

#### \[LONDON, 1895\]

###### {Reduced to HTML by Christopher M. Weimer, Sept. 2003}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

ART. XVII.—*Ssŭma Ch‘ien's Historical Records*. By H<span
class="small">ERBERT</span> J. A<span class="small">LLEN</span>,
M.R.A.S.

 

<span class="small">(*Continued from page* 110, *January
number*.)</span>

 

C<span class="small">HAPTER</span> III. *The Yin Dynasty*.

   Hsieh of Yin's mother was Chien Ti, who was one of the daughters of
Yusung<span id="page_601_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_601_note_1) and the
secondary wife of Emperor Ku. She was going with her two sisters to
bathe, when she saw a dark bird<span
id="page_601_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_601_note_2) drop its egg. Chien Ti
picked it up, and swallowed it, and thus being with child gave birth to
Hsieh. When Hsieh grew up, he was succeseful in assisting Yü to control
the flood, and the Emperor Shun, directing Hsieh, said:<span
id="page_601_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_601_note_3) "The people are wanting
in affection for one another, and do not observe the five orders of
relationship. You, as Minister of Instruction, should reverently
inculcate the lessons of duty belonging to those five orders, but do so
with gentleness." He held in fief the principality of Shang, and was
given the surname of Tzŭ (son). Hsieh flourished in the reigns of Yao,
Shun, <span id="page_602">p. 602</span> and the great Yü. His services
were manifest to the people, who were accordingly at peace.

   Hsieh (documents) died, and his son Chaoming (luminous) succeeded
him.

   Chaoming died, and his son Hsiangt‘u (view land) succeeded him.

   Hsiangt‘u died, and his son Ch‘ang Jo (bright-like) succeeded him.

   Ch‘ang Jo died, and his son Ts‘ao Yü (cattle-pens) succeeded him.

   Ts‘ao Yü died, and his son Ming (obscure) succeeded him.

   Ming died, and his son Chên (shake) succeeded him.

   Chên died, and his son Wei (diminutive) succeeded him.

   Wei died, and his son Paoting (report D) succeeded him.

   Paoting died, and his son Paoyi (report B) succeeded him.

   Paoyi died, and his son Paoping (report C) succeeded him.

   Paoping died, and his son Chujên (lord I) succeeded him.

   Chujên died, and his son Chu Kuei (lord J) succeeded him.

   Chu Kuei died, and his son T‘ien Yi (Heaven B) or T‘ang the Completer
succeeded him. <span
id="page_602_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_602_note_1)"From Hsieh to T‘ang the
Completer there were eight changes of the capital. T‘ang at first dwelt
in Po, choosing the residence of the first king, and the 'Emperor's
Announcement' was written. When T‘ang made an expedition against the
princes, the chief of Ko was not offering the proper sacrifices, and
T‘ang began by punishing him." T‘ang said: 'I observe that if a man
looks at the water he sees his reflection; if he seeks to make an
impression on the people, should he not know how to govern?' Iyin said:
'That is clear! If you say that you will listen to reason you may offer
yourself as ruler of the State. Whether the people do right or not
depends entirely on the king and his ministers. Rouse yourself to
action!' T‘ang said: 'If you cannot respect my commands, I will inflict
upon you the extreme penalty death. You will not obtain forgiveness.'
<span id="page_602_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_602_note_1)"The punitive
expedition of T‘ang was written." Iyin's name was Ahêng. <span
id="page_603">p. 603</span> Ahêng wanted to meet T‘ang, but had no
opportunity of doing so; he therefore became cook to the prince of Hsin,
and while bringing T‘ang dishes to taste urged him to perfect himself in
the way of the ancient kings.<span
id="page_603_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_603_note_1) Some say that when Iyin
was living in retirement T‘ang sent five times to invite him to a
meeting before he would obey him, and talk about matters connected with
the guileless king and the nine rulers.<span
id="page_603_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_603_note_2) T‘ang promoted Jên to
the administration of affairs. <span
id="page_603_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_603_note_3)"Iyin went from T‘ang to
Hsia. Being indignant with the sovereign of Hsia, he returned to Po, and
as he entered by the north gate met Juchiu and Jufang, and the 'Juchiu'
and 'Jufang' were written." T‘ang went out and saw a rustic, who was
spreading nets in every direction, and vowing that every bird in the sky
should go into his net. T‘ang said, 'What! all?' Then, taking away the
nets on three sides, he vowed that those which wanted to go to the left
should go left, and those which wanted to go right should go right, and
that only those which were the victims of fate should be caught in the
net. The princes, hearing of it, said, 'T‘ang's kindness is extreme, and
extends even to birds and beasts.' At this time Chieh of Hsia was
oppressive, and his rule dissipated, and one of the princes K‘unwu<span
id="page_603_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_603_note_4) rebelled, so T‘ang,
levying an army, put himself at the head of the princes. Iyin followed
T‘ang, who, grasping a halberd, marched against K‘unwu, and then
attacked Chieh. <span
id="page_603_fr_5"></span>[5](#page_603_note_5)"T‘ang said: Come, ye
multitudes of the people, listen ye all to my words. It is not I, the
little child, who dare to raise a rebellion. The <span id="page_604">p.
604</span> ruler of Hsia has committed many crimes. I have indeed heard
the words of you all, but the Hsia ruler is an offender, and, as I fear
the Supreme god, I dare not but punish him. Now, as the Hsia ruler has
committed many crimes, Heaven has charged me to destroy him. Now, ye
multitudes, you are saying, 'Our sovereign does not compassionate us; he
disregards our husbandry, and his government is a cruel one.' You say,
'As to his crimes, what remedy have we?' The king of Hsia does nothing
but exhaust his people's strength, and treat the kingdom of Hsia
oppressively. His people have all become idle, and are not in harmony
with him, saying, 'When will this sun set? We shall all perish
together.' Such being the conduct of the sovereign of Hsia, I must
advance. If you help me, the one man, to carry out the punishment
decreed by Heaven, and I will greatly reward you. On no account
disbelieve me. I will not retract my words. If you do not carry out the
words of my speech, I will put you and your children to death; you shall
not be pardoned." This being announced to the army, "the speech of T‘ang
was written."<span id="page_604_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_604_note_1) T‘ang
then said, 'I am very warlike'; and he was styled the 'warlike
king.'<span id="page_604_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_604_note_2) Chieh was
defeated in the wilds of Yusung, and fled to Mingt‘iao. <span
id="page_604_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_604_note_3)"The army of Hsia being
entirely defeated, T‘ang smote Santsung, where he captured the precious
jewels. Ipo and Ch‘ungpo wrote the 'Statutes and Jewels.' When T‘ang had
conquered Hsia, he wished to remove the altars to the spirits of the
land, but was unable to do so, and the 'Altar of Hsia' was written."
Iyin made a report, and the princes being satisfied, T‘ang ascended the
Imperial throne, and tranquillized the country within the four seas.
<span id="page_604_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_604_note_4)"When T‘ang
returned he came <span id="page_605">p. 605</span> to T‘aichüant‘ao, and
Chunghui wrote his announcement. Having made an end of the sovereignty
of Hsia, T‘ang returned to Po and wrote the 'Announcement of T‘ang.'" In
the third month the king came himself to the eastern suburb and made the
following announcement to the princes and nobles: 'If you do not perform
meritorious service for the people and be diligent in your business, I
shall inflict the extreme punishment of death. Do not murmur against
me.' He also said: 'Formerly Yü and Kaoyao laboured long in distant
regions. They performed meritorious service for the people, who dwelt in
peace. On the east there was the Great river, on the north the Chi, on
the west the Yellow river, and on the south the Huai. These four streams
were kept within bounds, and the people dwelt in safety. Prince Millet
told them how to sow and cultivate the various kinds of grain. These
three chiefs all performed meritorious service for the people, and were
therefore ennobled. Formerly Ch‘ihyu and his officers raised a rebellion
among the people but the \[Yellow\] Emperor disapproved, and his crimes
were exposed. The words of the former kings cannot but rouse you to
action. If you are unprincipled you shall not rule in the State. 'Do not
murmur against me.' Thus he directed the princes. <span
id="page_605_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_605_note_1)"Iyin wrote the book
'Both possessed pure Virtue,' and Chiutau wrote the 'Illustrious
Abode.'" T‘ang altered the day of the New Year, and changed the colour
of the dresses, white being uniformly worn at State functions. <span
id="page_605_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_605_note_2)"After the demise of
T‘ang" his eldest son, <span id="page_606">p. 606</span> "T‘aiting
(Great D), died before he could come to the throne"; and so T‘aiting's
younger brother Waiping (Outer C), that is Emperor Waiping, came to the
throne.

   Emperor "Waiping" reigned "three years," and died, and his brother
Chungjên (Middle I), that is Emperor Chungjên, came to the throne.

   Emperor "Chungjên" reigned "four years," and died. Iyin then set
T‘aiting's son, T‘aichia (Great A), on the throne. He was T‘ang the
Completer's eldest legitimate grandson. This was Emperor T‘aichia. <span
id="page_606_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_606_note_1)"In the first year of
Emperor T‘aichia. Iyin wrote the 'Instructions of I,' the 'Declaration
of the Appointment of Heaven,' and the 'Deceased Sovereign.' After
Emperor T‘aichia had been on the throne" three years, "he proved
unintelligent" and cruel. He did not obey T‘ang's laws, and his conduct
was disorderly, so <span
id="page_606_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_606_note_1)"Iyin placed him in the
Dryandra" (palace). For three years Iyin administered the government,
and as ruler of the State gave audience to the nobles. After the Emperor
T‘aichia had dwelt in the Dryandra palace <span
id="page_606_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_606_note_2)"for three years, he
repented of his errors, blamed himself, and amended his ways." Whereupon
Iyin met the Emperor T‘aichia and resigned to him the reins of
government. Emperor T‘aichia became virtuous, the princes all returned
to the Yin capital, and the people were tranquil. Iyin praised him, and
<span id="page_606_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_606_note_1)"wrote the
'Instructions to T‘aichia' in three books." Commending Emperor T‘aichia,
he honoured him with the title of 'Great Master.'

   'Great Master' died, and his son Wuting (Glossy D) came to the
throne. In Emperor Wuting's reign, Iyin died. <span
id="page_606_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_606_note_3)"When they had buried
Iyin at Po, Chiu Tan set forth as lessons the doings of Iyin; and the
'Wuting' was written."

   Wuting died, and his brother T‘aikêng (Great G), that is Emperor
T‘aikêng, came to the throne.

<span id="page_607">p. 607</span>

   Emperor T‘aikêng died, and his son Emperor Hsiaochia (Little A) came
to the throne.

   Emperor Hsiaochia died, and his brother Yungchi (Harmonious F), that
is Emperor Yungchi, came to the throne. The influence of the Yin dynasty
beginning to decline, the princes occasionally neglected to come to
court.

   Emperor Yungchi died, and his brother T‘aimou (Great E), that is
Emperor T‘aimou, came to the throne. In his reign <span
id="page_607_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_607_note_1)"Ichih became prime
minister, when there were omens in Po, for a mulberry tree and a stalk
of grain grew up together in the court." They attained full size in one
evening, and Emperor T‘aimou, being alarmed, questioned Ichih on the
subject. Ichih said: 'I, your servant, have heard that virtue is not
overcome by evil omens. There may be defects in your Majesty's
government, but let your Majesty cultivate virtue.' T‘aimou followed his
advice, and the ominous mulberry withered away. <span
id="page_607_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_607_note_1)"Ichih consulted with
Hsien the wizard," who governed the king's household admirably, <span
id="page_607_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_607_note_1)"and wrote the
'Hsien-ai'" and the 'T‘aimou.' Emperor <span
id="page_607_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_607_note_2)"T‘aimou spoke on the
subject with Ichih" in court, and said he was disloyal. Ichih gave up
his post, and <span
id="page_607_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_607_note_2)"wrote the original
commands." Yin prospered again, and the princes gave their allegiance to
the Emperor, who was called Middle Master.

   Middle Master died, and his son Emperor Chungting (Middle D) came to
the throne. Emperor <span
id="page_607_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_607_note_3)"Chungting removed to
Hsiao. Hotanchia lived in Hsiang." Tsuyi removed to Keng.

   Emperor Chungting died, and his brother Waijên (Outer I), that is
Emperor Waijen, came to the throne. The omissions in the book
'Chungting' were not supplied.

   Emperor Waijên died, and his brother Hotanchia (River <span
id="page_608">p. 608</span> Truth A), that is Emperor Hotanchia, came to
the throne. In his time the influence of Yin again began to wane.

   Hotanchia died, and his son Emperor Tsuyi (Ancestor B) came to the
throne. In Emperor Tsuyi's time Yin again prospered, and the wizard
Hsien held office.

   Tsuyi died, and his son Emperor Tsuhsin (Ancestor H) came to the
throne.

   Emperor Tsuhsin died, and his brother Wuchia (Glossy A), *i.e.*
Emperor Wuchia, came to the throne.

   Emperor Wuchia died, and Tsuting (Ancestor D), that is Emperor
Tsuting, who was Wuchia's elder brother, was put on the throne.

   Emperor Tsuting died, and his brother Wuchia's son, Nankêng (South
G), that is Emperor Nankêng, was put on the throne.

   Emperor Nankêng died, and Emperor Tsuting's son Yangchia (Male A),
that is Emperor Yangchia, was put on the throne. In his reign the power
of the Yins declined. Ever since the reign of Chungting the legitimate
heir had been set aside, and junior scions put on the throne instead.
These used to fight and displace each other. For the last nine
generations there had been anarchy, and the princes neglected to come to
court.

   Emperor Yangchia died, and his brother Pankêng (Plate G), that is
Emperor Pankêng, came to the throne. In his reign the Yins had their
capital on the north of the Yellow river, but Pankêng crossed to the
south of the river, and reoccupied the old palace of T‘ang the
Completer. This <span
id="page_608_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_608_note_1)"made the fifth change of
capital," and, as they had no fixed place of abode, <span
id="page_608_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_608_note_1)"the people of Yin
murmured and repined," for they did not like moving about. Pankêng made
the following announcement to the princes and ministers: 'Formerly our
exalted sovereign T‘ang the Completer, in conjunction with your
ancestors, decided what laws and regulations of the empire should be
attended to or set aside, but if you do not make an effort how can <span
id="page_609">p. 609</span> you attain perfection?' He then crossed over
to the south of the river, set up his capital at Po, and having adopted
T‘ang's system of government, the people were thereby tranquillized, and
the fortunes of Yin were again in the ascendant. The princes came to
court, and were influenced by the virtues of T‘ang the Completer.

   Emperor Pankêng died, and his brother Hsiaohsin (Little H), that is
Emperor Hsiaohsin, came to the throne. In his reign the power of Yin was
again on the wane. The people remembered Pankêng, and <span
id="page_609_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_609_note_1)"the 'Pankêng' in three
parts was written."

   Emperor Hsiaohsin died, and his brother Hsiaoyi (Little B), that is
Emperor Hsiaoyi, came to the throne.

   Emperor Hsiaoyi died, and his son Emperor Wuting (Martial D) came to
the throne. When Emperor Wuting was on the throne, he pondered how the
Yin dynasty could be revivified, but as he had not obtained an assistant
he <span id="page_609_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_609_note_2)"did not speak"
for three years, government affairs having to be conducted by the prime
minister, who examined into the customs of the country. Wuting <span
id="page_609_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_609_note_3)"dreamed" one night "that
he had found a holy man named Yue," and, in order that he might secure
the man he had seen in his dream, he passed under review his officers
and ministers of State, but not one of them was the right man. He then
<span id="page_609_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_609_note_3)"made all his
officers search for him in the wilds, and Yue was discovered at the crag
of Fu." At this time Yue was a clerk, not <span
id="page_609_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_609_note_2)"a builder at the crag of
Fu." He had an audience of Wuting, who said, 'That is the right man.'
Having talked with him, and finding that he really was a holy man,
Wuting <span id="page_609_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_609_note_2)"promoted
him to be his prime minister." The <span id="page_610">p. 610</span>
kingdom of Yin was well governed in consequence, and he was named after
the crag of Fu, being called Fu Yue. <span
id="page_610_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_610_note_1)"Wuting was sacrificing
to T‘ang the Completer" the next day, "when a pheasant flew up, lighted
on the ear of a tripod, and crowed." Wuting was alarmed, but <span
id="page_610_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_610_note_2)"Tsuchi (Ancestor F)
said" the king should not be anxious; he must first rectify the
administration of affairs. "Tsuchi accordingly lectured the king,
saying, 'In its superintendence over men below, Heaven pays special
regard to their proper behaviour, and bestows on them accordingly length
of years or the reverse. Heaven does not cut short men's lives; they
bring them to an end themselves. Some men may not have conformed to
virtue, and will not acknowledge their crimes; Heaven then charges them
to correct their conduct, but they say, 'What shall we do?' Ah! the king
should continuously treat the people with respect. Are they not Heaven's
descendants? Be constant in sacrificing, and do not worship with the
rites of a discarded religion.'" Wuting instituted a government reform,
and practised virtue. The whole nation rejoiced, and the fortunes of Yin
again flourished.

   Emperor Wuting died, and his son Emperor Tsukêng (Ancestor G) came to
the throne. Tsuchi commended Wuting for considering the omen of the
pheasant as a ground for practising virtue, and conferred on him the
posthumous title of 'exalted ancestor,' and <span
id="page_610_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_610_note_3)"the 'Day of the
Supplementary Sacrifice of Kaotsung' and the 'Instructions \[to
Kaotsung\]' were written."

   Emperor Tsukêng died, and his brother Tsuchia (Ancestor A), that is
Emperor Chia, came to the throne. He was dissipated, and the fortunes of
Yin again waned.

   Emperor Chia died, and his son Emperor Linhsin (Granary H) sat on the
throne.

   Emperor Linhsin died, and his brother Kêngting (G. D), that is
Emperor Kêngting, sat on the throne.

<span id="page_611">p. 611</span>

   Emperor Kêngting died, and his son Emperor Wuyi (Martial B) sat on
the throne. The Yins again left Po, and crossed to the north bank of the
river. The Emperor Wuyi was unprincipled and made images, which he
called 'Heavenly gods.' With these he played chess, ordering some one to
make the moves for them; and when the 'celestial gods' did not win he
abused them, and making a leather bag, filled it with blood, threw it up
and shot at it. This he called shooting at Heaven. While Wuyi was
hunting between the Yellow and Wei rivers, there was a clap of thunder,
and Wuyi was struck dead by lightning.

   His son Emperor T‘aiting (Great D) came to the throne. Emperor
T‘aiting died, and his son Emperor Yi (B) sat on the throne. In his
reign the fortunes of Yin declined still further. Emperor Yi's (B)
eldest son was Ch‘i, viscount of Wei. Ch‘i's mother being of low caste,
he could not be heir to the throne. His younger son was Hsin (H), whose
mother was the principal consort, and so he became the heir-apparent.

   Emperor Yi died, and his son Hsin sat on the throne. Emperor Hsin was
called by everybody in the empire Chou (the tyrant). Emperor Chou's
discrimination was acute, his hearing and sight particularly good, his
natural abilities extraordinary, and his physical strength equal to that
of a wild beast. He had cunning enough to evade reproofs, and volubility
enough to gloss over his faults. He boasted that he was above his
ministers on the ground of ability, and that he surpassed the people of
the empire on account of his reputation. He indulged in wine, women, and
lusts of all sorts. His partiality for Tachi (Actress F) caused him to
carry out whatever she desired, so that his ministers had to devise new
forms of dissipation, the most depraved dances and extravagant music; he
increased the taxation in order to fill the Stag tower with money, and
to store the granary at 'Big bridge.' He made a collection of dogs,
horses, and curiosities, with which he filled his palaces; and enlarging
his parks and towers at Shach‘iu, <span id="page_612">p. 612</span>
procured numbers of wild beasts and birds and put them therein. He
slighted the spirits, assembled a great number of play actors at
Shach‘iu, made a pond of wine, hung the trees with meat, made men and
women chase each other about quite naked, and had drinking bouts the
whole night long. The people murmured, and when the nobles rebelled
Chouhsin increased the severity of his punishments, instituting the
punishment of roasting.<span
id="page_612_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_612_note_1) He appointed Ch‘ang
Chief of the West, the prince of Chiu, and the prince of Ou his three
principal ministers. The prince of Chiu had a beloved daughter who was
sent in to the emperor, and when she disapproved of his debaucheries the
tyrant killed her in his rage, and made mincemeat of her father. The
prince of Ou objected, and vehemently remonstrated with him, whereupon
he was sliced to pieces. Ch‘ang Chief of the West, hearing of all this,
sighed furtively, but 'Tiger' the prince of Ts‘ung, being aware of it,
informed the tyrant, who thereupon cast Chief of the West into prison at
Yuli. His servant Hungyao and others procured a pretty girl, rare
curiosities, and fine horses, which they presented to the tyrant, who
thereupon pardoned Chief of the West. The latter went forth and gave the
country to the west of the Lo river to the tyrant, and begged that he
would abolish the punishment of roasting. The emperor agreed to this,
and gave him bows, arrows, axes, and halberds, with a commission to
start on a warlike expedition. He was appointed Chief of the West, and
Feich‘ung was employed in the government. Feich‘ung was fond of flattery
and greedy of gain, so the men of Yin were not attached to him. The
tyrant also gave Alai an appointment, but Alai was fond of vilifying
persons, so the princes became more and more estranged from the court.
Now Chief of the West, on returning from his expedition, secretly
cultivated virtue, and was charitable; many of the princes revolted from
<span id="page_613">p. 613</span> the tyrant and gave their allegiance
to Chief of the West, who from this time gained in influence, while the
tyrant rather lost his authority. The monarch's son Pikan remonstrated
with his father, but he was not listened to. Shangyung praised his
worth, and the people loved him, but the tyrant set him aside. Chief of
the West marched against and conquered the Chi State, and the tyrant's
minister <span id="page_613_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_613_note_1)"Tsu-i"
heard of it, and "blaming \[the house of\] Chou hurried off in alarm to
report it to the tyrant." <span
id="page_613_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_613_note_2)"He said: 'Heaven is
bringing to an end the destiny of our dynasty of Yin; great men and the
ancient tortoise do not venture to foretell good fortune. It is not that
the former kings do not aid us men of this later time; but you, O king,
by your dissoluteness and oppression are cutting yourself off. Heaven
has therefore rejected us; we do not eat our meals in peace, we do not
consider our heavenly nature, we do not follow and observe the statutes.
Our people are now all longing for the destruction of the dynasty,
saying, Why does not Heaven send down its awe-inspiring authority? Why
is not its great decree manifested? What remedy is there against the
present king?' The tyrant said: 'Is not my life secured by the decree of
Heaven?' Tsu-i returned, and said," 'The tyrant cannot be remonstrated
with.' Chief of the West having died, King Wu of Chou in his march
eastward arrived at the ford of Mêng. The princes revolted, and 800
princes of the house of Chou having assembled declared that the tyrant
ought to be attacked. King Wu said, 'You know nothing of Heaven's
decree,' and retired. The tyrant abandoned himself all the more to lust
and dissipation, and the viscount of Wei<span
id="page_613_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_613_note_3) remonstrated with him
several times, but he would not heed, so having consulted with the
senior and junior tutors the viscount <span id="page_614">p. 614</span>
of Wei withdrew from court. Pikan said, 'A minister cannot but argue to
the death'; he accordingly remonstrated vehemently with the tyrant, who
in a rage said, 'I have heard that the heart of a holy man has seven
apertures,' and cut Pikan open to look at his heart. The viscount of
Chi, in terror, then feigned himself mad, and <span
id="page_614_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_614_note_1)"became a slave," and the
tyrant again imprisoned him. The senior and junior tutors of Yin,
accordingly, taking the sacrificial and musical implements, hastened to
the Chou State, and King Wu of Chou upon this marched at the head of the
princes to attack the tyrant, who also sent out an army to withstand him
in the plain of Mu. On the day Chia-tzŭ the tyrant's troops were beaten,
and he himself fled to the Stag tower, which he ascended, and, putting
on his gorgeous robes and jewels, burnt himself to death. King Wu of
Chou then cut off the tyrant's head and exhibited it on a pole; he also
slew Tachi, <span
id="page_614_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_614_note_2)"released the viscount of
Chi from prison, raised a tumulus over the grave of Pikan, and made a
eulogy to the memory of Shangyung." His sons, Wukêng and Lüfu, were
appointed to continue the sacrifices to the Yins. He restored Pankêng's
mode of administration, and the people of Yin were greatly rejoiced.
Whereupon King Wu of Chou became Son of Heaven (emperor). His
descendants abolished the title of Ti (divine emperor), and called
themselves kings (Wang); and the descendants of the Yins were made
princes subordinate to the house of Chou.

   After the death of King Wu of Chou, Wukêng, Kuanshu, and Ts‘aishu
rebelled. King Ch‘eng ordered the duke of Chou to execute them, and the
viscount of Wei was established in the Sung State to continue (the
ancestral worship as) a descendant of the Yins.<span
id="page_614_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_614_note_3)

 

<span class="small">(*To be continued*.)</span>

<span class="small">{This series of translations was apparently never
continued in JRAS.}</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Ssuma Ch'ien](../../cfu/smc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_601">p. 601</span>

   <span id="page_601_note_1"></span>[1](#page_601_fr_1) The term Yusung
is doubtless a variant of Yu-hsiung, one of the names of the 'Yellow
Emperor' of the first chapter of the Records. The second of the two
characters may also be read Jung, for it is the same as the ordinary one
for 'Jung,' with the addition of the determinative 'woman' (\#\#\#), as
M. Lacouperie has already pointed out. Ssŭma Ch‘ien, in his history of
the Hsiungnu (Huns), also calls the tribe Mountain Jung, so that if
there were any truth in the history it might be shown that we have here
a tradition of the descent of the Chinese nation from the Huns. The name
Chien Ti means 'impetuous barbarian of the North.'

   <span id="page_601_note_2"></span>[2](#page_601_fr_2) The dark bird
is a swallow. In the third sacrificial ode of Shang ('Sacred Books of
the East,' iii, p. 307) we are told that 'Heaven commissioned the
swallow to descend and give birth to the Shangs.'

   <span id="page_601_note_3"></span>[3](#page_601_fr_3) Quoting the
passage from the Canon of Shun, also in the first chapter of the
Records.

<span id="footnotes_page_602">p. 602</span>

   <span id="page_602_note_1"></span>[1](#page_602_fr_1) From the
preface to the Shuching, paras. 9 and 10.

<span id="footnotes_page_603">p. 603</span>

   <span id="page_603_note_1"></span>[1](#page_603_fr_1) Iyin is stated
to have come to Po in the train of a daughter of the prince of Hsin,
whom T‘ang was marrying, and recommended himself to the favour of the
latter by his knowledge of cookery (L. C. II, p. 238).

   <span id="page_603_note_2"></span>[2](#page_603_fr_2) A native
commentator says that the guileless king was T‘ai-au-shang-huang (great
guileless supreme sovereign). The nine rulers are stated by one author
to be the 'three sovereigns,' the 'five gods,' and Yü, the founder of
the Hsia dynasty, while another says they are the 'nine sovereigns of
man' (*vide* Introductory Chapter to the Historical Records).

   <span id="page_603_note_3"></span>[3](#page_603_fr_3) Quotation from
the preface to the Shuching, para. 11.

   <span id="page_603_note_4"></span>[4](#page_603_fr_4) *Cf*. the name
K‘unmo, king of the Wusun country, to which a princess of China was sent
<span class="small">B.C.</span> 106.

   <span id="page_603_note_5"></span>[5](#page_603_fr_5) The whole of
the 'Speech of T‘ang,' being the first of the 'Books of Shang,' is here
quoted.

<span id="footnotes_page_604">p. 604</span>

   <span id="page_604_note_1"></span>[1](#page_604_fr_1) Preface to the
Shuching, para. 12.

   <span id="page_604_note_2"></span>[2](#page_604_fr_2) It is
noticeable that the term 'warlike king' was applied to the founders of
both the Shang and Chou dynasties, as well as to the emperor under whose
sway the historian wrote.

   <span id="page_604_note_3"></span>[3](#page_604_fr_3) Quotation from
the 14th and 13th paragraphs of the preface to the Shuching.

   <span id="page_604_note_4"></span>[4](#page_604_fr_4) Quotation from
the preface to the Shuching, paras. 15 and 16. The 'Announcement of
Chunghui' is the second book of Shang, and the 'Announcement of T‘ang'
the third book of Shang.

<span id="footnotes_page_605">p. 605</span>

   <span id="page_605_note_1"></span>[1](#page_605_fr_1) Quotation from
the preface to the Shuching, paras. 20 and 17. The 'Both possessed pure
Virtue' is the sixth book of Shang.

   <span id="page_605_note_2"></span>[2](#page_605_fr_2) Quotation from
Mencius (L. C. II, p. 236), Dr. Legge having noticed the historical
difficulty as to T‘ang's successor, and intimated that he should follow
the standard chronology, which omits the reigns of Waiping and Chungjên,
it would be as well to give the reading of Mencius, which, although
rather vague, seems to confirm the historian's statement. Mencius says:
"After T‘ang's demise, T‘aiting did not come to the throne. Waiping two
years; Chungjên four years; T‘aichia turned upside down the statutes of
T‘ang, and Iyin placed him in T‘ung," etc. Dr. Legge considers that the
language of the 18th paragraph of the preface to the Shuching, viz.
"After the death of T‘ang, the first year of T‘aichia," is opposed to
the view that there were two reigns between T‘ang and T‘aichia.

<span id="footnotes_page_606">p. 606</span>

   <span id="page_606_note_1"></span>[1](#page_606_fr_1) Quotations from
the preface to the Shuching, paras. 18 and 19. The 'Instructions of I
and the T‘aichia' are the fourth and fifth books of Shang.

   <span id="page_606_note_2"></span>[2](#page_606_fr_2) Quotation from
Mencius, V, 1, VI, 5.

   <span id="page_606_note_3"></span>[3](#page_606_fr_3) Quotation from
the preface to the Shuching, para. 21.

<span id="footnotes_page_607">p. 607</span>

   <span id="page_607_note_1"></span>[1](#page_607_fr_1) Quotations from
the preface to the Shuching, para. 22.

   <span id="page_607_note_2"></span>[2](#page_607_fr_2) Quotations from
the preface to the Shuching, para. 23.

   <span id="page_607_note_3"></span>[3](#page_607_fr_3) Quotation from
paras. 24 and 25 of the preface to the Shuching. Para. 26 reads: "Tsuyi
was overthrown in Kêng."

<span id="footnotes_page_608">p. 608</span>

   <span id="page_608_note_1"></span>[1](#page_608_fr_1) From para. 27
of preface to the Shuching. The Pankêng is the seventh book of Shang.

<span id="footnotes_page_609">p. 609</span>

   <span id="page_609_note_1"></span>[1](#page_609_fr_1) Para. 27 of
preface to the Shuching.

   <span id="page_609_note_2"></span>[2](#page_609_fr_2) This passage
becomes more intelligible on referring to the 'Charge to Yue,' or the
eighth book of Shang, a portion of which is quoted (L. C. III, pt. i, p.
250), where the king says: "As it is mine to secure what is right in the
four quarters of the empire, I have been afraid that my virtue is not
equal to that of my predecessors, and, therefore have not spoken. But
while I was respectfully and silently thinking of the right way, I
dreamt that God gave me a good assistant, who should speak for me. He
then minutely described the appearance of the person, and caused search
to be made for him, by means of an image of him, throughout the empire.
Yue, a builder in the country of Fuyen, was found like," etc.

   <span id="page_609_note_3"></span>[3](#page_609_fr_3) Para. 28 of
preface to the Shuching.

<span id="footnotes_page_610">p. 610</span>

   <span id="page_610_note_1"></span>[1](#page_610_fr_1) From para. 29
of preface to the Shuching.

   <span id="page_610_note_2"></span>[2](#page_610_fr_2) Here follows
the whole of the book called 'The Day of the Supplementary Sacrifice of
Kaotsung,' that being the ninth book of Shang.

   <span id="page_610_note_3"></span>[3](#page_610_fr_3) From para. 29
of preface to the Shuching.

<span id="footnotes_page_612">p. 612</span>

   <span id="page_612_note_1"></span>[1](#page_612_fr_1) This was a
copper rod placed over a pan of live charcoal, and rubbed with grease,
and arranged in such a way that when the poor wretches had to cross over
it, they slipped and fell into the fire.

<span id="footnotes_page_613">p. 613</span>

   <span id="page_613_note_1"></span>[1](#page_613_fr_1) From 30th
paragraph of preface to the Shuching.

   <span id="page_613_note_2"></span>[2](#page_613_fr_2) The tenth book
of Shang, called 'The Chief of the West's Conquest of Li,' is here
quoted throughout, with the exception of the last sentence.

   <span id="page_613_note_3"></span>[3](#page_613_fr_3) The eleventh or
last book of Shang is referred to. Every book in the first part of the
Shuching has now been quoted from or referred to.

<span id="footnotes_page_614">p. 614</span>

   <span id="page_614_note_1"></span>[1](#page_614_fr_1) This expression
is found in the Analects, 18, i.

   <span id="page_614_note_2"></span>[2](#page_614_fr_2) Quotation from
the third book of Chou, called 'Successful Completion of the War.'

   <span id="page_614_note_3"></span>[3](#page_614_fr_3) As the period
recorded in this chapter extends from <span class="small">B.C.</span>
2256 to 1122, according to the accepted chronology, it must be admitted
that the details are meagre in the extreme. Of the forty-three reigns,
including the thirteen prior to T‘ang the Completer, we have merely a
list of names of the rulers (and this is also the case with eleven out
of the seventeen emperors of the Hsia dynasty), <span
id="footnotes_page_615">p. 615</span> and the chapter is chiefly made up
of ridiculous legends and pompous announcements. Again, every one of the
thirty emperors of this dyasty has a name compounded of one of the '10
stems'—used for the cycle and for numeration, and which I have,
therefore, translated by a letter of the alphabet—and a word such as
'ancestor,' 'great,' 'little,' 'martial,' etc. It has been alleged that
the real names of these emperors have been tabooed, but those who assert
this should be prepared to state where we are to look for the real
names, for the histories do not give any others than those I have
mentioned, and should give their authority for the statement that the
names were actually tabooed. Cyclical characters also form part of the
names of five of T‘ang the Completer's immediate ancestors, of Wuting's
minister, and of the vile consort of the last sovereign of the Yin
dynasty. If it were the custom to taboo the names of the emperors of the
dynasty (and history does not relate that such was the case), why should
the names of these people also be tabooed? It is hard to reconcile so
many strange coincidences with actual facts. Surely it is more natural
to suppose that the historian, who had reformed the calendar just before
he wrote his history, and whose mind was, therefore, running on cyclical
characters, should have used them as names for his fictitious emperors.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
