[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE MEGHA-SÛTRA

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

 

#### \[New Series, Volume XII\]

###### \[London, Trübner and Company\]

#### \[1880\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, March 2002}

###### {circumflexes represent macrons in this file}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ART. X.--*The Megha-Sûtra*. By CECIL BENDALL, Fellow of Gonville and
Caius College, Cambridge.

   THE following article was originally suggested by a notice in
Beal's<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> "Catena of Buddhist
Scriptures from the Chinese." The sûtra is there selected as a type of
the latest phase of Buddhist literature, not only on account of its own
peculiarities, but owing to its religious importance among the Chinese,
which caused the imperial rescript for its translation and general
promulgation, of which an English version is there given. The two parts
of which this sûtra is composed are mentioned as Nos. 15 and 16 of vol.
14 of the Tibetan "Gyut," by Csoma Körösi in As. Res. xx. p. 529; the
names of the translators fix its date as earlier than the ninth century.
Finding that the Sanskrit original existed in the great, and hitherto
unworked, mine of Northern Buddhist literature, the Wright Collection of
Nepalese Sanskrit MSS. in the University Library of Cambridge, it was
suggested to me by Prof. Cowell, to whose assistance I have been
throughout deeply indebted, that it might prove generally interesting if
an edition of the sûtra were prepared. A perusal, however, of the work
showed such a preponderance of the objectionable peculiarities of this
branch of Tantric literature, endless repetitions of words and thought,
huge and meaningless congestions of epithets and titles, vast
catalogues<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> of names, and in
fact such an entire absence of literary merit of any kind, that the
project of preparing a complete edition was abandoned, and the following
annotated abridgment drawn

\[1. See also [Fergusson, "Tree and Snake Worship," p. 55](ns12-10a.md) {p.
51 of the 1st ed.}, where some further account of the Chinese version is
given, and one of its illustrations reproduced; the observations as to
the date may be corrected, however, by a reference to Csoma (as
presently quoted).

2\. *e.g.* the list of 177 snakes at the beginning.\]

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

up. The text of these extracts is based on the Cambridge MS., of which I
have made a nearly complete transcript, and which I call A, and the MS.
in the Hodgson Collection of the Royal Asiatic Society (B), which I have
collated for this article.

   A few preliminary remarks on these MSS. may be not superfluous.

   A, is a palm-leaf, 16 inches by 2 inches, 5 lines on each page, dated
N.S. 494 = A.D. 1374. It is written in the peculiar and often very
difficult handwriting of the Nepalese of the period; and abounds in
errors such as the confusion of {Sanskrit: *.sa{?}*} and {Sanskrit:
*sa*} and of {Sanskrit: *.na*} and {Sanskrit: *na*}, which seem to show
the scribe's knowledge of Sanskrit to have been very small indeed.

   B, on the other hand, though a modern<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> paper transcript, is a fairly careful
copy of a good original, and clearly has independent authority.
Conjectural emendations of my own of the readings of A have been in very
many cases confirmed. I am also indebted to the courtesy of Prof. Beal
for help derived from a comparison of the Chinese transliterations of
the mystic names of charms on page 297.

   The following extracts, then, contain all the significant parts of
the sûtra, the nature of the omitted portions being everywhere
indicated.<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> The text is
founded on a comparison of the MSS., obvious blunders and vernacular
barbarisms in either being passed by unnoticed, and the genuine
differences of reading only being noted. Only the flagrant errors of
Sandhi, so common in Buddhist MSS., have been, as a rule, corrected.

   (References to the Divyâvadâna in the notes are to the pages of the
edition by Prof. Cowell and Mr. Neil, now in the press.)

\[1. It bears date on the cover, N.S. 888 = A.D. 1768.

2\. In the case of repeated epithets, etc., *e.g.* p. 292, ll. 8, 17; p.
294, 3 ( = p. 293, ll. 10, 27; 295, 4) the first words only are printed
again. Cf. also pp. 306, 307.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

TRANSLATION.

   Worship to the inconceivable oceans, to the all-enlightened.

   Thus was it heard by me; on one occasion the Venerable one dwelt in
the palace of the Snake-Kings Nanda and Upananda, in the summer pavilion
of the circle of mighty clouds filled with precious gems and jewels
accompanied by a mighty assemblage of bhikshus, and by a mighty
assemblage of bodhisatvas, and a mighty host of kings, to wit, Nanda the
Snake King, and Upananda . . . . etc. . . . . . . . . . attended, I say,
by 84 hundreds of thousands of millions of krores of snakes assembled
and seated together.

   Now at that time all these snake-kings with their retinue, rising
from their seats, placing their upper robes on one shoulder, putting
their right knees on the ground, bending their clasped hands towards the
Venerable One, with immeasurable and innumerable, and with infinitely
various and resplendent flowers, incense, odours, garlands, unguents,
sandal, monks' robes, shades, banners, canopies, silks, wreaths,
instruments, motions to the beat of drums; symphonies; jewel-flowers,
jewel-strings, pearl-chains, snake-flowers, and pearl-nets, rustling,
murmuring, emitting a mighty blast, sounding a mighty sound, and
sounding delightful sounds of the Law, overshadowing the Venerable One
with a great marvellous store of aloes and saffron, made the
pradakshi.na.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

   After this salutation they stood on one side; standing on one side
they made supplications.

   "Let us worship, let us reverence, esteem, honour the
samudras<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> of Bodhisatvas with
\[their\] samudras of bodies equal \[in number\] to the dust of the
infinitesimal atoms of the elements of the universe, in the samudras of
the assemblies of Bodhisatvas, in the samudras of the extension of
elements of the universe, in the atoms of all earth, water, fire, wind,
and in the atoms of the manifestations of all forms, as well as in each
several atom, riding upon the sea-clouds, immeasurable and innumerable,
with samudras of cloud-bodies exceeding the samudras of all computation,
and exceeding the innumerable, the immeasurable, the inconceivable, the
unequalled, and the unmeted, the unknowable, yet (each) in their own
several body, \[coming\] from the direction of the streams of every
quarter, and from every portion of each atom, with samudras of bodies
which are the adoration of all, and which spread through the shores of
all quarters in unbroken stream.

   To wit, occupying the expanse of firmament which is covered with
infinite, innumerable, inconceivable, unequalled, immeasurable,
unterminable, incomprehensible, and undivided sea-clouds, taking their
origin from full religious purity successively,<sup><span
class="small">\[6\]</span></sup> with sea-clouds which are the shapes of
Bodhisatvas, likewise with sea-clouds in circles of shapes of every sun
and moon compacted of the rays of the colour of every gem; with
sea-clouds of pavilions filled with the radiance of every gem, with
sea-clouds of the buds of every sandal-tree, with sea-clouds having the
appearance of all forms and all odours and fragrance, with sea-clouds of
instruments resounding with all noises, with sea-clouds of all trees of
fragrance, mounting the expanse of heaven (thus) overshadowed

\[1. *Samudra* seems to be employed in this and similar passages with
reference to its meaning of "an infinite number."

6\. Cf. Manu, 3, 76.\]

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

with samudras of clouds of all worship, of which the chief are such (as
described), immeasurable, innumerable, inconceivable, unequalled,
unmeted, incommensurable, unknowable, moreover in unbroken series,
\[with all these\], let us worship, reverence, esteem and honour all the
Buddhas and Bodhisatvas."

   Thus having made supplication, the Snake-Kings again thrice made the
pradakshi.na to the Venerable One and did salutation to his feet; then
at the command of the Venerable sat down on their own several seats:
moreover, on that occasion the great supreme King of Snakes, with three
thousand mighty thousands, whose kingly shade was the circle of glory of
a mass of clouds and endless retinue, rising from bis seat, and putting
his upper robe on one shoulder, placed his right knee on the ground, and
bending the a"njali of homage towards the Venerable, addressed him as
follows:--

   "I would ask the Venerable, the Tathâgata, the fully enlightened
Arhat somewhat, as a question for decision, if the Venerable One has
leisure, being asked, for the explanation of my question."

   At these words, the Venerable One thus addressed the snake-sovereign
whose form was most regal through the pavilion of the circle of radiance
of the mass of clouds, his boundless ocean of followers, "Ask,
Snake-monarch, whatsoever thing thou desirest, by the solution of thy
question concerning even that will I appease thy mind." At these words
the Serpent-King, with three thousand . . . . . thus bespake the
Venerable One, "How, O Venerable One, may all the troubles of all the
snakes subside; (and how) may <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> they
(thus) gladdened and blessed, send forth rain-torrents here, seasonably
for Jambudvîpa; make all grasses, bushes, herbs, forest-trees to grow;
produce all corn; give rise to all juices, whereby the men of Jambudvîpa
may become blessed?"

   At these words the Venerable One thus addressed the Snake-monarch,
with three thousand . . . etc.: "Excellent! excellent! O
Serpent-monarch, in that thou, acting for the good pleasure of all
creatures, dost think fit to inquire of the Venerable with such an
object.

   Therefore, snake-king, hearken, and ponder it well and carefully in
thy mind; I will tell thee. By the One Law, O snake-king, may all the
troubles of the snakes subside, and they may become endowed with bliss.

   By which 'One-Law'? Even by charity; therein devas and men,
snake-king, living in charity, are not burned by fire, nor hurt by
weapons, nor carried away by water, nor slain by poison, nor overcome by
a neighbour's host; they shall slumber sweetly, and sweetly they awake
and are guarded by their own holiness, being glorified by the glory of
great holiness, and are indestructible by this world with the world of
devas, and gracious, and fair of countenance, and everywhere unhindered
in their goings, with all griefs subsided, gladdened and endowed with
all bliss.

   And hereafter, after the dissolution of the body, pervaded by human
attributes, they are born in the Brahma-world, through the exercise of
charity, O king. These, O king, are the praises of devas and men who
live in charity. Now therefore, snake-king, ye must live with benevolent
action of body, speech and mind. Again, further, snake-king, a dhâra.ni
called 'Sarvasukhandadâ' must be put in action. That is destined to put
to rest all serpents' woes, and to give all blessings: because here in
Jambudvîpa in <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> season and for a season
it produces clouds; and causes to arise all grass, shrubs, herbage,
forest-trees, and corn. Now, O snake, which is that Dhâra.ni called
Sukhandadâ? It is as follows:--Dhâra.ni, Dhâra.ni Uttâra.ni,
Sampratish.thitâ, Vijaya, Var.nasatya, Pratijñâ, Sâhâjnânavati,
Utpâdani, Vinâçani, Abhishecha.ni, Abhivyâhâraçubhâvati, Ajâmatâmahi,
Kumbalanivâhâ, 'Take away troubles!' 'Shake off sin!' 'Cleanse the
paths!' Rîhakâ, Dharmatâsu;--such are the words.

   Again, snake-king, the names are to be repeated of the Tathâgatas,
whose families and races are sprung from the one hair-tip of Vairochana,
speedy producers of happiness \[consisting of\] a circle here of clouds,
which are the banner of their illumining knowledge, having their
production and origin from the splendour of the mass which is the site
of the source of cloud-gatherings.

   These put to rest all the woes of all the snakes, of all the families
of snakes, the races of snakes, births and productions of snakes, of all
snake-kings, of all snake-descended cloud-illumined virgins of all
snake-retinues; they bring together all supplies of blessings. Herein, O
King, what are <span id="page_299">p. 299</span> those names of
Tathâgatas? I name them by saying<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>, 'Homage to the Tathâgata
Vairochanagarbhamahâmegha . . .'

   By the utterance of these names of Tathâgatas, O snake-king, all woes
of all snakes are set at rest, and \[though\] fraught with ills they
create here in Jambudvîpa showers in season and for a season, and make
all grass, shrubs, herbs, forest-trees, and corn, to grow." Then the
snake-king with endless . . . . . thus entreated the Venerable One, "Let
the Venerable One speak such words of charms that through their
utterance here in Jambudvîpa, in the latter season and time, in drought,
mighty showers may give rains in time of calamity, in time of
difficulty, in times of turmoil in the iron age of a lawless people, in
time of accident and misfortune, of disease and death, of the
conjunction of adverse planets, let Him work the assuagement of all
calamities, accidents and pains. Let the Venerable One, of his supreme
pitifulness and mercy toward all beings, speak words of spells so formed
as to invoke all snakes, destroy all Maras, shield off all injuries of
all beings and their pains and affections and fears, and cause peace and
salvation, and mitigate the effects of adverse stars; moreover, let them
stop all the hindrances to rain that have been foretold by the Venerable
One, and fully create showers here in Jambudvîpa. I supplicate the
Venerable Tathâgata."

   On this being said, the Venerable thus bespake the snake-king with
endless . . . . . "Excellent! excellent! serpent-king, that thou
shouldst supplicate the Tathâgata for the wealth, goodliness, and bliss
of all creatures. Therefore, snake-king, hearken well, and fully ponder
in thine heart, I will declare unto thee.

   The Dhâra.nî is called Mahâkaru.nodbhava, etc., spoken, appointed,
and approved by all the Buddhas for the weal

<span class="small">\[1. literally . . . "to wit," as often in the
Divyâvadâna and Lalita-vistara.\]</span>

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

and bliss of all beings; which causes rain in time of drought, and
checks excessive rain, alleviates death and pain, invokes all the
snakes, gladdens all devas, destroys all Mâras, and makes all beings
endowed with all bliss; to wit: "O thou who shinest with mighty
knowledge, the mass of whose thunderbolts have their might firm through
the beauty and glory of Çrî, radiant as the Sun, with the banner of
holiness, and supremely bright and spotless, with thy slender and pure
form. . . . . .

   \[Here follow several pages of gibberish and mysticism, . . . .\]

\*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*      

   \[After this, commences a long series of invocations to the nâgas for
rain by aid of various personages, thus:--\]

   O mighty snakes, bring rain here by the appointment of the truth of
all Devas, hail! By the appointment of the truth of Brahma, rain here in
Jambudvîpa, hail!

   By that of Çakra,<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> . . . By
that of the four mahârâjas,<sup><span class="small">\[4\]</span></sup> .
. . of the eight good qualities, . . . of the Çrotâpanna,<sup><span
class="small">\[6\]</span></sup> . . . the Sak.ridâgâmi,<sup><span
class="small">\[6\]</span></sup> . . . the Anâgâmi,<sup><span
class="small">\[6\]</span></sup> . . . the Arhat,<sup><span
class="small">\[6\]</span></sup> ...the Pratyekabuddha.<sup><span
class="small">\[7\]</span></sup>

   \[After returning to devas, and Tathâgatas in general, we find
similar invocations to mythical beings, borrowed from Brahmanism, viz.
the Yakshas, Gandharvas, Asuras, Garu.das, Kinnaras. To this succeed
pages more of mysticism, with gibberish everywhere interspersed; then
many of the Nâgarâjas are invoked or re-invoked by name, and the charm
ends with the words--\]

\[3. Indra as a Buddhist archangel.

4\. The four Lokapâlas at the four cardinal points, guarding the lowest
devalokas.

6\. These are the four classes of âryas corresponding to the four paths.

7\. One who has attained Buddha-ship, but does not preach: opposed to
the 'Samyaksambuddha.'\]

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

   Homage to all the Buddhas: may the words of the spell be successful:
hail! (Thus ends) the 64th parivarta, called Varshâgamanama.n.dali of
the hundred-thousand-fold Mahâmegha mahâyâna sûtra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   He who desires a mighty rain must perform this rite 'the
great-cloud-circle' in an open space, overspread by a blue canopy,
shaded by a blue banner, on a clear spot of earth; (being) a prophet of
the Law, seated on a blue seat, fasting according to the ash.tânga, with
well-washed limbs, clad in pure raiment, anointed with fragrant odour,
wearing the three white stripes, he must recite it for a day and night
continuously facing the east; he must place four full vessels, filled
with pure blue water, after prayers to the Tathâgatas also, according to
his power, an oblation, and flowers and odours; then the prophet of the
Law, after having painted towards the four quarters with liquid cow-dung
on a reed, in the eastern quarter three hastas<sup><span
class="small">\[6\]</span></sup> high must depict the snake-king called
Triçîrshaka, with cow-dung: in the southern quarter hill called
Pa"nchaçîrshaka five hastas high; in the western, seven hastas high.
Saptaçîrshaka; in the northern, Navaçîrshaka, nine hastas high.

   And the prophet of the Law, with his own safety secured, and living
in goodwill, shall behave towards all beings with compassion, (and)
after prayers to all the Buddhas and Bodhisatvas shall perform this rite
to the snakes with the motive of his own prosperity. Afterward, at a
season of drought, he shall recite this chapter 'The
great-cloud-circle,' for one day or for two, until it needs shall rain
seven nights. Even the sea may overflow its shore, but his auspicious
word "Rain" fails not; nay, he must sustain himself on the three sweets,
ghee, honey and sugar, and by

<span class="small">\[6. A hasta = about 18 inches.\]</span>

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

rice, sugar, milk, etc., joined with all virtues of character, and
repeat this; so it must needs be effectual, according to the word of the
Lord of Speakers. Worship to the immovable Tathâgata; worship to
Çâkyamuni, the Tathâgata.

   Thus did I hear; once on a time the Venerable One was dwelling in the
great sea, in a pavilion of gem and jewel crests with a mighty host of
snakes, a full thousand of serpents; all possessed of all the
supernatural powers of the snakes, with a mighty snake-retinue: to wit,
with Nanda, etc., . . .

   And all these snake-kings, with these and other thousands of mighty
snake-kings, with mighty snake-power and mighty magic pomp, with
hissings in the air, sending forth a mighty wind and rain, approached to
do obeisance to the Venerable One, and to hear the Law. Now at that time
the Venerable One gave applause to the great snakes: "Bravo! bravo! O
serpents!

\*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*      \*      

   In crowds whose ornament is the magic pomp of mighty clouds, with
great sea-clouds with pendants of pearls, glittering strings, cloth of
gold and all jewel-crests, with clouds, etc., . . . let them overshadow
the sky, let them approach the snake-kings of all snakes in this round
world, let them shine, let them rain, rain down, roar, give forth a
mighty show of lightning, striving, striving together, rumbling,
rustling, setting in motion great sounds of snakes, delightful noises,
giving voice together to a mighty voice.

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

   Come, come, mighty serpents; hail! I summon the snake-king Pau.n.dra
by the truth of Buddha to Jambudvîpa.

   I summon the snake-king Çrîteja by the truth of the Law to
Jambudvîpa; Ananta, etc., . . . by the truth of the priesthood . . .

Vâsuki . . . by that of Indra . . .  
Takshaka. . . by that of Brahma. . .  
Çrîka.n.tha . . . . . of Indra . . .  
Erâva.na . . . . . . . Vish.nu . . .  
Mâlina . . . . . the Rudras . .  
Manaswin . . . . the .Rishis . . .  
Vidrâva.na . . . all the snake-kings .  
Praspho.ta . . . . the Yakshas  
Anavatapta . . . . . . Râkshasas  
All the snakes . by the ever higher truth (?)

   Tarry not, come, O mighty snake-kings, I summon all hearts of snakes.

   I murmur (?) sara hara dhapa . . .

   Fill all the fields, rain on all the corn, let loose great winds.

 

   By the ordinance of all the Buddhas, by the ordinance of all the
Bodhisatvas, by the truth of the snakes, I summon the hearts of all
snakes; come quickly, by the grace of the Triple Gem.<sup><span
class="small">\[4\]</span></sup>

<span class="small">\[4. Ratna-traya \[or triratna . . .\] is the
Personification of the Buddha, the Law, and the Church (sa"ngha) . . .
.\]</span>

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

   Worship to the Triple Gem, worship to him who hath a hot bolt in
hand, lord of the mighty host of Yakshas, wearing the form of Kâla in
its various junctures; in the end of one's robe a knot must be tied with
seven prayers by the prophet of the Law after he has previously made
provision for his safety. This "Whirlwind"-Chapter, (also) called "The
heart of all Serpents," must be recited. For thrice seven days
uninterruptedly, with cow-dung, in the eastern quarter the snake-king
called Triple-crest,<sup><span class="small">\[4\]</span></sup> with his
retinue, must be painted; in the western, the snake king called
Avabhâsanasikhin is to be painted, seven-crested, with a retinue of
serpents; in the north, the snake-king called Meghasa"nchodana,
nine-crested, is to be depicted; a blue canopy and blue dress, blue
banner and all the offering is to be made blue; but the sweet offering
to the snakes, and the triple-sweet,<sup><span
class="small">\[8\]</span></sup> must be offered,--an oblation of all;
with (this) "Heart of the snakes;" the cloud-monarchs too must be
depicted, emitting a shower, and rubbing against one another; at the end
masses of rain-birds and lightning are to be painted; and parched rice
canopied by the swastika,<sup><span class="small">\[11\]</span></sup>
also fish and flesh, and honey-food without curds,<sup><span
class="small">\[12\]</span></sup> and a sumptuous offering must be made
there. Then the prophet of the Law, pure and clad in pure raiment, must
recite this "Whirlwind" chapter, "The Heart of Snakes." Then the snakes
beginning on the first day, make a rustling sound and utter sounds of
delight.

\[4. For the whole passage, cf. p. 303 *supra*.

8\. Sugar, honey, and ghee.

11\. This *swastika* may either be the well-known four-pointed figure,
or the (three-pointed) figure of rice, cited by M. W. s.v. swastika as
used in the rites of Durgâ.

12\. The Mandhu-parka (v. Manu and Âçwalâyana) consisted of honey *with*
curds.\]

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

   And in this chapter there is no disappointment; or there is the
precept, "If the sea should exceed its bounding shore, (only) then would
this rain exceed (its due time of coming)."

   Glory to the fully enlightened Arhat, the Tathâgata
Çrîgarbhaku.tavinarditarâja . . .

   Worship to the Venerable One, health be to me, goodwill to all
creatures! May all beings have security! May the distress of all beasts
be assuaged! Homage to the remover of all the besetting sins! May this
rite of the Tathâgatas be successful, the rite watched over by all the
Buddhas whose words are "Expand, expand . . . all hail!" Whoso hath the
head purified, be they Bhikshu or Bhikshu.nî, Upâsaka or Upâsikâ, let
him, clothed in pure raiment with charity at heart, write these names of
Tathâgatas, and put them on a seat, and then throw into the air a
spoonful of seven odours. Let him repeat the names of Tathâgatas five
times severally. He must do great service, and continue in case of
drought for seven days; (then) the deva will rain.

   Here endeth the 65th chapter.--"The Whirlwind"--the "Great Cloud"--a
"Great Vehicle Sutra."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)
