[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Hindu
Articles](../../hin/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# The Šikshâ-Patrî of the Svâmi-Nârâya.na Sect

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

 

#### \[New Series, Volume XIV\]

###### \[London, Trübner and Company\]

#### \[1882\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002. Circumflexes represent macrons in this file, and ç represents c with an acute marking. Also, the name Brahma (not Param Brahma) is spelled with a breve over the final a, which is not represented.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_733">p. 733</span>

> ART. XXIV.--*Sansk.rit Text of the Šikshâ-Patrî of the Svâmi-Nârâya.na
> Sect*. Edited by Professor MONIER WILLIAMS, C.I.E., D.C.L.

\[THE text of the Šikshâ-Patrî of the modern Vaish.nava Sect, called
Svâmi-Nârâya.na, was lithographed in Samvat 1928 (A.D. 1872) by order of
the Heads of the Sect. It has a Gujarâtî Commentary by Nityânanda-muni.
So far as I know, this is the only version of the text that has yet
appeared. It was given to me by the Wartâl Mahârâja on the occasion of
my first visit to Wartâl in 1875. It is full of mistakes, and in
preparing the following edition of the text I have taken as my guide the
far more accurate manuscript and Sansk.rit commentary written by
Pa.n.dit Šatânanda-muni, and given to me by the Mahârâja on the same
occasion.\]

<span id="page_750">p. 750</span>

TRANSLATION OF THE FOREGOING ŠIKSHÂ-PATRÎ.  
BY PROFESSOR MONIER WILLIAMS.

   \[In making the following translation I have been careful to study
the Sansk.rit commentary called Artha-dîpikâ, written for me in clear
beautiful characters by Pa.n.dit Šatânanda-muni (one of the disciples of
Svâmi-Nârâya.na), by order of the Wartâl Mahârâja, after one of the
formal visits to the Wartâl Temple, which were kindly arranged for me by
Mr. Frederick Sheppard, C.S., late Collector of Kaira, and now
Commissioner. The translation is the first ever made by any European
scholar, though it is right I should mention that I have consulted a
fairly accurate version (not always perfect either in its renderings or
its English) written by She.th Bhogilâl Prânjîvandâs, of the Bombay
Education Society's Institution, Ahmedabad, and given in Mr. H. C.
Briggs' work, "The Cities of Gujarâsh.tra." I have also received
assistance from my friend Pa.n.dit Shyâmajî K.rish.na-varmâ, of Balliol
College, Oxford.\]

 

   <span id="pp_1"></span>1. I meditate in my heart on that K.rish.na on
whose left side is seated Râdhâ, on whose breast reclines Šrî (Lakshmî),
and who enjoyed sport (with them) in V.rindâvana.

   <span id="pp_2"></span>2. I, Sahajânanda.h Svâmî (afterwards called
Svâmî-Nârâya.na), living at V.rittâlaya, write this Letter of
instructions (or Book of directions) to all my followers scattered
throughout various countries.

   <span id="pp_3"></span>3. Let the two youths named Ayodhyâ-prasâda
and Raghu-vîra, the sons of my two brothers, Râma-pratâpa and
Iççhâ-râma, who were the children of Dharma (or Hari-prasâda);

   <span id="pp_4"></span>4. And let those Naish.thika Brahmaçârîs (that
is to say, those Brahmans who continue Brahma-çârîs or celibates all
<span id="page_751">p. 751</span> their lives), the chief among whom is
Mukundânanda, and those G.rihasthas (householders), such as
Mayârâma-Bha.t.ta, and other of my followers;

   <span id="pp_5"></span>5. And let those women, whether wives or
widows, who have become my disciples, and the whole number of holy men
(Sâdhus), such as Muktânanda and others;

   <span id="pp_6"></span>6. Let all these (persons) constantly give
heed to my prayers for their perpetual continuance in their own proper
duties--(my prayers) offered up with repetition of the name K.rish.na
(Nârâya.na), and in accordance with the sacred scriptures.
(Literally--Let my benedictory words which keep them in their own duties
be always read by all these persons accompanied by repetition of the
name of K.rish.na, and approved by the Šâstras.)

   <span id="pp_7"></span>7. Let this Letter of directions, which has
important objects (to be hereafter enumerated), and which promotes the
welfare of all living beings, be studied with perfect concentration of
mind by all these (persons).

   <span id="pp_8"></span>8. Those (virtuous) persons who conform to the
good usages enjoined by the sacred Šâstras will always enjoy great
happiness both in this world and in that which is to come.

   <span id="pp_9"></span>9. But those evil-minded persons who wilfully
transgress such (good usages) will certainly suffer great misery in this
world as well as in the next.

   <span id="pp_10"></span>10. Therefore let all of you who are my
disciples always remain careful and well-contented in the observance of
this (Book of directions).

   <span id="pp_11"></span>11. Let no followers of mine ever
intentionally kill any living thing whatever--not even a louse, flea, or
the most minute insect.

   <span id="pp_12"></span>12. The killing of any animal such as a goat,
etc., for the purpose of sacrificing to the Gods and Pit.ris, must not
be practised; because it is declared, that abstinence from injury to
others is the highest of all duties.

   <span id="pp_13"></span>13. The killing of any human being in any
way, at any place, for any object, (even) for the sake of acquiring a
wife, wealth, or political supremacy, is wholly prohibited.

<span id="page_752">p. 752</span>

   <span id="pp_14"></span>14. Suicide at a sacred place of pilgrimage,
or from passion, either by hanging, or by poison in consequence of the
commission of a criminal act,<span id="page_752_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_752_note_1.md) is prohibited.

   <span id="pp_15"></span>15. Flesh meat should never be eaten, not
even that which remains of a sacrifice. Spirituous liquor of any kind
should never be drunk, not even that presented to the Gods.

   <span id="pp_16"></span>16. If an unlawful act has been committed
anywhere by one's self or any other person, no member either of one's
own or any other person's body should be on that account mutilated with
a weapon of any kind through anger.

   <span id="pp_17"></span>17. All theft is prohibited, even that which
is committed under pretence of contributing to religious purposes; nor
must such things as wood and flowers that have an owner ever be
abstracted without his permission.

   <span id="pp_18"></span>18. Let no male or female followers of mine
ever commit adultery. Let them shun gaming and similar vices, and
abstain from all intoxicating liquors and substances such as hemp, etc.

   <span id="pp_19"></span>19. Nowhere--except in Jagannâtha-purî--let a
man accept water or food which has been cooked by one from whom food is
not to be taken (*i.e.* from a person of low caste), even though that
food may have formed the Prasâda<span
id="page_752_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_752_note_2.md) of K.rish.na (that is,
the remains of what has been presented as an offering to K.rish.na).

   <span id="pp_20"></span>20. No calumnious language must be used
against any one for the sake of promoting one's own interests. No
abusive words must ever be spoken.

   <span id="pp_21"></span>21. Never use nor listen to profane language
against the Gods, sacred places, Brâhmans, holy women, Sâdhus and the
Vedas.

   <span id="pp_22"></span>22. The remains of the offering to that
Goddess to whom flesh and liquor are offered and in whose presence the
killing of goats, etc., takes place, are not to be eaten.

<span id="page_753">p. 753</span>

   <span id="pp_23"></span>23. If you happen on the road to see before
you a temple of Šiva or any other God, having first made a salutation,
respectfully enter inside to view the image.

   <span id="pp_24"></span>24. Let no one abandon the duties of the
class and order to which he belongs, nor practise the religious duties
of others; nor have anything to do with those propounded by heretical
teachers.

   <span id="pp_25"></span>25. The narrative of the exploits of the Lord
K.rish.na should not be heard from the mouth of any person whose words
lead one to fall from his worship or from duty.

   <span id="pp_26"></span>26. Never tell a truth which is likely to
cause serious injury to yourself or to any one else. Avoid associating
with ungrateful persons. Never accept a bribe from any person whatever.

   <span id="pp_27"></span>27. Never associate with thieves, wicked or
vicious persons, heretics, people who are in love, and people who are
engaged in dishonest occupations.

   <span id="pp_28"></span>28. Never associate with those who, through
eager desire to obtain a wife, wealth or some sensual gratification,
practise sinful acts under pretext of devotion to religion or to sacred
knowledge.

   <span id="pp_29"></span>29. Never pay attention to those books in
which K.rish.na and his incarnations are impugned by controversial
arguments.

   <span id="pp_30"></span>30. No unstrained water or milk should be
drunk, nor should water containing minute insects be used for such
purposes as bathing, etc.

   <span id="pp_31"></span>31. Never take medicine which is mixed with
spirituous liquor or flesh meat; or which has been prescribed by a
physician whose character is unknown.

   <span id="pp_32"></span>32. Never allow bodily excretions or
evacuations or saliva to fall in places prohibited by the Šâstras or by
public custom.

   <span id="pp_33"></span>33. Never enter or leave (a house) by a side
entrance (or private door); never take up your residence at a place
belonging to another person, without asking the owner's permission.

   <span id="pp_34"></span>34. Males ought not to listen to (discourses
on) religious <span id="page_754">p. 754</span> knowledge, or to tales
(about the exploits of heroes) from the mouths of women,<span
id="page_754_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_754_note_1.md) nor ought they to carry
on controversial discussions with females; nor with a king or his
officials.

   <span id="pp_35"></span>35. Never speak disrespectfully of religious
preceptors, of superiors, of those who have gained renown in the world,
of learned men, and of those that carry arms.

   <span id="pp_36"></span>36. Never do any act rashly; nor be slow in a
religious duty. Impart to others the knowledge you may receive, and
daily associate with holy men.

   <span id="pp_37"></span>37. Do not go empty-handed to pay a visit to
a religious preceptor, a god or a king. Never betray a trust or violate
confidence. Never praise yourself with your own lips.

   <span id="pp_38"></span>38. The clothing of my followers should not
be of such an improper kind that, when put on, the limbs are exposed to
view.

   <span id="pp_39"></span>39. The worship of K.rish.na must not be
performed without attending to religious duties. Adoration of K.rish.na
should not be abandoned through fear of the reproaches of ignorant
people.

   <span id="pp_40"></span>40. On religious festivals and on ordinary
days, the males and females that go to K.rish.na's temple should keep
separate and not touch each other.

   <span id="pp_41"></span>41. Those twice-born persons who have
received initiation into the worship of K.rish.na from a duly qualified
religious teacher should always wear on their necks two rosaries made of
Tulsî wood (one for Râdhâ and another for K.rish.na), and should make an
upright mark on their foreheads.

   <span id="pp_42"></span>42. This mark should be made with
Gopî-çandana (*i.e.* white earth from Dvârikâ), or with sandal which is
left from that employed in the worship of Hari (K.rish.na), and mixed
with saffron.

   <span id="pp_43"></span>43. Within this (erect mark) there ought to
be made a round (v.ritta) mark with the materials (or earth) used for
the Pu.n.dra, or with saffron which has served for the <span
id="page_755">p. 755</span> Prasâda of Râdhâ and K.rish.na (that is,
with a portion left from that employed in their worship).

   <span id="pp_44"></span>44. Those pure Šûdras who are worshippers of
K.rish.na, while practising their own peculiar duties, should, like the
twice-born, use a rosary and a vertical mark on the forehead.

   <span id="pp_45"></span>45. By those (Šûdra) worshippers who are
different from the pure Šûdras two rosaries made of sandal wood, etc.,
are to be worn on the throat, and only a round mark is to be made on the
forehead.

   <span id="pp_46"></span>46. Those twice-born of my followers, who
have inherited from their forefathers the custom of using a rosary of
Rudrâksha berries (sacred to Šiva), and the three horizontal (Šaiva)
marks, should not discontinue that practice.

   <span id="pp_47"></span>47. Nârâya.na and Šiva should be equally
regarded as manifestations of one and the same Universal Spirit, since
both have been declared in the Vedas to be forms of Brahma.<span
id="page_755_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_755_note_1.md)

   <span id="pp_48"></span>48. In times of slight distress my adherents
shall not chiefly (or by preference) follow the laws which are laid down
by the Šâstras for times of (excessive) distress.

   <span id="pp_49"></span>49. Every day let every man awake before
sunrise, and after calling on the name of K.rish.na, proceed to the
rites of bodily purification.

   <span id="pp_50"></span>50. Having seated himself in some place
apart, let him cleanse his teeth, and then, having bathed with pure
water, put on two well-washed garments (an under and an upper).

   <span id="pp_51"></span>51. Then having seated himself on a clean and
single (asa.mkîr.na) seat placed on ground purified (with cow-dung,
etc.), let a man sip water with his face either to the east or north.

   <span id="pp_52"></span>52. My male followers should then make the
vertical mark with the round spot in it on their foreheads, and wives
should only make a circular mark with red powder (of saffron).

   <span id="pp_53"></span>53. A widow is prohibited from making either
a vertical <span id="page_756">p. 756</span> or round mark on her
forehead. In the next place all my followers ought to engage in the
mental worship of K.rish.na.

   <span id="pp_54"></span>54. After engaging in mental worship, let
them bow down before the pictures of Râdhâ and K.rish.na, and repeat the
eight-syllabled prayer to K.rish.na (that is--the formula meaning
'K.rish.na is my refuge') as many times as possible. After that they may
apply themselves to their secular affairs.

   <span id="pp_55"></span>55. All my ordinary disciples should perform
the preceding rules; but those who like Ambarîsha have dedicated their
whole souls (to the Deity) should be most particular in performing the
duties ending with mental worship in the order enumerated (in the
preceding six verses as well as the following):--

   <span id="pp_56"></span>56. (Such devoted persons) should also then
worship an image made of either stone or metal, and the black stone
called Šâla-grâma (representing Vish.nu), with the (sixteen) offerings
(of sandal, etc.), such as are procurable, and the eight-syllabled
mantra of K.rish.na should be repeated (manu = mantra).

   <span id="pp_57"></span>57. Next (in order to the performance of
brahma-yaj"na) the hymn celebrating the praises of K.rish.na should be
recited according to ability, and those that have not studied Sansk.rit
should at least repeat his name.

   <span id="pp_58"></span>58. All who have devoted themselves (in this
way) to the worship of K.rish.na, should next present an offering (of
cooked food) to him, and then they should eat the remains of the
offering (prâsâdikam). They should at all times be full of joy.

   <span id="pp_59"></span>59. Since they are called the passionless
(nirgu.na) worshippers of the passionless K.rish.na, therefore, in
consequence of that, all their acts are also (called) passionless
(nirgu.na).

   <span id="pp_60"></span>60. By these devoted (worshippers) indeed no
water should be drunk, nor should any leaves, roots or fruits anywhere
be eaten which have not been presented to K.rish.na.

   <span id="pp_61"></span>61. All those who from old age or some
grievous calamity are unable (to perform worship) should make over the
(image <span id="page_757">p. 757</span> or Šala-grâma stone) of
K.rish.na to the charge of some other devotee (able to carry on the
proper services), and should themselves act to the best of their
ability.

   <span id="pp_62"></span>62. An image (or Šâla-grâma) of K.rish.na,
given by a religious leader (*âçârya*), or consecrated by him, should be
worshipped, but to other images it is sufficient to make obeisance.

   <span id="pp_63"></span>63. Every day all my followers should go to
the temple of God in the evening, and there loudly repeat the names of
the lord of Râdhikâ.

   <span id="pp_64"></span>64. The story of his exploits should be
related as well as heard with the greatest reverence, and on festivals
hymns in praise of K.rish.na should be sung accompanied by musical
instruments.

   <span id="pp_65"></span>65. In this manner all my followers should
every day perform religious duties. Moreover, they should study works
both in Sansk.rit and in the popular dialects, according to their mental
abilities.

   <span id="pp_66"></span>66. Whatever individual is appointed to any
office, he should be so appointed with strict regard to his
qualifications, after due consideration, and never in any other way.

   <span id="pp_67"></span>67. Let every one always provide his own
servants with food and clothing in the most suitable manner, and
according to his own pecuniary means.

   <span id="pp_68"></span>68. In conversation every person should be
addressed conformably to his character (or qualities), and suitably to
time and place, and not in any other manner.

   <span id="pp_69"></span>69. By all well-conducted persons due
deference must be shown to a religious guide, a king, an elder, an
ascetic, a learned man, and one that practises austerities, by rising
from the seat and so forth.

   <span id="pp_70"></span>70. No man should sit down on the ground in
the presence of a religious preceptor, a god, or king, or in a (solemn)
assembly, in such a (disrespectful) attitude as to make one foot rest on
the thigh, or with a cloth tied round the (waist and) knees.

   <span id="pp_71"></span>71. A controversial discussion should never
be carried on with a religious teacher (*âçârya*). He is to be honoured
<span id="page_758">p. 758</span> with gifts of food, money, clothes,
and with all other things according to ability.

   <span id="pp_72"></span>72. When any of my disciples hear of his
arrival, they should immediately show their respect by advancing to meet
him, and when he departs, they should accompany him as far as the
confines of the village.

   <span id="pp_73"></span>73. If an act, attended with large
recompense, be opposed to religious duty, that act ought not to be
committed; for religious duty (when performed) confers all desired
objects.

   <span id="pp_74"></span>74. An unrighteous act that may have been
committed by great persons in former times must never be held (worthy of
imitation); but their virtuous conduct only is to be imitated.

   <span id="pp_75"></span>75. Let not the secrets of any one be ever
anywhere divulged, the neglect (vyatikrama) of proper respect (for those
deserving of reverence) should never be made, (as if all were to be
looked at) with an equal eye (of esteem).

   <span id="pp_76"></span>76. All my disciples should practise special
religious observances during the four special months (beginning with
Âshâ.dha). But those who are sickly need only practise the same in the
one month of Šrâva.na only.

   <span id="pp_77"></span>77. Reading and listening to the exploits of
Vish.nu, singing his praises, solemn worship, repetition of his mantra
("Great K.rish.na is my refuge"), recitation of the hymn of praise
(*i.e.* of the thousand names of Vish.nu), reverential circumambulations
(from left to right with the right side towards the object adored),

   <span id="pp_78"></span>78. Prostration with the eight members (of
the body) these are considered the best religious observances; any one
of these ought to be performed with special devotion.

   <span id="pp_79"></span>79. The fasts of all the eleventh days (of
the waxing and waning moon) should be carefully observed; also of the
birthdays of K.rish.na; and of the night of Šiva (*Šiva-râtri*) with
rejoicings during the day.

   <span id="pp_80"></span>80. On a fast-day sleeping by day should most
carefully be avoided, since by such sleep the merit of fasting is lost
to men, quite as much as by sexual intercourse.

   <span id="pp_81"></span>81. Whatever appointed order of religious
fasts and festivals (vrata and utsava) was enjoined by Šrî Vi.th.thaleša
<span id="page_759">p. 759</span> (Vi.th.thala-natha), who was the son
of Šrî Vallabhâçârya, the most eminent of Vaish.navas.

   <span id="pp_82"></span>82. Having conformed to that order, all
religious fasts and festivals should be observed accordingly; and the
form of worshipping K.rish.na directed by him (Vi.th.thaleša) should be
adopted.

   <span id="pp_83"></span>83. A pilgrimage to the Tîrthas, or holy
places, of which Dvârikâ (K.rish.na's city in Gujarât) is the chief,
should be performed according to rule. Love and Charity should be shown
towards the poor by all, according to ability.

   <span id="pp_84"></span>84. Vish.nu, Šiva, Ga.na-pati (Ga.neša),
Pârvatî, and the Sun, these five deities should be honoured with worship
by my followers.<span id="page_759_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_759_note_1.md)

   <span id="pp_85"></span>85. When at any place a calamity is caused by
a demon or by any similar cause, the charm called Nârâya.na should be
recited or the mantra of Hanumân should be muttered, but not the mantra
of any inferior god less esteemed.

   <span id="pp_86"></span>86. On the occurrence of eclipses of the sun
and moon, all my followers should immediately suspend their other
business, and, having purified themselves, should make repetition of the
(eight-syllabled) mantra of K.rish.na.

   <span id="pp_87"></span>87. When the eclipse has passed off, they
should bathe with their clothes on, and those who are householders
should distribute gifts according to their ability. Other persons (who
have no worldly means) should engage in the worship of the supreme Lord
(Vish.nu).

   <span id="pp_88"></span>88. Those followers of mine who belong to the
four classes should observe, in conformity with the Šâstras, the rules
in regard to the contraction of impurity through births and deaths,
according to the degree of kinship.

   <span id="pp_89"></span>89. Brâhmans should possess tranquillity of
mind, self-restraint, forbearance, contentment and similar virtues.
Kshatriyas (or the soldier caste) should be remarkable for bravery,
fortitude, and the like qualities.

<span id="page_760">p. 760</span>

   <span id="pp_90"></span>90. Vaišyas (or the agricultural and
commercial caste) should occupy themselves in mercantile pursuits,
money-lending, and the like. Šûdras (or the servile class) should be
employed in serving the twice-born, etc.

   <span id="pp_91"></span>91. The twice-born should perform at the
proper seasons, and according to their means--each according to his own
domestic rules--the twelve purificatory rites<span
id="page_760_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_760_note_1) (*sa*n*skâra*.md), the
(six) daily duties,<span id="page_760_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_760_note_2.md) and the Šraddha
offerings to the spirits of departed ancestors.

   <span id="pp_92"></span>92. If intentionally or unintentionally any
sin, great or small, be committed, the proper penance must be performed
according to ability.

   <span id="pp_93"></span>93. The Vedas, the Vedânta-sûtras of Vyasa,
the Bhâgavata-purâ.na and the thousand names of Vish.nu in the
Mahâbhârata,

   <span id="pp_94"></span>94. The Bhagavad-gîtâ and the precepts of
Vidura, the Vâsudeva-mâhâtmya from the Vaish.nava-kha.n.da of the
Skanda-Purâ.na,

   <span id="pp_95"></span>95. And the Sm.riti of Yâj"navalkya, which is
one of the Dharma-Šâstras, these eight sacred books are approved by me
as authorities.<span id="page_760_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_760_note_3.md)

   <span id="pp_96"></span>96. All my twice-born disciples who wish good
to themselves should recite these sacred books and hear them recited.

   <span id="pp_97"></span>97. In deciding questions of ancient usage
(âçâra), or practice, or penance, the code of Yâj"navalkya, with its
commentary the Mitâksharâ, should be taken (as the best authority).

   <span id="pp_98"></span>98. The tenth and fifth books of the
Bhâgavata Purâ.na are to be regarded as having the preeminence over all
the <span id="page_761">p. 761</span> other sacred books for the
understanding of the glory of K.rish.na.

   <span id="pp_99"></span>99. The tenth and fifth books of the
Bhâgavata Purâ.na and the code of Yâj"navalkya are respectively my
Bhakti-šâstra (manual of faith), Yoga-šâstra (manual of devotion), and
Dharma-šâstra (manual of law).

   <span id="pp_100"></span>100. As a treatise on the soul, the
commentary on the Bhagavad-Gîtâ as well as that on the Šârîraka-Sûtras
of Vyâsa, made by Râmânujâçârya, commends itself to my approval.

   <span id="pp_101"></span>101. Whatever precepts in these sacred books
have for their subject the excessive exaltation of K.rish.na and of
Justice (V.risha), of faith and of indifference to the world--

   <span id="pp_102"></span>102. Such precepts should be regarded as
taking precedence over all others. Their essential doctrine is that
devotion to K.rish.na should be joined with the performance of duty.

   <span id="pp_103"></span>103. Duty (*dharma*) is that good practice
which is enjoined both by the Veda (Šruti) and by the law (Sm.riti)
founded on the Veda. Devotion (*bhakti*) is intense love for K.rish.na,
accompanied with a due sense of his glory.

   <span id="pp_104"></span>104. Indifference to worldly objects means
absence of satisfaction in any object except K.rish.na. True knowledge
consists in discriminating rightly between the nature of the personal
soul (jiva), of the external world (Mâyâ), and of the Supreme Being
(Îša).

   <span id="pp_105"></span>105. The personal soul dwells in the heart.
It is as subtle as an atom; it is all thought; it has the faculty of
knowledge; it is ascertained to be constantly pervading the whole body
(*i.e.* the three corporeal envelopes kâra.na, sûkshma, and sthûla) by
its power of perception; it is characterized by indivisibility and the
like.

   <span id="pp_106"></span>106. The external world (Mâyâ) is identical
with the energizing power of K.rish.na. It is composed of the three
Gu.nas; it is darkness; it is to be understood as the cause of the
soul's having such ideas in regard to the body, and the things relating
to the body, as are conveyed by the expressions I, mine, and the like.

   <span id="pp_107"></span>107. He who abides in the living personal
soul in the <span id="page_762">p. 762</span> character of an internal
monitor, as the personal soul dwells in the heart, he is to be
considered as the Self-existent Supreme Being, the Rewarder of all
actions.

   <span id="pp_108"></span>108. That Being, known by various
names--such as the glorious K.rish.na, Param Brahma, Bhagavân,
Purushottama.h--the cause of all manifestations, is to be adored by us
as our one chosen deity.

   <span id="pp_109"></span>109. He, together with Râdhâ, should be
regarded as the Supreme Lord, under the name of Râdhâ-K.rish.na. With
Rukmi.nî and Ramâ he is known as Lakshmî-Nârâya.na.

   <span id="pp_110"></span>110. When joined with Arjuna, he is known by
the name of Nara-Nârâya.na; when associated with Bala-bhadra ( =
Bala-râma), or any other divine personage, he is called Ramâ-K.rish.na
and so on.

   <span id="pp_111"></span>111. Those devoted (female companions of the
god) Râdhâ and his other (consorts) are in some places represented at
his side. In other places (their images do not appear, because) they are
supposed to be one with his body and he with theirs.

   <span id="pp_112"></span>112. On no account let it be supposed that
difference in forms makes any difference in the identity of the deity.
For the two-armed K.rish.na may exhibit himself with four arms (or
eight, or a thousand, or any number of arms).

   <span id="pp_113"></span>113. Towards him alone ought all faith and
worship (bhakti) to be directed by every human being on earth in every
possible manner. Nothing else, except such (faith), is able to procure
salvation.

   <span id="pp_114"></span>114. The best result of the virtues of those
who possess good qualities is faith in K.rish.na and association with
holy men; without these, even persons who know (the Šâstras) go
downwards (towards a lower state).

   <span id="pp_115"></span>115. Meditation should be directed towards
K.rish.na, his incarnations and their images, but not towards living
men, nor (inferior) gods, etc., nor devotees, nor (even) those who
(merely) have knowledge of Brahma.

   <span id="pp_116"></span>116. Having perceived, by abstract
meditation, that the Spirit or Self is distinct from its three bodies
(viz. the gross, subtle and causal bodies), and that it is a portion of
the one <span id="page_763">p. 763</span> Spirit of the Universe
(Brahma), every man ought to worship K.rish.na by means of that (self)
at all times.

   <span id="pp_117"></span>117. The tenth book of the Bhâgavata-Purâ.na
should be listened to reverentially, and learned men should read it
daily or (if frequent reading is impossible, at least) once a year.

   <span id="pp_118"></span>118. The repetition (of the Bhâgavata), as
well as of the thousand names of Vish.nu, etc., should be performed as
far as possible in a pure place (such as the precincts of a temple); for
(such repetition) causes the accomplishment of desired objects.

   <span id="pp_119"></span>119. On the occurrenee of any disaster
caused by the elements (such as a flood or fire), or when any human
calamity or sickness takes place, a man should be wholly occupied in
striving to preserve himself and other people and in nothing else.

   <span id="pp_120"></span>120. Religious usages, business transactions
and penances, should be adapted to country, time, age, property, rank
and ability.

   <span id="pp_121"></span>121. The (philosophical) doctrine approved
by me is the Višish.tâdvaita (of Râmânuja),<span
id="page_763_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_763_note_1.md) and the desired heavenly
abode is Goloka. There to worship K.rish.na, and be united with him as
the Supreme Soul of the Universe, is to be considered salvation (Mukti).

   <span id="pp_122"></span>122. These that have been specified are the
general duties, applicable to all my followers, whether male or female.
Now I am about to enumerate the special duties.

   <span id="pp_123"></span>123. The two sons of my elder and younger
brothers (viz. Ayodhyâ-prasâda and Raghu-vîra) ought never to impart
instruction to any women except their nearest relations.

   <span id="pp_124"></span>124. They ought never to touch or converse
with any women in any place whatever. Cruelty should never be shown
towards any person. A deposit belonging to another should never be taken
charge of.

   <span id="pp_125"></span>125. In business matters no one should stand
security for <span id="page_764">p. 764</span> any other person. In
passing through a time of distress it is right to ask for alms, but
debts should not be contracted.

   <span id="pp_126"></span>126. One should not sell corn bestowed by
one's own disciples; having given away old corn, new corn is to be
bought. That is not called a sale.

   <span id="pp_127"></span>127. On the fourth day of the light-half of
the month Bhâdra, the worship of Ga.neša should be performed, and on the
fourteenth of the dark-half of Âšvina, Hanumân should be worshipped.

   <span id="pp_128"></span>128. Those two sons (of my brothers, viz.
Ayodhyâ-prasâda and Raghu-vîra), who have been appointed as spiritual
guides to guard the religious interests of my followers, should initiate
all desirous of obtaining salvation (in the use of the mantra of
K.rish.na).

   <span id="pp_129"></span>129. They should cause each of their
disciples to continue steadfast in his own appointed duty. Honour should
be paid to holy men, and the sacred Šâstras should be reverently
repeated.

   <span id="pp_130"></span>130. Worship of Lakshmî-Nârâya.na, and other
forms of K.rish.na that have been set up and consecrated by me in the
great temples, should be performed with the proper ceremonies.

   <span id="pp_131"></span>131. Any one who may come to the temple of
K.rish.na to ask for a gift of food (cooked or uncooked) should be
received with respect, and food given to him according to ability.

   <span id="pp_132"></span>132. Having established a school for giving
instruction, some learned Brâhman should be appointed over it. True
knowledge should be promoted throughout the world, for that is an act of
great merit.

   <span id="pp_133"></span>133. The two wives of these (sons of my
brothers), with the permission of their respective husbands, should
initiate females only (eva) in the Mantra of K.rish.na.

   <span id="pp_134"></span>134. They should never touch or speak to
other males than their nearest relations; nor should they ever show
their faces to them.

   <span id="pp_135"></span>135. My male followers who are householders
should never touch widows unless they are their own near relatives.

<span id="page_765">p. 765</span>

   <span id="pp_136"></span>136. They should not remain alone in any
private place with a youthful mother, sister or daughter, except in a
time of distress. Nor should a wife be given away (to another man).

   <span id="pp_137"></span>137. No attachment should on any account be
formed with a woman who in any transactions has been brought into
connexion with the king of the country.

   <span id="pp_138"></span>138. When a guest has arrived at a house, he
should be honoured by those (who live in it) with food and other things
according to ability. Offerings to the Gods and the Pit.ris (at the
Devatâ-tarpa.na and Pit.ri-tarpa.na and Šrâddha ceremonies) should be
made according to right usage and according to one's means.

   <span id="pp_139"></span>139. It is the duty of my disciples, as long
as they live and according to their ability, to honour with faithful
attention their father, mother, spiritual preceptor, and any one
affected with sickness.

   <span id="pp_140"></span>140. Every person should, according to his
ability, carry on some occupation suitable to his caste and religious
order. Those that live by agriculture should not allow a bull to be
gelded.

   <span id="pp_141"></span>141. Provisions and money should be laid by
according to circumstances and time; and those that keep cattle should
store up as much hay as these animals may need for their consumption.

   <span id="pp_142"></span>142. If a man can himself attend to the
proper feeding of cows and other animals with hay and water, then only
he may keep them, otherwise he must not do so.

   <span id="pp_143"></span>143. No business in regard to giving or
receiving land or property should ever be transacted even with a son or
friend, without a written deed attested by witnesses.

   <span id="pp_144"></span>144. When any pecuniary transactions
connected with giving away a girl in marriage have to be transacted for
one's self or another person, the money to be delivered over should not
be settled by verbal agreement, but only by a written contract attested
by witnesses.

   <span id="pp_145"></span>145. A man's expenditure ought always to be
in proportion to his income. Otherwise it is certain that great misery
will arise.

<span id="page_766">p. 766</span>

   <span id="pp_146"></span>146. Every day one should take note of one's
income and expenditure in the regular business of life, and write them
down with one's own hand.

   <span id="pp_147"></span>147. My followers should assign a tithe of
the grain, money, etc., acquired by their own occupation or exertions,
to K.rish.na, and the poor should give a twentieth part.

   <span id="pp_148"></span>148. The due performance of fasts, of which
the eleventh-day fasts are the principal, should be effected according
to the Šâstras and one's ability; for this will lead to the attainment
of desired objects.

   <span id="pp_149"></span>149. Every year in the month Šrâva.na one
should perform, or cause others to perform, cheerfully the worship of
Šiva with the leaves of the Bilva-tree, etc.

   <span id="pp_150"></span>150. Neither money, nor utensils, nor
ornaments, nor clothes should be borrowed for use (on festive occasions)
from one's own spiritual preceptor, or from the temple of K.rish.na.

   <span id="pp_151"></span>151. While going to do homage to great
K.rish.na, to a spiritual preceptor, or to a holy man, food should not
be accepted from others on the road, or at the places of pilgrimage; for
such food takes away religious merit.

   <span id="pp_152"></span>152. The full amount of promised wages
should be paid to a workman. Payment of a debt is never to be kept
secret. Let no one have any dealings with wicked men.

   <span id="pp_153"></span>153. If through great distress caused by a
famine, by enemies, or by (the oppression of) a king, any danger of
destruction arises anywhere to character, wealth or life,

   <span id="pp_154"></span>154. The wise among my followers should at
once quit even their own native country, and having gone to another, let
them reside there happily.

   <span id="pp_155"></span>155. Wealthy householders should perform
those sacrifices in honour of Vish.nu which entail no killing of
animals. Brâhmans and holy men (Sâdhus) should be fed on festival days
at sacred places of pilgrimage.

   <span id="pp_156"></span>156. They should observe the great festivals
in honour of the Deity in the temples, and should distribute various
gifts among Brâhmans who are deserving objects (of generosity).

   <span id="pp_157"></span>157. Kings who are my followers should
govern all their <span id="page_767">p. 767</span> subjects in
accordance with the law (laid down in the Dharma-šâstras), and should
protect them as if they were their children, and should establish the
observance of proper duties throughout the whole land.

   <span id="pp_158"></span>158. They should be well acquainted with the
circumstances of their kingdom; as, for example, with the seven Angas
(viz. the duties of the sovereign, minister, ally, treasury, territory,
fortresses and army); the four Upâyas (viz. conciliation, sowing
dissension, bribing, and punishing); the six Gu.nas (viz. peace, war,
marching, sitting encamped, dividing the forces, having recourse to an
ally for protection); and the places of resort to which spies should be
sent. They should also make themselves acquainted with the men who are
skilled in legal procedure, and with all the court functionaries,
observing by the right signs whether any ought to be punished or
not.<span id="page_767_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_767_note_1.md)

   <span id="pp_159"></span>159. Wives should honour their husbands as
if they were gods, and never offend them with improper language, though
they be diseased, indigent, or imbecile.<span
id="page_767_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_767_note_2.md)

   <span id="pp_160"></span>160. No communication, even though arising
naturally (*sâhajika*), should be held with any other man who may be
possessed of beauty, youth and good qualities.

   <span id="pp_161"></span>161. A chaste woman should not allow her
navel, thighs, or breasts to be seen by males; nor should she remain
without an upper garment (anuttarîyâ), nor should she look at (the
antics of) buffoons, nor associate with an immodest woman.

   <span id="pp_162"></span>162. A wife while her husband is absent in a
foreign country should wear neither ornaments nor fine clothes; she
ought not to frequent other people's houses, and should abstain from
laughing and talking with other women.

   <span id="pp_163"></span>163. Widows should serve the God K.rish.na
with minds intent on him as their only husband; they should live under
the control of their father, or other male members of the family, and
never in independence.

<span id="page_768">p. 768</span>

   <span id="pp_164"></span>164. They must never at any time touch any
men except their nearest relations, and when young they should never
without necessity engage in conversation with youthful men.

   <span id="pp_165"></span>165. If an infant male-child touch them, no
blame attaches to them, any more than from contact with a dumb animal;
nor if they are compelled from necessity to talk with or touch an old
man.

   <span id="pp_166"></span>166. Instruction in any science should not
be received by them from any man except from their nearest relations.
They should frequently emaciate their bodies by vows and fasts.

   <span id="pp_167"></span>167. They should never give away to others
the money which is required for their own support. That only must be
given away which they have in excess.

   <span id="pp_168"></span>168. They should eat only one meal a day,
and should sleep on the ground; they should never look at (animals)
engaged in sexual acts.

   <span id="pp_169"></span>169. They must never wear the dress of a
married woman, nor of a female ascetic, nor of a mendicant, nor any
unbecoming attire.

   <span id="pp_170"></span>170. They should neither associate with nor
touch a woman who has been guilty of procuring abortion; nor should they
either converse about, or hear stories of the loves of the male sex.

   <span id="pp_171"></span>171. Except in times of distress widows who
are young should never remain alone in secret places along with men,
even with their own relatives, if youthful.

   <span id="pp_172"></span>172. They should never join in the frolics
practised at the Holî festival, nor should they put on ornaments or
finely woven clothes composed of cotton or metal threads.

   <span id="pp_173"></span>173. Neither wives nor widows ought ever to
bathe without wearing clothes. No woman should ever conceal the first
appearance of her monthly periods.

   <span id="pp_174"></span>174. A woman at that season should not for
an interval of three days touch any human being, clothes, etc.; nor
ought she to do so till she has bathed on the fourth day.

   <span id="pp_175"></span>175. Those of my followers who have taken
the vow of <span id="page_769">p. 769</span> Naish.thika Brahmaçârîs
(that is, of perpetual celibacy and chastity) must not knowingly either
touch or converse with or look at women.

   <span id="pp_176"></span>176. They should never talk or listen to
conversations about women, and they should not perform their ablutions
or other religious rites at places where women pass backwards and
forwards.

   <span id="pp_177"></span>177. They should never knowingly touch or
look at even the pictures or wooden images of women, unless they be the
representations of goddesses.

   <span id="pp_178"></span>178. They should neither draw any likeness
of a woman, nor touch her clothes. They must never knowingly look even
at animals engaged in sexual acts.

   <span id="pp_179"></span>179. They should neither touch nor look at a
male dressed up as a woman; nor should they sing the praises of the
Deity with a view to being heard by women.

   <span id="pp_180"></span>180. They should pay no attention to the
command of even their spiritual preceptor if likely to lead them to a
breach of their vow of chastity. They should continue steadfast,
contented, and humble-minded.

   <span id="pp_181"></span>181. When a woman insists on forcing herself
near them, they should immediately try to keep her off by expostulating
with her, and (if she still approaches) by reproaching her.

   <span id="pp_182"></span>182. In cases where their own lives, or
those of women, are in jeopardy, they may be allowed contact or
conversation with women, such contact being necessary for the saving of
life.

   <span id="pp_183"></span>183. They should not anoint their lips with
oil. They should not carry weapons. They should not dress themselves in
unbecoming costume. They should subdue the sense of taste.

   <span id="pp_184"></span>184. If in the house of any Brâhman the
meals are cooked and served up by a woman, they should not go there to
ask for food, but should ask for it at some other house.

   <span id="pp_185"></span>185. They should constantly repeat the Vedas
and Šâstras, and serve their spiritual preceptor. They must shun the
society of women, and of men who are fond of women.

   <span id="pp_186"></span>186. He who is by birth a Brâhman should on
no account <span id="page_770">p. 770</span> drink water from a leathern
vessel; nor should he ever eat garlic, onions, etc.

   <span id="pp_187"></span>187. Nor must he eat food without having
first performed his ablutions, the Sandhyâ service, repetition of the
Gâyatri, the worship of Vish.nu, and the Vaišvadeva ceremony.<span
id="page_770_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_770_note_1.md)

   <span id="pp_188"></span>188. All who are Sâdhus are bound, just like
those who have made a vow of perpetual celibacy, to avoid associating
with women, or with men who are fond of women, and should subdue their
(six) internal enemies (lust, anger, avarice, infatuation, pride, and
envy).

   <span id="pp_189"></span>189. They should subjugate all the senses,
more especially the sense of taste; they should neither lay by a store
of property themselves, nor make others do so for them.

   <span id="pp_190"></span>190. They must not take charge of any one's
deposit, they should never relax their firmness, nor allow a woman to
enter their abodes at any time.<span
id="page_770_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_770_note_2.md)

   <span id="pp_191"></span>191. Except at a time of distress, they
should never go anywhere by night without a companion, nor should they
travel to any place singly.

   <span id="pp_192"></span>192. They should not use a costly variegated
cloth, or one dyed with kusumbha, or dyed in any other way; or any
expensive cloth, though freely presented to them by another.

   <span id="pp_193"></span>193. They should not go to the houses of
householders unless for the purpose of asking alms, or for being present
at an assembly. They should not spend time uselessly without devoting
any of it to the worship of the Deity.

   <span id="pp_194"></span>194. To the abode of a householder in which
only males are employed for serving up the cooked food, and where no
woman is to be seen--

   <span id="pp_195"></span>195. To the house of such a householder only
should my Sâdhus resort for participation in a meal, otherwise they
should ask for uncooked food, and prepare it themselves.

   <span id="pp_196"></span>196. All my holiest sages should conduct
themselves in <span id="page_771">p. 771</span> the same manner as
Bharata, son of .Rishabha, the idiot Brâhman (Ja.da-vipra), did in
ancient times.<span id="page_771_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_771_note_1.md)

   <span id="pp_197"></span>197. Those holy men (Sâdhus) who are
Brahmaçârîs should diligently abstain from eating or using betel-leaves,
opium, tobacco (tamâla), etc.

   <span id="pp_198"></span>198. They should never accept a meal given
on the performance of the Sa*n*skâra ceremonies, beginning with that of
conception;<span id="page_771_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_771_note_2.md) nor on performing the
Šrâddha ceremony at death, nor at that performed on the 12th day after
decease.

   <span id="pp_199"></span>199. They should never sleep during the day,
unless afflicted with sickness, etc. They should never gossip about
local matters, nor intentionally listen to such gossip.

   <span id="pp_200"></span>200. They should not lie down on a bedstead
except when suffering from illness or other affliction, and should be
guileless and straightforward in their behaviour towards other Sâdhus.

   <span id="pp_201"></span>201. They should patiently bear abusive
language, or even blows from evil-minded persons, and wish good to (them
in return).

   <span id="pp_202"></span>202. They should not undertake the work of a
go-between or informer, or spy; they should never show selfishness or
partiality towards their relations.

   <span id="pp_203"></span>203. Thus I have specified in a summary
manner the general duties of all. Those who desire more particular
instructions must refer to the sacred books handed down by tradition.

   <span id="pp_204"></span>204. Having myself extracted the essence of
an the sacred Šâstrâs, I have written this Directory, which leads men to
the attainment of desired objects.

   <span id="pp_205"></span>205. Hence it is incumbent on my followers,
having their minds well controlled, to conduct themselves in conformity
with its precepts, and not according to their own wills.

   <span id="pp_206"></span>206. Those males and females of my disciples
who will <span id="page_772">p. 772</span> act according to these
directions shall certainly obtain the four great objects of human
desires (viz. *Dharma*, religious merit; *Artha*, wealth; *Kâma*,
pleasure; and *Moksha*, final beatitude).

   <span id="pp_207"></span>207. Those who will not act according to
these (directions) shall be considered by my male and female followers
as excluded from communion with my sect.

   <span id="pp_208"></span>208. My followers should daily read this
Book of directions, and those who do not know how to read should listen
to others reading it.

   <span id="pp_209"></span>209. But in the absence of a reader
(vaktrabhâve), worship should be paid to it every day, and it should be
honoured with the greatest reverence as my word and my representative.

   <span id="pp_210"></span>210. This Directory should only be given to
those persons who are endowed with a nature of the divine type; never to
a man possessing a nature of the demoniacal type.<span
id="page_772_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_772_note_1.md)

   <span id="pp_211"></span>211. This Book of directions, bringing
welfare (to all who study it), was completed on the first day of the
season of spring in the year 1882 of the era of Vikramâditya. ( = A.D.
1826).

   <span id="pp_212"></span>212. May K.rish.na, the remover of the
sufferings of his worshippers, the maintainer of devotion, accompanied
with the performance of proper duties, the bestower of the desires of
the heart, grant us blessings of all kinds!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Hindu Articles](../../hin/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_752">p. 752</span>

<span id="page_752_note_1"></span>[1](#page_752_fr_1.md) A father sometimes
kills himself because a criminal act has been committed by a member of
his family.

<span id="page_752_note_2"></span>[2](#page_752_fr_2.md) By Prasâda is
meant the remains of food presented as an offering to a god. Here the
word must be either prasâdî or prasâdi, from prasâdin.

<span id="footnotes_page_754">p. 754</span>

<span id="page_754_note_1"></span>[1](#page_754_fr_1.md) This is in strict
unison with the present Hindû practice of keeping women ignorant. That
women in ancient times were not only educated, but sometimes erudite and
celebrated as religious teachers, is proved by the example of Maitreyî,
Gârgî and others.

<span id="footnotes_page_755">p. 755</span>

<span id="page_755_note_1"></span>[1](#page_755_fr_1.md) This precept
furnishes an interesting proof of the tolerant character of
Vaish.navism, and of its harmony with the pantheism of the Vedânta.

<span id="footnotes_page_759">p. 759</span>

<span id="page_759_note_1"></span>[1](#page_759_fr_1.md) It is evident from
this verse, as from [verse 47](#pp_47.md), that although Vaish.navas give
preferential worship to Vish.nu, they are really Pantheists in the sense
of honouring other deities, as manifestations of the Supreme Being. It
may be observed that although five deities are here mentioned, Ga.napati
and Pârvatî are connected with Šiva, as the Sun is with Vish.nu.

<span id="footnotes_page_760">p. 760</span>

<span id="page_760_note_1"></span>[1](#page_760_fr_1.md) Of these only six
are now generally performed, viz.:--1, the birth-ceremony, or touching
the tongue of a new-born infant with clarified butter, etc.; 2, the
name-giving ceremony on the tenth day; 3, tonsure; 4, induction into the
privileges of the twice-born, by investiture with the sacred thread; 5,
solemn return home from the house of a preceptor after completing the
prescribed course of study; 6, marriage. See *Indian Wisdom*, p. 246.

<span id="page_760_note_2"></span>[2](#page_760_fr_2.md) The six daily
duties (called Nitya-karman), according to Parâšara, are:--1, bathing;
2, morning and evening prayer (sandhyâ); 3, repetition of sacred texts;
4, offerings to fire (homa); 5, worship of ancestors; 6, worship of the
gods. The six daily acts enjoined by Manu are different. See *Indian
Wisdom*, p. 244.

<span id="page_760_note_3"></span>[3](#page_760_fr_3.md) I commend this
list to the attention of those European scholars who wish to be guided
by Indian authorities in determining the real "sacred books" of India.

<span id="footnotes_page_763">p. 763</span>

<span id="page_763_note_1"></span>[1](#page_763_fr_1.md) This verse proves
that in their philosophical ideas the Svâmi-Nârâya.na sect are followers
of the Râmânuja sect. Compare [verse 100](#pp_100.md).

<span id="footnotes_page_767">p. 767</span>

<span id="page_767_note_1"></span>[1](#page_767_fr_1.md) With reference to
this verse compare Manu's directions to Kings (Books vii. and viii.),
and the precepts in the Vigraha chapter of the Hitopadeša.

<span id="page_767_note_2"></span>[2](#page_767_fr_2.md) Compare Manu, v.
154.

<span id="footnotes_page_770">p. 770</span>

<span id="page_770_note_1"></span>[1](#page_770_fr_1.md) This ceremony,
which partly consists in throwing portions of food into the fire, before
dinner, as an offering to all the deities, will be fully described in my
new work on "Religious Thought and Life in India," to be published by
Mr. Murray.

<span id="page_770_note_2"></span>[2](#page_770_fr_2.md) We may notice that
there is no little repetition in this Book of instructions, especially
in enforcing the duty of keeping clear of all feminine seductions.

<span id="footnotes_page_771">p. 771</span>

<span id="page_771_note_1"></span>[1](#page_771_fr_1.md) The story is told
in Vish.nu-purâ.na, ii. 13. He feigned idiocy, that he might not be
troubled with worldly society and might so give his undivided attention
to devotional exercises.

<span id="page_771_note_2"></span>[2](#page_771_fr_2.md) See [note to verse
91](#page_760_note_1.md).

<span id="footnotes_page_772">p. 772</span>

<span id="page_772_note_1"></span>[1](#page_772_fr_1.md) The Purâ.nas
divide all men into two classes: those whose nature is divine, and those
whose nature is demoniacal.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
