[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# VALÂHASSA JÂTAKA

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

 

#### \[New Series, Volume XX\]

###### \[London, Trübner and Company\]

#### \[1888\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

ART. XIV.--*A Jâtaka-Tale from the Tibetan*. By H. WENZEL, PH.D.

IN the History of Tibet called *Rgyal-rabs-gsal-vai-me-lo"n* ('The
mirror illustrating the lineage of the kings') we find, as sixth
chapter, the tale translated here, which corresponds to the Valâhassa
Jâtaka (Fausböll, ii. 127 ff., also in E. Müller's Pali Grammar, p. 128
ff.). As will be seen, the tale appears here in a richer, and
quasi-dramatic, garb, with the addition of some characteristic traits,
as *e.g.* the marvellous food that makes men forget their bygone
troubles (cp. Odyssey, ix. 94 f.), etc., etc.

   The Rgyal-rabs itself is a work of the 17th century A.D. It begins
with the evolution of the universe (in chapter 1, cp. Rockhill, Life of
the Buddha, p. 1 ff.), gives, in ch. 2, a short survey of the Lord's
life, and, in ch. 3 and 4, of the beginnings of Buddhism, relates, in
ch. 5, the merits of Avalokiteçvara in spreading the Law in Tibet, and
goes then, ch. 6, on to our tale. Follows the origin of the Tibetan race
from an ape and a râkshasî (ch. 7), the beginning of the royal line (ch.
8), finally, the chief contents and purpose of the book, life and doings
of King *Sro"n-btsan sgam-po* (ch. 9-17), whereon the book closes with a
sort of appendix containing the further history of the country to the
time of the writer.

   The work has been partially known for a long time by the extracts
from the Mongolian translation thereof, called Bodhimor, given in the
notes to I. J. Schmidt's edition of the Mongolian historian Ssanang
Ssetzen. For my copy of the work I had the use of two blockprints, one
belonging formerly to Mr. Jäschke, now in the British Museum; the other
of the University Library of St. Petersburg, <span id="page_504">p.
504</span> 25181 (569), for which latter I am indebted to the kindness
of Mr. Saleman. The first is pretty correct, the other gives a few
different readings, and has a peculiar, not to say faulty, spelling.

 

*Sixth chapter, (relating) how (Avalokiteçvara), by transforming himself
into the horse king, worked the good of living beings.*

   When the noble Avalokiteçvara had (thus) in many ways profited living
beings, he assumed, in order to give an example of how to choose virtue
and to reject sin (according to the Sutra Za-ma-tog), the form of the
horse king *Bhalaha*<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> to work
(further) for the good of the living beings. At this time many merchants
from the South of India, whose merits were but small, had departed to
the outer ocean to search for jewels. With the many implements each one
wanted they had gone on board a large vessel, (but) after the expiration
of seven days they were brought into danger by an unwelcome wind,
thus:<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> "At midday a dark cloud
like a dense fog obscures the light of the sun and spreads darkness
(everywhere); a fearful red wind seems to shake the foundations of the
earth, (so that) the mighty trees of the forest fall. The waves of the
sea spring like lions, and the breakers lash sky and earth. The
merchants take hold of each other, and calling (loud) on the names of
their relatives, they cry; howling in terrified lamentation, they weep,
helpless and exhausted, bloody tears, nevertheless the vessel goes to
wreck." Then the merchants take firm hold of some beam<sup><span
class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> of the wrecked ship, and, driven in one
direction by an unwelcome wind, they were carried to the island of
Si"nghala (*sic*!), which was (a dwelling-place) of Râkshasîs. There the
merchants, calling each other by name, came on shore (lit. the dry,
*viz*. land). When the Râkshasîs became aware of this, they changed
themselves into young and exceedingly pretty women, and,

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. *sic*! in Divyâvadâna his name is spelt *Bâlâha*, p. 120, 4 ff.;
there it is a metamorphosis of *Maitreya* (122, 29).

2\. Verses; cp. Rom. Leg. p. 333 (see appendix).

3\. Perhaps 'of the hull.'

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span> laden with much food and drink, they
came before the merchants and greeted them, 'Are you tired? Have you
suffered pain?' Having beguiled them by these greetings, they filled
them with food and drink. The merchants, not knowing that they were
Râkshasîs, but only seeing in them exceedingly pretty women, were very
glad, and conversed with them. Then the Râkshasîs said with one voice:
"You merchants must not go into the upper part of the valley."<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> Each of the women led a merchant away
into her house, where they became man and wife, and sported together.

   Then a voice was heard (from the sky): "The merchants suffering from
(the consequences of) evil deeds of (former) kalpas, have, carried by a
contrary wind, run into the hand of those who have power to kill them,
like a snared animal into a game-net, and have no means of salvation.
Infatuated by the thought of marrying them they mistake the Râkshasîs
for goddesses, and, filled with the delusive food, they forget former
pains like a dream, and their soul is contented." From this the great
captain understood that this was the island of the Râkshasîs, and,
lamenting despondingly, he thought; "Now they are happy, but what will
the end be like?" and was very unhappy. Then reflecting: "What may
signify their prohibition to go into the upper valley?" the captain
started in the night when his own wife had fallen asleep, and reaching
the upper end of the valley he heard, within an iron house<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> without doors, laments and complaining.
Reflecting what it might be, he listened and knew by the language that
they were merchants from India. So he climbed up the trunk of a
tree<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> standing near and asked,
"Who is in there?" The men within answered: "Within here are we
merchants who have lost our way." On the question: "How long have you
been shut up here?" they answered: "Like you, our ship being driven by a
contrary wind, we arrived here, and led on

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Rom. Leg. 334, "south of the city."

2\. Rom. Leg. p. 335 has 'an iron city.'

3\. Rom. Leg. the tree *hoh-hwen* (united joy).

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span> by these women, not recogninng that
they were Râkshasîs, we became man and wife. While we thus played
together, you came to this island and we were put into this iron house
without doors; now we are to be eaten up one by one. You, taking to
heart our misery and the fear of death, fly now at once, for now there
is a possibility of flying; when (once) you are confined in this iron
house, there is neither flight nor means of salvation." The captain
saying again: "In truth there is no means of escape," they said, "There
is a means of escape. We also thought we must fly, but, clinging to
lust, we were taken (again); you (now) cling to nothing and nobody and
fly. And the means to fly is this: if you cross from here a small pass
there is on the north side in an expanse of golden sand a turkois (gÿu)
well, whose rim is surrounded by a vai.dûrya<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> meadow. On the evening of the
fifteenth<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> (day of the month)
the horse-king *Bha-la-ha*, on whose croup a hundred men have room, very
beautiful, accompanying (or perhaps merely: like) a moon-beam, will come
there. After having drunk from the turkois well, having eaten from the
vai.dûrya meadow,<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> having
rolled three times in the golden sand, and having shaken himself once,
he says, sending forth his horse-voice like a human voice: 'O Indian
merchants, whoever has come to (this) râkshasî-island, all get on my
back, I will bring you to your country.'<sup><span
class="small">\[4\]</span></sup> When this marvellous horse speaks thus,
mount him, and, not clinging to whatever enjoyments or sons (you have
here), but close your eyes, and flee." The captain thought, 'Thus (we)
must act,' and went back. When he came to the bed of his wife, the
râkshasî, she knew it, and spoke these words:<sup><span
class="small">\[5\]</span></sup> "Perverted merchant, you will destroy
your own life; if you direct your thoughts to aught else (than me), you
will perish; where have you been to, lord of merchants?" The merchant
lied, "I went mûtram utsrash.tum." Thereon the captain

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. In Tibetan transliteration mostly spelt negligently *vai-du-rya*.

2\. Rom. Leg. p. 336; Divyâv. 120, 3.

3\. Rom. Leg.: having partaken of the pure food.

4\. Cp. Divyâv. 120, 5. Rom. Leg. p. 337.

5\. In Rom. Leg. 338 he finds all the Râkshasîs asleep.\]

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span> assembled the young merchants, told
them exactly what had happened, and all unanimously agreed to fly. Then,
on the evening of the fifteenth day, they gave a narcotic to the
râkshasîs, and when they had fallen asleep, the captain led forth the
young merchants, and, having crossed the small pass, they reached on
(its) north side, the golden sand, before the turkois well, near the
vai.dûrya meadow (the place where) the horse-king *Ba-la-ha* would
appear. And after a short while came the horse-king from the sky on a
moonbeam, with the light of the rainbow. When now this excellent horse
had drunk from the turkois well, had eaten from the vai.dûrya meadow,
had rolled three times on the golden sand, and had given himself a
shake, he said in a human voice: "Merchants! let all whosoever is shut
up in the râkshasî-island, mount on my back; not clinging to the love of
the râkshasîs, of (your) little children, or of any enjoyment whatever.
Close (your) eyes,<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> I will
bring you to your own country." Thereon the captain said: "Thou leader,
excellent magic horse, we merchants had started together to the islands
of the ocean to fetch jewels, but, because our merits failed, our great
ship was wrecked on the ocean, by a contrary wind we were driven to the
râkshasî-island. There we entered the houses of the evil-doing
râkshasîs, who wanted to kill us. Now there is for us no other means of
escape, we implore the help of the merciful horse-lord." Having spoken
thus, the captain mounted on the horse's neck and took hold of his
ear,<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> the young merchants
mounted on his back. Saying: "(Now) do not desire the râkshasî houses,
their sons, and whatever enjoyment (you have had there), do not even
think of it, but, till we have reached the end of the sea, close your
eyes," the horse-lord carried (them) along the sky. When the Râkshasîs
perceived this, they came forth (from their houses) leading their
children, and spoke thus: "Can you (indeed)

<span class="small"></span>

\[1 See Divyâv. 120, 21; also Don Quixote, Part II. ch. 41.

2 Jäschke would translate, 'leapt into the ear,' but I do not know how
to justify this. Is it meant as a precaution against hearing the
râkshasîs' allurements? Compare Odyssey, xii. 178 f.\]

<span id="page_508">p. 508</span> forsake the high castles, forsake the
harmonious community of husband and wife, forsake the sons begotten from
your body, forsake (our) savoury food and drink, O ye bad, shameless
men!" Speaking thus, some (of them) lifted up their children to the sky,
some waved their garments. When the young merchants heard this, they
were as if hit in their inmost hearts by an arrow, and thinking, '(This)
is indeed very true,' they turned their eyes back, and, except the
captain, all, seized by desire, looked and fell. The fallen (men) were
seized by the râkshasîs, who, throwing off their former beautiful body,
appeared in (true) râkshasî-shape, with shaggy heads, carrying their
breasts on the shoulders, and showing their teeth (fangs); and began to
eat them up, without waiting a moment. When now the horse-lord had come
to the end of the sea, he said to the merchant, "Look with your eyes and
alight." When he now opened his eyes and saw that none of the young
merchants was on the horse's back, he was deeply grieved, and saying: "O
noble horse-king, where are my young merchants?" he wept. The noble
horse, beating the earth with his fore-foot and shedding tears, said:
"(Those) young merchants, being void of your (high) merits, not
remembering their own country Jambudvîpa, but clinging to the island of
the evil Râkshasîs, perished; not remembering their parents and dear
friends, but clinging to the faces of the young râkshasîs, they
perished; not remembering their legitimate (*lit*. useful<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>) children, but clinging to the
deceitful râkshasî-children, they perished. Alas, you miserable beings!
when these slain pupils of the diamond-teacher have entered the abode of
the hell Avîci, what could even a highly merciful priest (*blama*) do
(for them)? If they, looking after their children, are perverted (in
mind) and carried away by a contrary wind, what can their parents do,
even with great affection?<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup>
If, not listening to the word of useful doctrine, the young merchants
cast their eyes back and fall, what can even the flying horse-king do? O
merchant, do not

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. This may possibly mean 'natural' as opposed to 'magical.'

2\. This sentence seems confused.\]

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span> weep, but hear me: 'The joy and sorrow
of this life is like the illusion of a dream, like a cataract, like a
lightning-cloud in the sky, therefore do not desire the joy of the orb
(sa.msâra).' " Thus the horse-lord explained the doctrine of the four
truths, and carried the chief merchant, when he had dried his tears, to
a place whence he (could) see his own house. There this horse-lord went
off in the sky like a dissolving rainbow. When now the chief merchant
came to his house, his parents and relatives all assembled, and
embracing him they wept; then they saluted him. Afterwards the parents
and relatives of the young merchants came forth, and shouting, "Where is
my father? Where is my elder brother? Where is my uncle? Where is my
grandson?" they wept. Then the chief merchant assembled the parents and
relatives of the young merchants, and told them explicitly how they
first had entered the sea, how the pernicious red wind had wrecked their
ship; how they had been carried by a contrary wind to the Râkshasî
island, had married them, and begotten children; how they had then found
out that they were Râkshasîs, and had sought means of escape; how the
men of the iron house had taught them this means; how the young
merchants had not listened to the admonitions of the horse-king and fell
and so forth. Then he instructed them in the true faith, that, as (all)
things within the orb were changeable, they must believe in the fruits
born from deeds (karman). Whosoever, clinging to this life, commits sin,
will, like the young merchants, who, looking back, fell, err about
within the orb, without finding an opportunity of saving himself from
the rebirth into evil states (durgati). But those who, not clinging to
this life, have received the true law in their minds, will, like the
chief merchant, after having obtained the happiness of heaven and
salvation, become a buddha.

 

   Our version of the story is nearly identical with that forming ch. 49
of the "Romantic Legend of the Life of Buddha," translated by Beal, p.
332 ff., and some significant points have been noted above. It is also
mentioned by <span id="page_510">p. 510</span> Hiuen Thsang in the
Si-yu-ki, transl. Beal, ii. 240 ff. That the Râkshasîs (the Yakkhinîs of
the Pâli) are the same as the Sirens of Homer, has been pointed out by
Mr. Axon and Mr. Morris (Ind. Ant. x. 291), the first giving also a
parallel from Malay mythology.

   It is quite clear, I think, from our version, that by the airy horse
the moon is understood (candûpamâ kira buddhâ, Dh. 244). He comes on, or
with, a moonbeam on the 15th day of the month. It becomes more evident
still by the version in the Rom. Leg., where, besides, he bears the
significant name of Keçin 'hairy,' which as early as in the Rig Veda is
an epithet of flames and heavenly bodies (S. Pet. Dict.). But, again, it
is an epithet of Vish.nu, who rides on the Garu.da, as is known from the
Pañcatantra, Book I. tale 5. For all these divine magic animals are of
the same race. Besides those noticed in Benfey's remarks on the tale,
Pañc. vol. i. 159 ff., the wooden bird is found in a tale of the
Transilvanian Gipsies, see ZDMG. xlii. 117 fr., and again in the second
tale of the Siddhi Kür (ed. Jülg), p. 63 of the translation, where the
son of gods *Çuklaketu* descends on it to the princess; *çukla*
'bright,' is, with or without *paksha*, the light half of the month, and
also an epithet of Vish.nu. He afterwards appears himself in the shape
of a bird, a lark (ibid. p. 64), and, having been hurt maliciously,
agrees with the princess to visit her on the 15th of every month (p.
65).

   Vish.nu, of course, is the *sun*, but the difference of origin of
those magic animals, from sun and moon respectively, is obliterated in
these later tales.

   In the Buddhist tale, naturally, the divine horse is a birth of the
Lord (as in the Jâtaka and in the Rom. Leg.), or of Maitreya (as in the
Divyâvadâna); while to the Tibetan he is an incarnation of the country's
patron saint, Avalokiteçvara.

   But I cannot go farther here into this absorbing question of the
divine bird or horse, which lies at the very root of comparative
mythology, as already shadowed forth in A. Kuhn's "Herabkunft des
Feuers." I would only call attention, in conclusion, to the latest shape
the divine horse has <span id="page_511">p. 511</span> taken in the
West, in Andersen's "Flying Trunk"; for I think we can discern something
of the same moral tendency in both this and the Tibetan tale--the flight
from Sa.msâra!

 

   NOTE.--To *valâha*, of which Bâlâha is only a wrong Sanskritisation,
cp. Divyâv. 127, 17. 19, *vâtavalâhakâ devaputrâ.h* and *varshaval.
dev.* 'the angels of the wind-clouds and of the rain-clouds,' and Jât.
I. 330, vassavalâhakadevarâjâ. *Muñja-keça* (Jât. II. 129, 9, cf. also
the wonderful horse Muñjakesi of king Udena, Dh. 160) 'having hair like
reed,' *i.e.* 'having beams,' is also an epithet of Vish.nu. The
'black-headed' of the Jâtaka points most likely to a cloud--so we would
have the moon emerging from the black clouds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)
