[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE NITI KYAN

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## JOURNAL

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

 

#### \[Old Series, Volume IV\]

###### \[London, John W. Parker and Son\]

#### \[1860\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

ART. IX.--*Translation of a Burmese Version of the Niti Kyan*, a Code of
Ethics in Pali. By E. FOWLE, Esq.

\[*Read* 20*th November*, 1858.\]

THE work that I am about to read is called the Niti Kyan, signifying "a
sacred writing."<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> It is a
short code of ethics compiled from selections from various authors, and
is one of several that I have translated from the Burmese language,
which are themselves translations from the Pali. The present work is
taught in the Burmese monasteries to the daily scholars and resident
novices. The necessity of learning and the advantages of education are
impressed upon the youthful population from an early age, and the
consequences of ignorance are contrasted at the same time. It may
perhaps be interesting to notice briefly the system of education adopted
in Burmah; this is so simple in its practical application that I can
explain it in a few words. The clergy receive no pay, and are not
connected with the State, but entirely supported by voluntary
contributions of food and other necessaries, a small quantity from each
meal being set apart for the priests; but this custom is so general, and
the portion so freely contributed, that there is generally a surplus of
food at the monasteries, sufficient to feed the poor. In return, the
poongyees, or priests, educate the whole of the male population without
charge or fee of any description, their vocation precluding them from
touching money.

   The education imparted generally consists of reading, writing,
arithmetic, and sacred history. A useful amount of education is
therefore generally diffused. A higher standard is less common, but a
knowledge of algebra, astronomy, and of the classical Pali, besides the
rudiments of the arts and sciences, are also imparted to the extent that
they are understood by their religious professors. The fact that almost
every man can read and write speaks for itself as regards the working of
their system, which is based upon universal or national charity; it is
firmly fixed and established among the people, and, as I have before
stated, it results in feeding the poor, educating the people, and
supporting the clergy.

   The same simple system I have no doubt exists also in Japan,

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. More correctly "A Knowledge of Polity."--ED.\]

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span> where, as in Burmah, the Buddhist
religion exists in greater purity than in other countries, and may
perhaps explain the recent interesting accounts that we have lately
received, and be the cause of the prosperous, satisfactory, and
contented condition of this singular and extraordinary nation.

   The code of ethics which I propose to read to you is in every day
use, and is generally known, being one of their elementary books.

   The Burmese resemble the Persians in their style of conversation
being remarkably figurative in their manner of expressing themselves,
constantly seasoning their conversation wlth proverbs, metaphors,
poetry, and citations from this work, either for attack or defence.

   But little of the literature of the Burmese has been translated, and
it is therefore almost unknown. It is in a great measure derived from
the Pali, but they are far from being deficient in strictly national
literature, possessing a written history and poetry of their own,
besides works too numerous to mention upon astronomy, botany, law,
medicine, statistics, revelations, and also of fiction. Burmah is,
comparatively speaking, a new field from which many wild flowers of
literature may yet be gathered, sufficient to make a presentable bouquet
to the Royal Asiatic Society, and to which I wish to direct the
attention of the scholar and student.

 

NITI KYAN.

   I bow with reverence to the three principles of worship--namely, God,
his precepts (commandments), and disciples; and, having done so, will
expound the Loga Nee Dee, a book formed from extracts gathered from
various Burmese works on religious law. With respect to this book it
deserves among men to be called their Life, Father, Mother, Teacher,
Friend: therefore is it that those who have made themselves acquainted
with its contents are celebrated for their wisdom and intelligence.

   <span id="pp_1"></span>1. A lazy man cannot acquire knowledge.

   <span id="pp_2"></span>2. A man without knowledge cannot collect
wealth.

   <span id="pp_3"></span>3. A man without wealth cannot secure good
friends.

   <span id="pp_4"></span>4. A man without good friends has no comfort.

   <span id="pp_5"></span>5. A man without comfort has no leisure for
religious duties.

   <span id="pp_6"></span>6. A man who does not attend to his religious
duties can never attain to the state of Nibban, or absorption into the
Deity.

   <span id="pp_7"></span>7. Riches are not equal to learning, for
wisdom cannot be stolen or lost; it is therefore thy best friend, and
benefits while living and even after death.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

   <span id="pp_8"></span>8. Gather up each fragment of learning, and
think it not small or unworthy of notice, for as rivers are formed and
wells are filled by drops of water, so may thy wisdom increase.

   <span id="pp_9"></span>9. A knowledge and mastery of the tongue is
desirable and good; equally so is that of the hand, but they can only be
perfected by study and application, and in return they will support thee
in thy profession or employment.

   <span id="pp_10"></span>10. Every mountain does not contain a mine of
precious stones.

   <span id="pp_11"></span>11. A person without sense is like the fruit
of the Sapan tree, fair without, but the inside is filled with insects.

   <span id="pp_12"></span>12. A sensible person is like unto a jack
fruit, which may be rough without, yet is filled with wholesome food.

   <span id="pp_13"></span>13. A woman's wealth is her beauty.

   <span id="pp_14"></span>14. A man's wealth, his learning, family, and
good name.

   <span id="pp_15"></span>15. A snake's wealth, its venom.

   <span id="pp_16"></span>16. The wealth of men in power, their
position, influence, state, and followers.

   <span id="pp_17"></span>17. The wealth of priests, moral precepts.

   <span id="pp_18"></span>18. The wealth of Brahmans, their charms and
prophecies.

   <span id="pp_19"></span>19. A man of good family upholds its honour,
and however poor he may become, never disgraces it.

   <span id="pp_20"></span>20. The shade of the forest is pleasant.

   <span id="pp_21"></span>21. Better than the shade of the forest is
the shelter of thy parents or relatives.

   <span id="pp_22"></span>22. Better than the shelter of thy parents is
that of thy teacher.

   <span id="pp_23"></span>23. Better than the shelter of thy teacher is
that of thy ruler.

   <span id="pp_24"></span>24. But above all, the shelter of thy God is
greater.

   <span id="pp_25"></span>25. Soft words make many friends.

   <span id="pp_26"></span>26. Bitter words make many enemies. As the
sun from its heat cannot be approached, and appears alone, so is he who
speaketh bitterly; but, on the other hand, the man who speaketh fairly
is as the cool moon, surrounded by the stars and planets which keep her
company, so are his friends.

   <span id="pp_27"></span>27. A brave man is impatient for the battle.

   <span id="pp_28"></span>28. A lawyer is fond of argument.

   <span id="pp_29"></span>29. One wishes for a friend when one gets a
rare or dainty dish.

   <span id="pp_30"></span>30. A scholar wishes for difficult passages
for the pleasure of interpreting them.

   <span id="pp_31"></span>31. The ignorant are like dogs that snap and
bite at each other; when they meet with a wise man they snarl and snap
at him, fearing his power.

   <span id="pp_32"></span>32. He who takes his ease is liable to
disease.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

   <span id="pp_33"></span>33. Every elephant is not an Albino (white
elephant).

   <span id="pp_34"></span>34. Every scented tree is not a santagoo
tree.

   <span id="pp_35"></span>35. Every town does not contain a
philosopher.

   <span id="pp_36"></span>36. If a harper does not practice for five
days he loses proficiency;

   <span id="pp_37"></span>37. An archer neglecting practice in seven
days fails in his aim;

   <span id="pp_38"></span>38. And a woman separated from her husband
for thirty days endangers her chastity.

   <span id="pp_39"></span>39. The man who eats and sleeps much,
although he increases in fatness, increases in vice.

   <span id="pp_40"></span>40. The beauty of women and the sweetness of
the sugar-cane bring satiety; but with the words of wisdom you can never
be filled.

   <span id="pp_41"></span>41. Learning, to be permanent, must be taught
by degrees.

   <span id="pp_42"></span>42. Those who seek for riches must do so by
degrees.

   <span id="pp_43"></span>43. Those who go a-courting, must not be in a
hurry.

   <span id="pp_44"></span>44. Those who ascend a mountain must walk
slowly. Answer angry people gently and slowly. These five things are to
be done gently and slowly.

   <span id="pp_45"></span>45. Give thanks and praise to soldiers when
they return victorious from the battle.

   <span id="pp_46"></span>46. Be grateful and pleased when your grain
is stored in your granary.

   <span id="pp_47"></span>47. Be thankful for the feast when you have
partaken of it.

   <span id="pp_48"></span>48. Be grateful to your wife in old age.

   <span id="pp_49"></span>49. A man who continually asks favours is not
liked.

   <span id="pp_50"></span>50. A man who never confers favours should
not be liked.

   <span id="pp_51"></span>51. Those who have wealth in riches and
learning should take care of them.

   <span id="pp_52"></span>52. Those who never accumulate riches or
succeed in life are drunkards, gamblers, spendthrifts, dissipated
characters, and their associates.

   <span id="pp_53"></span>53. The avarice of governors for riches,
philosophers for learning, and the love of those we cherish, is as
insatiable as the sea, which receives into its bosom all the rivers and
waters of the world, but is never filled.

   <span id="pp_54"></span>54. A person may have youth, beauty, rank,
wealth; but without learning, he is like a handsome flower that has no
fragrance.

   <span id="pp_55"></span>55. A person, although his parents may be
poor, foolish, and of humble origin, may yet become prime minister;
therefore in talking never allude to a man's family.

   <span id="pp_56"></span>56. A person who studies many things at the
same time without perfecting himself in any particular thing, remembers
that which he <span id="page_256">p. 256</span> has imperfectly learned
only as a dream, of which he has but a faint recollection.

   <span id="pp_57"></span>57. The master beats his pupil as a potter
batters his clay, not to break it or destroy it, but to bring it into
shape.

   <span id="pp_58"></span>58. A rose imparted its fragrance to a leaf
in which it was folded: so associate thyself with wise men, and their
wisdom will cling to thee.

   <span id="pp_59"></span>59. Associate with the virtuous, and when you
have learned their law you can come to no harm. Mix not with the wicked,
put them aside, but cling to the virtuous. Do good at all times, whether
by night or by day; and reflect within thyself of the uncertainty of
human existence.

   <span id="pp_60"></span>60. There is no friend like good sense.

   <span id="pp_61"></span>61. Gifts give great pleasure to the
recipients.

   <span id="pp_62"></span>62. A good kind of flower, though withered,
still retains some of its fragrance.

   <span id="pp_63"></span>63. A fighting elephant does not fear the
battle.

   <span id="pp_64"></span>64. You may break or crush a sugar-cane as
much as you please, but it will still retain its sweetness.

   <span id="pp_65"></span>65. However great may be the misfortunes of
the virtuous man, be will never transgress by breaking the law, or
acting improperly in any way.

   <span id="pp_66"></span>66. However hungry the lion, he will not feed
on vegetables, or touch the flesh of his friend the elephant.

   <span id="pp_67"></span>67. The perfume of flowers is refreshing,
more refreshing is light of the cool moon, but most refreshing are the
words of wisdom.

   <span id="pp_68"></span>68. The sun may rise in the west, the Myeen
Moh mountain may be bent as a bow, the infernal fires quenched, and the
lotus grow on the mountain's top; but the words of truth and wisdom are
unchangeable.

   <span id="pp_69"></span>69. The bee loves flowers, flies putritied
flesh; the wicked quarrel, but the wise and virtuous love good deeds.

   <span id="pp_70"></span>70. However deep the well, it cannot contain
as much water as the river.

   <span id="pp_71"></span>71. There is nothing that can shine like the
sun.

   <span id="pp_72"></span>72. However much your friends and others may
like you, it is nothing compared with a mother's love.

   <span id="pp_73"></span>73. A woman is the best and sweetest of
blessings.

   <span id="pp_74"></span>74. Wonderful things are believed when seen.

   <span id="pp_75"></span>75. A wicked mother brings up her son to
speak improperly, and a wicked father teaches him to act improperly, and
if both parents are wicked the son both speaks and acts improperly.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

   <span id="pp_76"></span>76. A good mother teaches her son to speak
fairly, and a good father teaches him to act honestly.

   <span id="pp_77"></span>77. A brave man is required in battle.

   <span id="pp_78"></span>78. A clever speaker is required to quell a
riot.

   <span id="pp_79"></span>79. When we meet with a difficult passage in
the sacred writings, we wish for the presence of a scholar.

   <span id="pp_80"></span>80. When one dog meets another he feels
inclined to fight, and snarls at him; so it is with stupid persons, when
they meet they are inclined to quarrel.

   <span id="pp_81"></span>81. Do nothing hurriedly without reflection,
or you will repent at leisure.

   <span id="pp_82"></span>82. Those who are grateful God loves; be
gentle, meek, and forbearing to those who revile or slander you.

   <span id="pp_83"></span>83. It is unfortunate to be in contact with
uncleanliness; more so to be near enemies who hate you; but to be near
those who are ungrateful is to be more unfortunate still.

   <span id="pp_84"></span>84. There is a proper time for punishment,
and to give advice, and those who receive punishment when deserved, and
advice when necessary, should be grateful for it; but punishment and
advice should be given with consideration, and only when merited.

   <span id="pp_85"></span>85. Those who are superiors should master
themselves, that they may master those who are inferior to them.

   <span id="pp_86"></span>86. Separate yourself from those you wish to
master, and you will succeed.

   <span id="pp_87"></span>87. Inferiors are mastered by presents.

   <span id="pp_88"></span>88. To render yourself superior to your
equals, you must be industrious.

   <span id="pp_89"></span>89. Be thankful to the horse that has carried
you safely and swiftly to the end of your journey.

   <span id="pp_90"></span>90. Be thankful to the bullock that has
carried your burden.

   <span id="pp_91"></span>91. Be thankful to the cow that gives her
milk freely.

   <span id="pp_92"></span>92. Be thankful for the knowledge that has
assisted you in difficulties.

   <span id="pp_93"></span>93. The wealth of the wise man is like a
source or well, which, though water be constantly drawn from it, yet is
constantly being replenished;

   <span id="pp_94"></span>94. But the wealth of the rogue is like the
sea, which from its saltness cannot be drunk.

   <span id="pp_95"></span>95. Rivers do not drink their own waters,
trees do not eat the fruits they produce, and the rains do not select
particular spots, but distribute themselves equally on the earth; the
virtuous and generous <span id="page_258">p. 258</span> man resembles
these things by dispensing his wealth, charity, and wisdom to all, and
by not being selfish,

   <span id="pp_96"></span>96. Suffer not ambition to lead you to aspire
to impossible things, or to covet things beyond your reach; but it is
proper to aspire to the attainment of possible things which your sense
informs you you are capable of reaching by a useful occupation of time;
for it is not proper to be satisfied with a state of idleness.

   <span id="pp_97"></span>97. Some prosper without exertion, others
with great exertions sometimes fail; people must not always expect their
efforts will be successful.

   <span id="pp_98"></span>98. Ignorant persons dislike the wise, but
listen with pleasure and follow the advice of the wicked, which leads to
destruction.

   <span id="pp_99"></span>99. The ignorant cannot keep a secret, but
when anything is confided to them, they at once impart it to every one,
making a noise like that of a half-filled jar of water when carried.

   <span id="pp_100"></span>100. The bite of a snake leads to death, but
is sometimes cured by a proper antidote; but for a person confirmed in
wickedness and sin, there is no hope or antidote; he is in a worse state
than if bitten by a venomous snake; there is no cure for him,

   <span id="pp_101"></span>101. A confirmed or thorough fool is he who
knowingly and obstinately persists in doing that which he is perfectly
convinced is against his interest or well-being,

   <span id="pp_102"></span>102. An ignorant fellow, but a notorious
robber and dacoit, committed many deeds without being caught, which so
filled him with self-conceit that the recollection of his crimes was as
sweet as honey to him. He was at last caught, placed in irons, and
thrown into prison, and when his difficulties and the hour of adversity
came upon him, he then knew that his deeds had been bad; for the
recollection of his evil acts was as bitter as gall.

   <span id="pp_103"></span>103. Ignorant people should not be strong,
because they are liable to commit acts of violence; and should they die
while so doing, they have no chance of heaven, but are certain of
hell-fire.

   <span id="pp_104"></span>104. Rats do mischief to houses, monkeys to
forests, crows to young birds, and priests to men.

   <span id="pp_105"></span>105. A sleepless person thinks the morning
is long in breaking; the tired traveller thinks the end of his journey
still distant; and those who are wicked, and know not the law, think
happiness is not attainable.

   <span id="pp_106"></span>106. A silly person can discover a fault as
small as a teel seed in others, but he has not the ability to discover a
fault of the size of a cocoa-nut in himself. A wise man, on the
contrary, has not only the <span id="page_259">p. 259</span> power of
discovering faults in others, but hiding his own; resembling the
tortoise, which draws in its head and limbs when it wishes to conceal
them.

   <span id="pp_107"></span>107. The praise of fools is painful to the
wise, but the praise of the virtuous is most gratifying.

   <span id="pp_108"></span>108. The selfish and avaricious are gained
by presents and bribery, the passionate by submission, the silly by
conceding to their folly; but the wise by honesty and uprightness.

   <span id="pp_109"></span>109. Those who are connected with you in
business, and work for your benefit, consider them as relations; but
relations who work against your interests should not be considered as
relations, for they resemble a disease of your own body; but the former,
although not connected with you, yet resemble the medicine-tree, which,
although it grows at a distance, still does you good.

   <span id="pp_110"></span>110. Those friends who flatter you to your
face, but slander you behind your back, resemble a pot of poisoned
honey, which must be thrown away; for though it is sweet yet it is
dangerous.

   <span id="pp_111"></span>111. Many cling to you while rich, but
desert you when poor; even relations, friends, and wives; therefore
consider your wealth your best friend.

   <span id="pp_112"></span>112. A good servant is known by the
cheerfulness with which he performs his work; a friend and wife in the
time of adversity.

   <span id="pp_113"></span>113. Consider your partner in business as a
relation, those who support you as a father, those who console you in
trouble as a wife.

   <span id="pp_114"></span>114. Associate not with your enemies, be not
too familiar with your friends; for if you quarrel they will reproach
you with your defects which you have acquainted them with. Never admit
to your confidence a friend with whom you have seriously quarrelled, for
it is as dangerous as opening the side of a mare to bring forth its
foal.

   <span id="pp_115"></span>115. Quarrel not with an enemy if away from
your friends and assistance, but carry him on your back should he desire
it; but if you come to a place where you have assistance, cast him off,
and break him like an earthen jar if you can.

   <span id="pp_116"></span>116. In putting out a fire leave not the
slightest ember behind, in discharging debts leave not a portion unpaid,
and in war leave not a single enemy; for these three things will
increase and destroy you.

   <span id="pp_117"></span>117. Associate not with those who flatter
and fawn upon you with fair looks and words, for they resemble a snake,
which, though handsome in shape, has venom in its fangs.

   <span id="pp_118"></span>118. Separate yourself from a cruel master;
but he is preferable <span id="page_260">p. 260</span> to the
hasty-tempered; but, above all, the oppressive master is to be shunned.

   <span id="pp_119"></span>119. Keep fifty cubits from horned cattle,
one hundred cubits from horses; one thousand cubits from elephants; but
from a fool run away to some other country.

   <span id="pp_120"></span>120. Run away from a bad district, a false
friend, bad relations, and a bad wife.

   <span id="pp_121"></span>121. A good friend is one who when you are
sick attends upon you and gives you medicine, who feeds you when you are
hungry, assists you when in poverty, delivers you from your enemies, who
will plead for you when in trouble with your rulers, and at the last get
execution of judgment put aside; such a friend is to be prized and
cherished.

   <span id="pp_122"></span>122. The cuckoo's notes are pleasant, a
beautiful woman's glory is in the acquisition of a good husband, a plain
person in his learning, priests and hermits in their patience and
forbearance.

   <span id="pp_123"></span>123. A woman's wealth is in her beauty, a
man's wealth in his knowledge, a priest's wealth in religion, the wealth
of kings and rulers in their revenue.

   <span id="pp_124"></span>124. Priests and hermits are handsome when
lean, four-footed animals when fat, men when learned, and women when
married.

   <span id="pp_125"></span>125. Buffaloes delight in mud, the bird
henza in beautiful lakes of clear water, women in the society of men,
and priests in the words of truth and wisdom.

   <span id="pp_126"></span>126. Be thankful for a feast when you have
partaken of it.

   <span id="pp_127"></span>127. Trust not a woman who has separated
three times from three different husbands, a priest who has changed to
three different temples, or a bird that has escaped three times from the
snare of the fowler; they are very cunning and deceitful.

   <span id="pp_128"></span>128. The wicked are tamed by punishment,
false friends are mastered by shunning them, a wicked or unruly wife by
taking all your property out of her keeping, a gourmand is mastered by
starvation.

   <span id="pp_129"></span>129. The night without moonlight is not
beautiful, the sea without billows is not beautiful, a woman without a
husband is not beautiful to contemplate, for from a husband she derives
her ease and comfort; she is but able to take care of the property he
accumulates, which she retains as a box, the husband being the source of
all her happiness; and it well may be said that the woman is like the
thread in the needle, which follows where the latter penetrates and
leads.

   <span id="pp_130"></span>130. Women are as prone to sin as rivers to
run crooked, and as full of wickedness as forests are of fuel.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

   <span id="pp_131"></span>131. When a woman is fond of contradicting,
of backbiting, and slandering, who is quarrelsome, envious, and wishes
for all she sees, who is greedy and eats ber meals before her husband,
who is always gadding about to other people's houses, with such a woman
remain not; separate from her.

   <span id="pp_134"></span>134. A good wife is as a brother to her
husband when he eats or dresses, resembles a sister in modesty when in
private with him, a slave when he is preparing for a journey, a friend
when in difficulties; she comforts him quickly to sleep, she attires
herself neatly to please him, she forbears kindly when he is angry; such
a woman has been described by the learned as an excellent woman, and
when she dies will attain to a heavenly state.

   <span id="pp_135"></span>135. If a young maiden has a golden
complexion, a face with the expression of a deer, a long waist, wide
hips, small stomach, thighs and legs tapering like an elephant's trunk,
hair that reaches to her heels and turns up regular, and even teeth, and
deep navel; should you meet such an one, consider not whether she be
poor or rich, but marry her.

   <span id="pp_136"></span>136. November is the best month; a handsome
woman the best thing; the eldest son the most prized; and the north side
the most liked.

   <span id="pp_137"></span>137. Should a woman desire to be born a man
in the course of transmigration, she can only attain this by treating
her husband as the angels' wives treat their husbands, with love,
respect, and attention.

   <span id="pp_138"></span>138. Should a man desire to return to earth
as a man when death and transmigration occur, he should avoid committing
adultery as he would shun treading in a miry way.

   <span id="pp_139"></span>139. Old age and extreme youth should not
unite in marriage, for it leads to misery and unhappiness.

   <span id="pp_140"></span>140. Kings and ministers should sleep but a
quarter of the night, philosophers and learned men but half the night,
merchants and traders three parts of the night; but beggars may sleep
the whole night.

   <span id="pp_141"></span>141. In a country that has no capital,
government, learned man, doctor, or river, remain not a day.

   <span id="pp_142"></span>142. In a place where you are not
appreciated, where no one loves you, where you have no friends, where
you cannot learn, remain not a day, but be off.

   <span id="pp_143"></span>143. In a house without children there is
quietness; in a well-governed country there is
quietness;--dark-complexioned and poor people are quiet.

   <span id="pp_144"></span>144. He who wishes for riches, must trade
(speculate); he who <span id="page_262">p. 262</span> wishes for
learning must attach himself to those who have wisdom; and he who wishes
for a family must marry a young woman; he who aims to be prime minister
must study to please the wishes of the king.

   <span id="pp_145"></span>145. When priests and kings become
dissatisfied, there is no chance for them, they are lost; a woman of
good family, without modesty, is lost; a foolish woman who assumes
modesty is lost.

   <span id="pp_146"></span>146. A bird's strength is the air; a fish's
strength the water; the strength of the weak is in the law, and the
strength of children in their parents.

   <span id="pp_147"></span>147. Rulers should pride themselves in
forbearance, intelligence, energy, discrimination, tenderness,
forethought, for these bring satisfaction and contentment.

   <span id="pp_148"></span>148. Rulers and priests should have but one
true word, from which they should never depart.

   <span id="pp_149"></span>149. A man who is married and has a family,
but stays at home without working, or exerting himself for their
benefit, is lazy and good for nothing; a priest who has not command over
his tongue is bad: the governor or magistrate who acts without
consideration is worthless; a person who considers himself clever should
never lose his temper.

   <span id="pp_150"></span>150. When there is a difference of opinion
and discord among the learned, confusion is sure to follow, and bad
results therefrom.

   <span id="pp_151"></span>151. Kings should personally know the amount
of their revenue and of their expenditure, the quantity of food
necessary for the subsistence of their subjects, and inform themselves
as to the manner in which the duties of the civil and military services
are executed.

   <span id="pp_152"></span>152. Repress and keep down those who
misbehave, and exalt and reward the deserving.

   <span id="pp_153"></span>153. Fire, water, women, fools, snakes, and
rulers should be avoided, for they lead to sudden death.

   <span id="pp_154"></span>154. He who lives in the same house with a
wicked woman, a wicked slave, or a venomous snake, is in danger of
death.

   <span id="pp_155"></span>155. A clever master loses his reputation in
striving to teach a fool who will not learn; a man loses his honour who
lives with an unchaste wife; and those who associate with the wicked
lose their characters.

   <span id="pp_156"></span>156. Lay not the sin upon the child but upon
the mother; when a pupil takes to evil blame the teacher; when the
people of a country act improperly blame the rulers; when kings do wrong
blame the ministers.

   <span id="pp_157"></span>157. Anger is conquered by gentleness; the
unjust are conquered by justice; the irritable are mastered by coaxing
and presents; liars are conquered by truth.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

   <span id="pp_158"></span>158. A generous man, though vulgar, becomes
refined; a generous man can carry out his wishes with ease; the words of
a generous nature are sweet; a man of an amiable disposition is always
easy to approach, and you can become acquainted with him; he also can
form the acquaintance of whom he wishes. What is generosity? the
medicine of love. What is stinginess or avarice? the medicine of hatred.
Generosity is a popular medicine; stinginess is a private medicine.

   <span id="pp_159"></span>159. Union is strength; many small fibres
united will hold an elephant.

   <span id="pp_160"></span>160. A general or king who does not conquer
with an army well provided with arms and stores, of what use is he? he
is as a light which will expire by the smallest breath of wind.

   <span id="pp_161"></span>161. Seek not to imitate the pleasures of
your rulers, nor their ways, dress, or conversation; perfume not
yourself as they do, for they are neither your friends, relations, or
equals, but your superiors.

   <span id="pp_162"></span>162. When you approach your superiors, keep
not at too great a distance, or approach too near; place not yourself
between the wind and them, neither place yourself directly in front of
them, or in too high or too low a position; study to avoid these six
faults, as you would a burning fire.

   <span id="pp_163"></span>163. A person with the highest
qualifications comes to no advantage, if not supported by his king; a
precious jewel is only seen to advantage when set in gold.

   <span id="pp_164"></span>164. Believe not a priest religious who
converses with women; nor in the humanity of a man who indulges much in
the eating of flesh; nor in the promises of a drunkard, or the modesty
of a sensualist, or the knowledge of a lazy person, or the wealth of a
bad-tempered man.

   <span id="pp_165"></span>165. For the drunkard, night-walker,
gambler, lover of plays, and those who associate with lazy people, there
is no ease or comfort in life; they will be destroyed after death.

   <span id="pp_167"></span>167. Look before you speak in the daytime;
at night look to the right and left, before and behind; as a hunter
considers the dangers of the forest, consider before you speak.

   <span id="pp_168"></span>168. Four kinds of living men were called
dead men by the author. Who were they? First, an extremely poor man;
second, a much oppressed man; third, a most ignorant man; and fourth, a
favourite minister. These may be considered as dead men.

   <span id="pp_169"></span>169. The wise man avoids danger, and sees it
from a distance; but if it overtakes him he fears not.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

   <span id="pp_170"></span>170. For the sluggard, for the man of bad
memory, for the spendthrift, for the avaricious, for those oppressed by
disease, for the lazy, and the careless, for these seven characters,
there is no place in Holy Writ.

   <span id="pp_171"></span>171. Say not to wealth go not to the rich
man, for he has plenty, but go to the poor man; nor to the clouds rain
not in the sea or in the rivers, for there is already plenty there, but
rain alone upon the earth: for where Providence directs thither will
they go.

   <span id="pp_172"></span>172. The teacher should not expend the whole
of his knowledge upon his pupil, he should retain something to himself
that his disciple may respect him; even so in all things, expend not the
whole of thy store, keep a reserve.

   <span id="pp_173"></span>173. Silk-cotton is the lightest thing, but
lighter than this are careless persons; those who obey not their parents
and teachers are the emptiest and lightest of all; but those who neglect
their religion and God are lighter than air.

   <span id="pp_174"></span>174. Rocks are heavy. What is heavier? the
voice of the Náths. What is of greater weight? the advice of parents and
teachers: but the words of God are of greatest weight.

   <span id="pp_175"></span>175. The right hand is the slave of the
body; the little finger the slave of the eye, the nose, and the ear; the
left hand the slave of the feet.

   <span id="pp_176"></span>176. The cow should be respected and
appreciated, as she nourishes man; and should therefore be considered as
a mother, as her milk gives him food, and she conduces to his ease and
comfort: all men eat her flesh, but those who do so, eat as it were
their mother's flesh; it should not be eaten, but when she dies her
flesh should be given to the vultures,

   <span id="pp_177"></span>177. Those who commence their studies on a
Thursday learn thoroughly; those who commence on a Sunday or Friday
obtain mediocrity; those who commence on a Saturday or Tuesday are
liable to die.

   <span id="pp_178"></span>178. To commence studying on the eighth day
of the increase or wane of the moon is equal to killing the teacher; on
the fourteenth of the increase or waning moon it is equal to killing the
pupil; on the tenth increase or wane, it is equal to the destruction of
all learning; on the full moon, it is equal to killing your parents.

   <span id="pp_179"></span>179. Those who wish to learn should not on
the seventh day of the increase or wane of the moon eat of coco nuts; on
the third increase or wane they should not eat venison or the flesh of
any other animal, for if they do they will lose what they have learned,
by forgetting it.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

   <span id="pp_180"></span>180. Sacrifice and abandon your friend for
your family, if necessary; sacrifice your relations for the good of the
public; for your own interests, sacrifice the earth you live upon, and
remove to some other spot.

   <span id="pp_181"></span>181. The lion, the elephant, and the wise
man are never found but in a place suitable for them; but the crow, the
deer, and a low person always remain in their old place.

   <span id="pp_182"></span>182. Consider well before leaving a place
where you have been long a resident, to remove to another where you are
a stranger.

   <span id="pp_183"></span>183. Go not unarmed to the battle field, and
do not commence argument without being prepared to cite your
authorities.

   <span id="pp_184"></span>184. A merchant who travels to buy or sell
in foreign countries, as well as those who travel for pleasure, should
be accompanied by some friend who is acquainted with the couutry.

   <span id="pp_185"></span>185. Ride from the world thy losses, thy
grief, thy domestic troubles, and the intrigues and insults of thy
enemies.

   <span id="pp_186"></span>186. To show your wisdom, speak according to
your position, love those of your own rank, and moderate your anger to
your position.

   <span id="pp_187"></span>187. There are three kinds of fools: those
who have limited means but live above them; those who have no strength
but are always fighting; and those who have no sense but are always
arguing.

   <span id="pp_188"></span>188. There are three kinds of detestable
characters: those who visit without being invited; those who volunteer
their advice without being asked, and talk scandal; and those who vaunt
their own praises.

   <span id="pp_189"></span>189. Ugly people are very talkative.

   <span id="pp_190"></span>190. A stupid man betrays his own ignorance
and proclaims his own disgrace.

   <span id="pp_191"></span>191. A cow that has no milk kicks if you try
to milk her.

   <span id="pp_192"></span>192. A frog once thought itself a lion,
because its posture when seated was the same, but a crow seized the frog
and made it croak for fear; so is it with those who assume a knowledge
of what they do not understand: when they are in the company of those
who have knowledge, fearing that they may be questioned, they cry out
"Master, master," and show great civility. Can the wild boar think
itself a cheetah, because his grunting somewhat resembles it? Does the
cat imagine itself a tiger? Does the person consider himself wise,
because he resembles a philosopher?

   <span id="pp_193"></span>193. Those who refuse to learn when young,
will, when grown up, have to carry the loads, pull off the boats, and
serve those who have learning.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

   <span id="pp_194"></span>194. Those who are learned are bowed to by
the ignorant.

   <span id="pp_195"></span>195. The thorns upon the tree grew there, so
learn to form thyself.

   <span id="pp_196"></span>196. Who polished the eye of the deer?

   <span id="pp_197"></span>197. Who gave to the lily its fragrance?

   <span id="pp_198"></span>198. A good tree will produce good fruit.

   <span id="pp_199"></span>199. There is no enemy like disease.

   <span id="pp_200"></span>200. Men love themselves more than anything
else.

   <span id="pp_201"></span>201. Good deeds meet with their reward.

   <span id="pp_202"></span>202. A crab has no head, but he can come and
go as he chooses.

   <span id="pp_203"></span>203. A fowl has no milk, but she can bring
up her young ones.

   <span id="pp_204"></span>204. One good man is found in a hundred, a
learned one in a thousand, a liberal one rarely; but a perfect one in a
million.

   <span id="pp_205"></span>205. An ambassador should not be ashamed;
when learning, buying, selling, or amusing yourself be not ashamed.

   <span id="pp_206"></span>206. Women consume twice as much as men;
their sense is four times greater than man's; their industry and energy
six times greater; and their passions eight times greater.

   <span id="pp_207"></span>207. The top of the sugar cane is saltish,
but it increases in sweetness in every joint to the end; so is a true
friend, he increases in goodness from the beginning to the end. A wicked
friend also resembles the sugar cane, with this difference, that he
increases in wickedness.

   <span id="pp_208"></span>208. The four causes of a country's
prosperity are good cultivators, commercial men, good ministers, and
priests.

   <span id="pp_209"></span>209. If study is neglected, learning is
forgotten; those who are poor keep an uncomfortable house; those who are
beautiful but lazy, are untidy; a priest who forgets his dignity is
unclean and degraded.

   <span id="pp_210"></span>210. The property of those who are lazy goes
to those who are industrious; the fool says it is fate, the wise man
says it is not so; industry must never slacken, and you are sure to
thrive; your conscience moreover will gladden you.

   <span id="pp_211"></span>211. If a man in these times be ugly,
ignorant, and vulgar, but withal rich, he is considered faultless, says
the author.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)
