[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# Vajra Suchi

### by Asvaghosha

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## TRANSACTIONS

<span class="small">OF</span>

## THE ROYAL ASIATIC SOCIETY.

<span class="small">OF</span>

### GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND

 

#### \[Transactions, Volume III\]

###### \[London, J. Murray and Parbury, Allen & Co.\]

#### \[1835\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

VIII.--*A Disputation respecting C<span class="small">ASTE</span> by a
B<span class="small">UDDHIST</span>, in the form of a Series of
Propositions supposed to be put by a S<span class="small">AIVA</span>
and refuted by the Disputant.--Communicated by B. H. H<span
class="small">ODGSON</span>, Esq., M.R.A.S.*

Read January 1, 1831.

*To the Secretary of the Asiatic Society.*

|            |                  |
|------------|-----------------:|
|            | Nepal Residency, |
|       SIR: | July 11th, 1829. |

   A few days since my learned old *Bauddha* friend brought me a little
tract in Sanscrit, with such an evident air of pride and pleasure, that
I immediately asked him what it contained. "Oh, my friend!" was his
reply, "I have long been trying to procure for you this work, in the
assurance that you must highly approve the wit and wisdom contained in
it; and, after many applications to the owner, I have at length obtained
the loan of it for three or four days. But I cannot let you have it, nor
even a copy of it, such being the conditions on which I procured you a
sight of it." These words of my old friend stimulated my curiosity, and
with a few fair words I engaged the old gentleman to lend me and my
*pandit* his aid in making a translation of it; a task which we
accomplished within the limited period of my possession of the original,
although my *pandit* (a Brahman of Benares) soon declined co-operation
with us, full of indignation at the author and his work!
Notwithstanding, however, the loss of the *pandit's* aid, I think I may
venture to say that the translation gives a fair representation of the
*matter* of the original, and is not altogether without some traces of
its *manner*.

   It consists of a shrewd and argumentative attack, by a *Bauddha*,
upon the Brahmanical doctrine of caste: and what adds to its pungency
is, that throughout, the truth of the Brahmanical writings is assumed,
and that the author's proofs of the erroneousness of the doctrine of
*caste* are all drawn from those writings. He possesses himself of the
enemy's battery, and turns their own guns against them. To an English
reader this circumstance gives a puerile character to a large portion of
the Treatise, owing to the enormous absurdity of the data from which the
author argues. His inferences, however, are almost always shrewdly
drawn, and we must remember that not he but his antagonists must be
answerable for the character of the data. To judge by the effect
produced upon my Brahman *pandit*--a wise man in his generation, and
accustomed for the last four years to the examination of *Bauddha*
literature--by this little Treatise, it would seem that there is no
method of assailing Brahmanism comparable to that of "judging it out of
its own mouth:" and the resolution of the Committee of the Serampore
<span id="page_161">p. 161</span> college to make a thorough knowledge
of Hindu learning the basis of the education of their destined young
apostles of Christianity in India, would thence appear to be most wise
and politic: but to return to my little Treatise.

   We all know that the Brahmans scorn to consider the Sudras as of the
same nature with themselves, in this respect resembling the bigoted
Christians of the dark ages, who deemed in like manner of the Jews. The
manner in which our author treats this part of his subject is, in my
judgment, admirable, and altogether worthy of a European mind. Indeed it
bears the closest resemblance to the style of argument used by
Shakspeare, in covertly assailing the analogous European prejudice
already adverted to. I need not point more particularly to the glorious
passage in the Merchant of Venice: "Hath not a Jew eyes, hands, organs,
dimensions, senses, passions; fed with the same food, hurt by the same
diseases?" &c. &c.

   The *Bauddha* Treatise commences in the sober manner of a title page
to a book; but immediately after the author has announced himself with
due pomp, he rushes "*in medias res*," and to the end of his work
maintains the animated style of *vivâ voce* disputation. Who A<span
class="small">SHU</span> G<span class="small">HOSHA</span>, the author,
was, *when* he flourished and *where*, I cannot ascertain{!}. All that
is known of him at Nepal is, that he was a *Maha pandit*, or great sage,
and wrote, besides the little Treatise now translated, two larger
*Bauddha* works of high repute, the names of which are mentioned in a
note.<span id="page_161_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_161_note_*.md)

|           |                   |
|-----------|-------------------|
| I am, &c. |                   |
|           | B. H. HODGSON.    |

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   I, A<span class="small">SHU</span> G<span class="small">OSHA</span>,
first invoking M<span class="small">ANJA</span> G<span
class="small">HOSHA</span>, the *Guru* of the world, with all my soul
and all my strength, proceed to compose the book called *Vajra Suchi*,
in accordance with the *Shastras* (Hindu or Brahmanical *Sastras*).

   Allow then that your *Vedas* and *Smrittis*, and works involving both
*Dharma* and *Artha*, are good and valid, and that discourses at
variance with them are invalid, still what you say, that the Brahman is
the highest of the four castes, cannot be proved from those books.

   Tell me, first of all, what is Brahmanhood? Is it life, or parentage,
or body, or wisdom, or the way (*áchár*), or acts, *i.e.* morality
(*Karam*), or the Vedas?

   If you say it is life (*jiva*), such an assertion cannot be
reconciled with <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> the *Vedas*; for, it
is written in the *Vedas*, that "the sun and the moon, I<span
class="small">NDRA</span>, and other deities, were at first quadrupeds;
and some other deities were first animals and afterwards became gods;
even the vilest of the vile (*Swapak*) have become gods." From these
words it is clear that Brahmanhood is not life (*jiva*), a position
which is further proved from these words of the *Mahabharata*: "Seven
hunters and ten deer, of the hill of Kalinjal, a goose of the lake
Mansaravara, and a *chakwa* of Saradwipa, all these were born as
Brahmans, in the *Kurukshetra* (near Dehli), and became very learned in
the *Vedas*." It is also said by M<span class="small">ANU</span>, in his
*Dharma Sastra*, "Whatever Brahman learned in the four *Vedas*, with
their *ang* and *upang*, shall take charity from a Sudra, shall for
twelve births be an ass, and for sixty births a hog, and seventy births
a dog." From these words it is clear that Brahmanhood is not life; for,
if it were, how could such things be?

   If, again, you say that Brahmanhood depends on parentage or birth
(*jàti*); that is, that to be a Brahman one must be born of Brahman
parents,--this notion is at variance with the known passage of the
*Smritti*, that A<span class="small">CHALA</span> M<span
class="small">UNI</span> was born of an elephant, and C<span
class="small">ESA</span> P<span class="small">INGALA</span> of an owl,
and A<span class="small">GASTYA</span> M<span class="small">UNI</span>
from the *Agasti* flower, and C<span class="small">OUSIKA</span> M<span
class="small">UNI</span> from the *Cusa* grass, and C<span
class="small">APILA</span> from a monkey, and G<span
class="small">AUTAMI</span> R<span class="small">ISHI</span> from a
creeper that entwined a Saul tree, and D<span class="small">RONA</span>
A<span class="small">CHARYA</span> from an earthen pot, and T<span
class="small">AITTIRI</span> R<span class="small">ISHI</span> from a
partridge, and P<span class="small">ARSWA</span> R<span
class="small">AMA</span> from dust, and S<span
class="small">RINGA</span> R<span class="small">ISHI</span> from a deer,
and V<span class="small">YASA</span> M<span class="small">UNI</span>
from a fisherwoman, and K<span class="small">OSHIKA</span> M<span
class="small">UNI</span> from a female Sudra, and V<span
class="small">ISWA</span> M<span class="small">ITRA</span> from a
*Chandalni*, and V<span class="small">ASISHTHA</span> M<span
class="small">UNI</span> from a strumpet. Not one of them had a Brahman
mother, and yet all were notoriously called Brahmans; whence I infer,
that the title is a distinction of popular origin, and cannot be traced
to parentage from written authorities.

   Should you again say, that whoever is born of a Brahman father or
mother is a Brahman, then the child of a slave even may become a
Brahman; a consequence to which I have no objection, but which will not
consort with your notions, I fancy.

   Do you say, that he who is sprang of Brahman parents is a Brahman?
Still I object that, since you must mean pure and true Brahmans, in such
case the breed of Brahmans must be at an end; since the fathers of the
present race of Brahmans are not, any of them, free from the suspicion
of having wives, who notoriously commit adultery with Sudras. Now, if
the <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> real father be a Sudra, the son
cannot be a Brahman, notwithstanding the Brahmanhood of his mother. From
all which I infer, that Brahmanhood is not truly derivable from birth;
and I draw fresh proofs of this from the *Manava Dharma*, which affirms
that the Brahman who eats flesh loses instantly his rank; and also, that
by selling wax, or salt, or milk, he becomes a Sudra in three days; and
further, that even such a Brahman as can fly like a bird, directly
ceases to be a Brahman by meddling with the flesh-pots.

   From all this is it not clear that Brahmanhood is not the same with
birth: since, if that were the case, it could not be lost by any acts
however degrading. Knew you ever of a flying horse that by alighting on
earth was turned into a pig?--'Tis impossible.

   Say you that body (*Sarìr*) is the Brahman? this too is false; for,
if body be the Brahman, then fire, when the Brahman's corpse is consumed
by it, will be the murderer of a Brahman; and such also will be every
one of the Brahman's relatives who consigned his body to the flames. Nor
less will this other absurdity follow, that every one born of a Brahman,
though his mother were a *Kshatriya* or *Vaisya*, would be a
Brahman--being bone of the bone, and flesh of the flesh of his father: a
monstrosity, you will allow, that was never heard of. Again, are not
performing sacrifice, and causing others to perform it, reading and
causing to read, receiving and giving charity, and other holy acts,
sprung from the body of the Brahman?

   Is then the virtue of all these destroyed by the destruction of the
body of a Brahman? Surely not, according to your own principles; and, if
not, then Brahmanhood cannot consist in body.

   Say you that wisdom<span
id="page_163_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_163_note_*.md) constitutes the
Brahman? This too is incorrect. Why? Because, if it were true, many
Sudras must have become Brahmans from the great wisdom they acquired. I
myself know many Sudras who are masters of the four *Vedas*, and of
philology, and of the *Mimansa*, and *Sanc' hya*, and *Vaisheshika* and
*Jyotishika* philosophies; yet not one of them is or ever was called a
Brahman. It is clearly proved then, that Brahmanhood consists not in
wisdom or learning. Then do you affirm that the *Achár* is Brahmanhood?
This too is false; for if it were true, many Sudras would become
Brahmans; since many *Nats* and *Bháts*, and *Kaivertas*, <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> and *Bhánds*, and others, are everywhere to
be seen performing the severest and most laborious acts of piety. Yet
not one of these, who are all so pre-eminent in their *Achár*, is ever
called a Brahman: from which it is clear that *Achár* does not
constitute the Brahman.

   Say you that *Karam* makes the Brahman? I answer, no; for the
argument used above applies here with even greater force, altogether
annihilating the notion that acts constitute the Brahman. Do you declare
that by reading the *Vedas* a man becomes a Brahman? This is palpably
false; for it is notorious that the *Rakshasa* R<span
class="small">AVAN</span> was deeply versed in all the four *Vedas*; and
that, indeed, all the *Rakshasas* studied the *Vedas* in R<span
class="small">AVAN'S</span> time: yet you do not say that one of them
thereby became a Brahman. It is therefore proved that no one becomes a
Brahman by reading the *Vedas*.

   What then is this creature called a Brahman? If neither reading the
*Vedas*, nor *Sanskar*, nor parentage, nor race (*Kula*), nor acts
(*Karam*), confers Brahmanhood, what does or can? To my mind Brahmanhood
is merely an immaculate quality, like the snowy whiteness of the *Kundh*
flower. That which removes sin is Brahmanhood. It consists of *Uráta*,
and *Tapas*, and *Neyama*, and *Ripavas*, and *Dan*, and *Dáma*, and
*Sháma*, and *Sanyama*. It is written in the *Vedas* that the gods hold
that man to be a Brahman who is free from intemperance and egotism; and
from *Sanga*, and *Parigraha*, and *Praga*, and *Dwesha*. Moreover, it
is written in all the Sastras that the signs of a Brahman are these,
truth, penance, the command of the organs of sense, and mercy; as those
of a *Chándala* are the vices opposed to those virtues. Another mark of
the Brahman is a scrupulous abstinence from sexual commerce, whether he
be born a god, or a man, or a beast. Yet further, S<span
class="small">UKRA</span> A<span class="small">CHARYA</span> has said,
that the gods take no heed of caste, but deem him to be the Brahman who
is a good man although he belong to the vilest. From all which I infer,
that birth, and life, and body, and wisdom, and observance of religious
rites (*achár*), and acts (*karam*), are all of no avail towards
becoming a Brahman.

   Then again, that opinion of your sect, that *pravrajaya* is
prohibited to the Sudra; and that for him service and obedience paid to
Brahmans are instead of *pravrajaya*,--*because*, forsooth, in speaking
of the four castes, the Sudra is mentioned last, and is therefore the
vilest,--is absurd; for, if it were correct, I<span
class="small">NDRA</span> would be made out to be the lowest and meanest
of beings, I<span class="small">NDRA</span> being mentioned in the
*Parni Sutra* after the dog, thus-- <span id="page_165">p. 165</span>
"*Shua*, *Yua Maghwa*." In truth, the order in which they are mentioned
or written, cannot affect the relative rank and dignity of the beings
spoken of.

   What! is P<span class="small">ARVATI</span> greater than M<span
class="small">AHESA</span>? or are the teeth superior in dignity to the
lips, because we find the latter postponed to the former, for the mere
sake of euphony, in some grammar sentence? Are the teeth older than the
lips; or does your creed teach you to postpone S<span
class="small">IVA</span> to his spouse? No; nor any more is it true that
the Sudra is vile, and the Brahman high and mighty, because we are used
to repeat the *Chatur Varána* in a particular order. And if this
proposition be untenable, your deduction from it, *viz*. that the vile
Sudra must be content to regard his service and obedience to Brahmans as
his only *pravrajaya*, falls likewise to the ground.

   Know further, that is is written in the *Dharma Sastra* of M<span
class="small">ENU</span>, that the Brahman who has drank the milk of a
*Sudarni*, or has been even breathed upon by a *Sudarni*, or has been
born of such a female, is not restored to his rank by *prayáschitta*. In
the same work it is further asserted, that if any Brahman eat and drink
from the hands of a *Sudarni*, he becomes in life a Sudra, and after
death a dog. M<span class="small">ANU</span> further says, that a
Brahman who associates with female Sudras, or keeps a Sudra concubine,
shall be rejected by gods and ancestors, and after death shall go to
hell. From all these assertions of the *Manáva Dharma*, it is clear that
Brahmanhood is nothing indefeasibly attached to any race or breed, but
is merely a quality of good men. Further, it is written in the *Sastra*
of M<span class="small">ANU</span>, that many Sudras became Brahmans by
force of their piety; for example, K<span class="small">ATHINU</span>
M<span class="small">UNI</span>, who was born of the sacrificial flame
produced by the friction of wood, became a Brahman by dint of *Tapas*;
and V<span class="small">ASISHTHA</span> M<span
class="small">UNI</span>, born of the courtezan U<span
class="small">RVASI</span>; and V<span class="small">YASA</span> M<span
class="small">UNI</span>, born of a female of the fisherman's caste; and
R<span class="small">ISHIYA</span> S<span class="small">RINGA</span>
M<span class="small">UNI</span>, born of a doe; and V<span
class="small">ISHVA</span> M<span class="small">ITRA</span>, born a
*Chandalni*; and N<span class="small">ARED</span> M<span
class="small">UNI</span>, born of a female spirit-seller; all these
became Brahmans by virtue of their *Tapas*. Is it not clear then that
Brahmanhood depends not on birth? It is also notorious that he who has
conquered himself is a *Yati*; that he who performs penance is a
*Tapasya*; and that he who observes the *Brahma charya* is a Brahman. It
is clear then that he whose life is pure, and his temper cheerful, is
the true Brahman; and that lineage (*Kula*) has nothing to do with the
matter. There are these *slokas* in the *Manava Dharma*, "Goodness of
disposition <span id="page_166">p. 166</span> and purity are the best of
all things; lineage is not alone deserving of respect. If the race be
royal and virtue be wanting to it, it is contemptible and useless."
K<span class="small">ATHINA</span> M<span class="small">UNI</span> and
V<span class="small">YASA</span> M<span class="small">UNI</span>, and
other sages, though born of Sudras, are famous among men as Brahmans;
and many persons born in the lowest ranks have attained heaven by the
practice of uniform good conduct (*sila*). To say therefore that the
Brahman is of one particular race is idle and false.

   Your doctrine, that the Brahman was produced from the mouth, the
Kshatriya from the arms, the Vaisya from the thighs, and the Sudra from
the feet, cannot be supported. Brahmans are not of one particular race.
Many persons have lived who belonged to the *Kaivarta Kul*, and the
*Rajaka Kul*, and the *Chándal Kul*, and yet, while they existed in this
world, performed the *Chura Karan*, and *Mung-bandan*, and
*Dant-kashtha*, and other acts appropriated to Brahmans, and after their
deaths became, and still are, famous under the Brahmans.

   All that I have said about Brahmans you must know is equally
applicable to Kshatriyas; and that the doctrine of the four castes is
altogether false. All men are of one caste.

   Wonderful! You affirm that all men proceeded from one, *i.e.* Brahma;
how then can there be a fourfold insuperable diversity among them? If I
have four sons by one wife, the four sons, having one father and mother,
must be all essentiaily alike. Know too that distinctions of race among
beings are broadly marked by differences of conformation and
organization: thus, the foot of the elephant is very different from that
of the horse; that of the tiger unlike that of the deer; and so of the
rest: and by that single diagnosis we learn that those animals belong to
very different races. But I never heard that the foot of a Kshatriya was
different from that of a Brahman, or that of a Sudra. All men are formed
alike, and are clearly of one race. Further, the generative organs, the
colour, the figure, the ordure, the urine, the odour, and utterance, of
the ox, the buffalo, the horse, the elephant, the ass, the monkey, the
goat, the sheep, &c. furnish clear diagnostics whereby to separate these
various races of animals: but in all those respects the Brahman
resembles the Kshatriya, and is therefore of the same race or species
with him. I have instanced among quadrupeds the diversities which
separate diverse genera. I now proceed to give some more instances from
among birds. Thus, the goose, the dove, the parrot, the peacock, &c. are
known to be different by their diversities of figure, <span
id="page_167">p. 167</span> and colour, and plumage, and beak: but the
Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaisya and Sudra are alike without and within. How
then can we say they are essentially distinct? Again, among trees the
*Báta*, and *Bakula*, and *Palás*, and *Ashoka*, and *Tamal*, and
*Nagkeswar*, and *Shirik*, and *Champa*, and others, are clearly
contradistinguished by their stems, and leaves, and flowers, and fruits,
and barks, and timber, and seeds, and juices, and odours; but Brahmans,
and Kshatriyas, and the rest, are alike in flesh, and skin, and blood,
and bones, and figure, and excrements, and mode of birth. It is surely
then clear that they are of one species or race.

   Again, tell me, is a Brahman's sense of pleasure and pain different
from that of a Kshatriya? Does not the one sustain life in the same way,
and find death from the same causes as the other? Do they differ in
intellectual faculties, in their actions, or the objects of those
actions; in the manner of their birth, or in their subjection to fear
and hope? Not a whit. It is therefore clear that they are essentially
the same. In the *Udambára* and *Panosa* trees the fruit is produced
from the branches, the stem, the joints, and the roots. Is one fruit
therefore different from another, so that we may call that produced from
the top of the stem the Brahman fruit, and that from the roots the Sudra
fruit? Surely not. Nor can men be of four distinct races, because they
sprang from four different parts of one body. You say that the Brahman
was produced from the mouth; whence was the Brahmani produced? From the
mouth likewise? Grant it--and then you must marry the brother to the
sister! a pretty business indeed! If such incest is to have place in
this world of ours, all distinctions of right and wrong must be
obliterated.

   This consequence, flowing inevitably from your doctrine that the
Brahman proceeded from the mouth, proves the falsity of that doctrine.
The distinctions between Brahmans, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, are
founded merely on the observance of divers rites, and the practice of
different professions; as is clearly proved by the conversation of
B<span class="small">AISHAM</span> P<span class="small">AYANA</span>
R<span class="small">ISHI</span> with Y<span
class="small">UDHISTHIRA</span> R<span class="small">AJA</span>, which
was as follows: One day the son of P<span class="small">ANDU</span>,
named Y<span class="small">UDHISTHIRA</span>, who was the wise man of
his age, joining his hands reverentially, asked B<span
class="small">AISHAM</span> P<span class="small">AYANA</span>, Whom do
you call a Brahman; and what are the signs of Brahmanhood? B<span
class="small">AISHAM</span> answered, The first sign of a Brahman is,
that he possesses long-suffering and the rest of the virtues, and never
is guilty of violence and wrong doing; that he <span id="page_168">p.
168</span> never eats flesh; and never hurts a sentient thing. The
second sign is, that he never takes that which belongs to another
without the owner's consent, even though he find it in the road. The
third sign, that he masters all worldly affections and desires, and is
absolutely indifferent to earthly considerations. The fourth, that
whether he is born a man, or a god, or a beast, he never yields to
sexual desires. The fifth, that he possesses the following five pure
qualities, truth, mercy, command of the senses, universal benevolence,
and penance.<span id="page_168_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_168_note_*.md)
Whoever possesses these five signs of Brahmanhood I acknowledge to be a
Brahman; and, if he possess them not, he is a Sudra. Brahmanhood depends
not on race (*Kuli*), or birth (*Jat*), nor on the performance of
certain ceremonies. If a *Bhandál* is virtuous, and possesses the signs
above noted, he is a Brahman. Oh! Y<span
class="small">UDHISTHIRA</span>, formerly in this world of ours there
was but one caste. The division into four castes originated with
diversity of rites and of avocations. All men were born of woman in like
manner. All are subject to the same physical necessities, and have the
same organs and senses. But he whose conduct is uniformly good is a
Brahman; and if it be otherwise he is a Sudra; aye, lower than a Sudra.
The Sudra who, on the other hand, possesses these virtues is a Brahman.

   Oh, Y<span class="small">UDHISTHIRA</span>! If a Sudra be superior to
the allurements of the five senses, to give him charity is a virtue that
will be rewarded in heaven. Heed not his caste; but only mark his
qualities. Whoever in this life ever does well, and is ever ready to
benefit others, spending his days and nights in good acts, such an one
is a Brahman; and whoever, relinquishing worldly ways, employs himself
solely in the acquisition of *Moksha*, such an one also is a Brahman;
and whoever refrains from destruction of life, and from worldly
affections, and evil acts, and is free from passion and backbiting, such
an one also is a Brahman; and whoso possesses *Kshema*, and *Daya*, and
*Dama*, and *Dán*, and *Satya*, and *Souchana*, and *Smritti*, and
*Ghrina*, and *Vidya*, and *Vijnan*, &c. is a Brahman. Oh, Y<span
class="small">UDHISTHIRA</span>! if a person perform the *Brahmacharya*
for one night, the merit of it is greater than that of a thousand
sacrifices (*yajna*). And whoso has read all the *Vedas*, and performed
<span id="page_169">p. 169</span> all the *Tirthas*, and observed all
the commands and prohibitions of the *Sastra*, such an one is a Brahman!
and whoso has never injured a sentient thing by act, word or thought,
such a person shall instantly be absorbed (at his death) in B<span
class="small">RAHMA</span>. Such were the words of B<span
class="small">AISHAM</span> P<span class="small">AYANA</span>. Oh, my
friend, my design in the above discourse is, that all ignorant Brahmans
and others should acquire wisdom by studying it, and take to the right
way. Let them, if they approve it, heed it; and if they approve it not,
let them neglect its admonitions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_161">p. 161</span>

<span id="page_161_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_161_fr_*.md) The *Buddha
Charitra Kàvya*, and the *Nandi-Mukhasughosha Avadàn*, and other works.

<span id="footnotes_page_163">p. 163</span>

<span id="page_163_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_163_fr_*.md) Perhaps it should
rather be translated *learning*. The word in the original is *jnyana*.

<span id="footnotes_page_168">p. 168</span>

<span id="page_168_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_168_fr_*.md) The word in the
original is *Tapas*, which we are accustomed to translate "penance," and
I have followed the usage, though "ascetism" would be a better word. The
proud *Tapasyi*, whom the very gods regard with dread, never dreams of
contrition and repentance.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
