[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm08)  [Next](mhm10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

# THE MAQÁMÁT

### I. THE MAQAMA OF POESIE

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: Separation once hurled me hither
and thither until I reached the utmost confines of Jurján.' <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119) Here, to fortify myself against the
days, I took some arable land which I proceeded to cultivate. I invested
in some goods as my stock-in-trade, settled upon a shop as my place of
business, and selected some friends whom I made my companions.

I stayed at home in the morning and in the evening, and, between these
times, I was at the shop. <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120)

Now one day, when we were seated together discussing poetry <span
id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_121) and poets, there was sitting, but a
short distance off, a youth listening as if he understood, and remaining
silent as though he did not know, until we were carried away by our
discussion and lengthy disputation, when he said: 'Ye have found the
little palm tree loaded with fruit, <span
id="fr_122"></span>[4](#fn_122) and got the little rubbing-post. If I so
desired, I could talk and that eloquently, and, were I to speak, I
should quench their thirst for knowledge. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[5](#fn_123) Yea, I would

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

make the truth clear in the arena of eloquence so as to cause the deaf
to hear and draw down the white-footed goats from their mountain
haunts.' So I said: 'O learned one! Come near, for thou hast inspired us
with the feeling that we shall derive much benefit from thee. Speak, for
thou hast cut thy wisdom tooth.' He then approached and said: 'Question
me, and I will answer you. Listen, and I will delight you.' So we asked
him: 'What dost thou say regarding Imr al-Qais?' <span
id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124) He said: 'He was the first to stand
lamenting <span id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_125) over the encampments and
their areas, who set out early while the birds were still in their
nests, <span id="fr_126"></span>[3](#fn_126) and described the points of
the horse. <span id="fr_127"></span>[4](#fn_127) He did not compose
poetry for gain, nor speak eloquently from covetousness and, therefore,
he was superior to him whose tongue was loosened designingly and whose
fingers were foraging for a prize.' <span
id="fr_128"></span>[5](#fn_128) We next asked: 'What dost thou say to
Nabigah?' <span id="fr_129"></span>[6](#fn_129) He answered: 'He is as
ready to revile, when he is angry, as he is to eulogize when he is
pleased; he makes excuses when he is frightened and he shoots not but he
hits.' We asked: 'What sayest thou to Zuheir?' He answered:
'Zuheir <span id="fr_130"></span>[7](#fn_130) melts poetry and poetry
melts him. He summons words and enchantment answers him.'

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We said: 'What
dost thou say to Ṭarafa?' <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131) He
replied: 'He is the very water and clay of poetry, the treasure-house
and metropolis of its rhymes. He died  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132) before his secret treasures came to
light, or the locks of his store-houses were opened.' We said: 'What
sayest thou to Jarír and Farazdaq, and which of them is superior?' He
answered: 'Jarír's  <span id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_133) poetry is
sweeter and more copious, but Farazdaq's <span
id="fr_134"></span>[4](#fn_134) is more vigorous and more brilliant.
Again Jarír is a more caustic satirist and can tell of more celebrated
battles,  <span id="fr_135"></span>[5](#fn_135) whereas al-Farazdaq is
more ambitious and belongs to the nobler clan. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[6](#fn_136) Jarír, when he sings the praises of the
fair, draws tears. When he vituperates,  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[7](#fn_137) he destroys, but, when he eulogizes, he
exalts. And al-Farazdaq <span id="fr_138"></span>[8](#fn_138) in

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

glorying is all-sufficient. When he scorns he degrades, but, when he
praises, he renders the full weed.' We said: 'What is thy opinion of the
modern and the ancient poets?' <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139) He
answered: 'The language of the ancients is nobler and their themes more
delightful, whereas the conceits of the moderns are more refined and
their style more elegant.' We then said: 'If thou wouldst only exhibit
some of thy poetry and tell us something about thyself.' He replied:
'Here are answers to both questions in one essay:--

'Do you not see I am wearing a thread-bare cloak, <span
id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_140)  
Borne along in misfortune, by a bitter lot,  
Cherishing hatred for the nights,  
From which I meet with red ruin, <span id="fr_141"></span>[3](#fn_141)  
My utmost hope is for the rising of Sirius, <span
id="fr_142"></span>[4](#fn_142)  
But long have we been tormented by vain hopes.  
Now this noble personage was of higher degree  
And his honour <span id="fr_143"></span>[5](#fn_143) was of greater
price,  
For my enjoyment, I pitched my green tents  
In the mansion of Dara, <span id="fr_144"></span>[6](#fn_144) and in the
Hall <span id="fr_145"></span>[7](#fn_145) of Kisra,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

But fortune reversed my circumstances, <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146)  
And pleasure, my familiar friend, became a stranger to me.  
Of my wealth nought remained but a memory,  
And so on until to-day.  
But for the old dame at Surra-Manra <span
id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_147)  
And the babes on this side of the hills of Baṣra,  
Upon whom fate has brought affliction,  
I would, O masters, destroy myself deliberately.' <span
id="fr_148"></span>[3](#fn_148)

‘Ísá ibn Hishám said: I gave him what I had to hand and then he turned
away from us and departed. Now I began to deny and then to assert him, I
failed to recognize him, and yet I seemed to know him, when his front
teeth directed me to him. Then I said: 'Al-Iskanderí by Heavens', for he
had left us young <span id="fr_149"></span>[4](#fn_149) and had now
returned full grown. So I followed in his track, seized him by the waist
and said: 'Art thou not Abú’l-Fatḥ? Did we not rear thee as a child and
didst <span id="fr_150"></span>[5](#fn_150) thou not pass years of thy
life with us? What old dame hast thou then at Surra-Manra?'

He laughed and recited:--

'Sirrah the times are false, <span id="fr_151"></span>[6](#fn_151)  
Let not deception beguile thee.  
Cleave not to one character, but,  
As the nights change, do thou change too.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_119"></span>[26:1](mhm09.htm#fr_119) … *Jurján:* A
well-known town between Tabaristán and Khurásán, said to have been
founded by Yazíd ibn Muhalleb. It was once noted for its silk fabrics
which were sent to all parts of the world. Yaqút (Wüstenfeld), ii, 48.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[26:2](mhm09.htm#fr_120) … *The shop:*
arabicized from the Syriac ḥamúthá, a room or cell. It has frequently in
Arabic the more restricted meaning of 'wineshop'. For words of this
type, see Fleischer, *Kleinere Schriften*, i, 172.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[26:3](mhm09.htm#fr_121) … *Poetry:* probably
connected with … to praise. See *Aḍ-ḍád* (Houtsma), p. 252 and the
well-known proverb: … 'Choking stops the way of the verse' Freytag,
*Arab Proverbs*, i, 340.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[26:4](mhm09.htm#fr_122) *Ye have found the
little palm tree loaded with fruit*, etc. Freytag, *Arab Proverbs*, i,
47. The meaning is 'I am one of those by means of whose counsel people
seek relief.'

<span id="fn_123"></span>[26:5](mhm09.htm#fr_123) *I should quench their
thirst for knowledge:* Literally, I would bring camels up from the
watering quenched and take others down.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[27:1](mhm09.htm#fr_124) *Imr al-Qais:* Prince
of the Banú Kindeh, the well-known author of the most celebrated of the
*Mu‘allaqát*, flourished about the middle of the sixth century A.D.
*Aghání*, vii, 60.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[27:2](mhm09.htm#fr_125) *He was the first to
stand lamenting:* i.e. he was the first to introduce the prelude in the
form of a lament or erotic prologue over the deserted encampment with
which almost every subsequent *qaṣída* begins. But, according to Ibn
Qutaiba (*Kitáb al-Sh‘ir wa’l-Shu‘ará*, p. 52), the first to make this
prelude fashionable was a certain Ibn al-Humam or Ibn Khedhám. See also
*Aghání*, iv, 114 and 149.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[27:3](mhm09.htm#fr_126) *Set out early while
the birds were still in their nests:* *Qaṣída* of Imr al-Kais, v. 53.
(Lyall.)

<span id="fn_127"></span>[27:4](mhm09.htm#fr_127) *Described the points
of the horse:* ibid., vv. 53-70.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[27:5](mhm09.htm#fr_128) *Were foraging for a
prize:* i.e. were writing for gain.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[27:6](mhm09.htm#fr_129) *Al-Nabigah
al-Dhubyani:* Proper name Ziád ibn Mu‘awiya, a well-known poet, who
lived at the courts of Ghassan and al-Ḥíra during the latter half of the
century before Islám. He is classed with the authors of the *Mu‘allaqát*
(see ed. by Lyall, p. 152) and is said to have had a close acquaintance
with Christianity. For a fuller notice of this poet, see Nicholson, p.
121 and *Aghání*, ix, 154.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[27:7](mhm09.htm#fr_130) *Zuheir* ibn Abi Sulma
of the tribe of Muzaina, the author of the third *Mu‘allaqa*, flourished
about the end of the [eighth](errata.htm#0) century A.D. He is
remarkable for his wise sayings and moral reflections. It is said of him
he only praised a man for what was in him. Hamadhání's opinion of
him--Zuheir melts poetry and poetry melts him--is no exaggerated
estimate of his poetic genius. He was one of the triad of pre-Islámic
poets, the other two being Imr al-Qais and Nabigah. *Shu‘ará
al-Naṣraniah*, p. 510.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[28:1](mhm09.htm#fr_131) *Ṭarafa* ibn al-‘Abd
was a member of the tribe of Bakr. He flourished about the middle of the
[eighth](errata.htm#1) century A.D. and was the author of a *Mu‘allaqa*,
No. 2 in Lyall's edition. He early developed a talent for satire which
cost him his life at the early age of twenty, so that he is generally
called the 'youth of twenty'. Nicholson, p. 107 and Ibn Qutayba, *Sh‘ir
wa’l-Shu‘ará*, p. 88.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[28:2](mhm09.htm#fr_132) *He died:* a reference
to Ṭarafa's untimely end.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[28:3](mhm09.htm#fr_133) *Jarír* ibn ‘Atiyyah
(ob. A.H. 110--A.D. 728-9), of the tribe of Kulayb was court poet of
Ḥajjáj ibn Yúsuf, the governor of ‘Iráq. He was famous for his satire,
He survived al-Farazdaq, his lifelong rival, but a short time--either
thirty or forty days. Nicholson, p. 244 and *Aghání*, vii, 35.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[28:4](mhm09.htm#fr_134) *Al-Farazdaq:* Hammám
ibn Ghálib, generally known as al-Farazdaq, belonged to the tribe of
Tamím and was born at Baṣra towards the end of ‘Umar's Khalífate. He was
one of the triad of early Islámic poets, the other two being Akhtal and
Jarír. He died in 110 A.H.--A.D. 728-9), at the great age of a hundred.
*Aghání*, viii, 180.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[28:5](mhm09.htm#fr_135) … *more celebrated
battles:* The Days, i.e. the great battles of the Arabs. For a list of
the Days of the Arabs see the *Majma al-Baḥrein*, p. 150.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[28:6](mhm09.htm#fr_136) *Nobler clan:*
Al-Farazdaq belonged to the tribe of Tamím and Jarír to the Kulayb, a
branch of the Tamím.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[28:7](mhm09.htm#fr_137) *When he vituperates
he destroys:* For an example of this, see *Kitáb al-Aghání*, vii, 46 and
Nicholson, p. 245.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[28:8](mhm09.htm#fr_138) Farazdaq and Jarír are
connected by a strange rivalry. For years they were engaged in a public
scolding competition in which they roundly abused each other, and
exhibited their marvellous skill in manipulating the vast resources of
vituperation of the Arabic language. See The *Naka’iḍ* or *Flytings* of
Jarír and Farazdaq in three volumes edited by Professor A. A. Bevan
(Leyden, 1905-12). The relative merits of Jarír and Farazdaq were a
favourite subject for discussion. See *Aghání*, vii, 37 and Nicholson, p
239.

It is difficult to gather from Hamadhání's comparison of these two poets
as to which of them he accords the palm. Probably he intended the
question to remain undecided. Yúnas says: 'I have never been in an
assembly where the company was unanimous as to which of the two was the
better poet.' The Arabs, while they considered Jarír, al-Farazdaq and
al-Akhtal to be the three greatest Islámic poets, differed in the matter
of assigning precedence to them. *Kitáb al-Aghání*. vii, 36. Comparison
of poets formed a branch of *belles lettres* (…). See *Aghání*, iii, 101
and viii, 75.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[29:1](mhm09.htm#fr_139) *What is thy opinion
of the modern and the ancient poets?:* This was another favourite topic
for discussion. The opinion of scholars in the time of the author was
that the pre-Islámic poets had been excelled by their successors and
both had been surpassed by the poets of the day of whom the famous
Mutanabbí was chief.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[29:2](mhm09.htm#fr_140) *Do you not see I am
wearing a thread-bare cloak?:* The metre of these verses is *rejez*. … a
thread-bare cloak. This word, which is met with so frequently in the
Maqámát, is used to denominate an exceedingly old and shabby dress.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[29:3](mhm09.htm#fr_141) *Red ruin*: Literally,
red vicissitudes.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[29:4](mhm09.htm#fr_142) *The rising of
Sirius:* The greater dog-star. This star rises (aurorally) in the time
of intense heat, and this he ardently desires because of the
insufficiency of his clothing to protect him from the cold. Certain of
the Arab tribes worshipped this star. See Qur’án, liii, 50.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[29:5](mhm09.htm#fr_143) *His honour:*
Literally, the water of this face. The ingenuous blush of an honest man
is called by the Arabs 'water of the face ', hence modesty,
self-respect. It also means lustre.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[29:6](mhm09.htm#fr_144) *The mansion of Dara:*
Built by Darius I, or the Great, son of Hystaspes, in 521 B.C.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[29:7](mhm09.htm#fr_145) *The Hall* (…) or
Palace of Kisra: The Aiwan, or the immense hall of the palace built by
al-Núshirwan, in the sixth century A.D., twenty-five miles from Baghdad.
Ibn al-Ḥájib writing on the Aiwan says: 'O thou who didst build it a
lofty structure and, through the Aiwan relegated the skill of time to
oblivion, these palaces, pleasure houses, buildings, and castles of our
Kisra al-Núshirwan. See Yaqút, i, 425.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[30:1](mhm09.htm#fr_146) *Reversed my
circumstances:* Literally turned the back of the shield to me:
figuratively, for became hostile.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[30:2](mhm09.htm#fr_147) *Surra-man ra‘a*
(Sámarrá): The Khalífa Mu‘taṣim (A.D. 833-42) removed his court from
Baghdad, sixty miles further up the Tigris to Sámarrá the official
spelling of which was Surra-man ra‘a, a contraction of Surur-man ra‘a,
'the beholder's joy, which suddenly grew into a superb city of palaces
and barracks. For an account of recent excavations at Sámarrá, revealing
examples of art and architecture of the ‘Abbásid period, see *Lughat
El-Arab* No. XI, May, 1913, pp. 515-20.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[30:3](mhm09.htm#fr_148) *I would deliberately
destroy myself:* … means he was confined alive and then shot at or cast
at until he was killed, or he was slain deliberately, not in the field
of battle, nor by mistake.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[30:4](mhm09.htm#fr_149) … *young:* Literally,
a fawn.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[30:5](mhm09.htm#fr_150) *Did we not rear
thee?:* An illusion to Qur’án, xxvi, 17,

<span id="fn_151"></span>[30:6](mhm09.htm#fr_151) *Sirrah! the times are
false:* The metre of these lines is *basít*. The author appears to have
drawn his inspiration for this maqáma from *Aghání*, vii, 56.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Maqáma of the Date](mhm10)
