[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm04)  [Next](mhm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. RHYMED PROSE

RHYMED prose called saj‘ (…) because of its evenness or monotony, or
from a fancied resemblance between its rhythm and the cooing of a dove,
is a highly artificial style of prose, characterized by a kind of rhythm
as well as rhyme. It is a species of diction to which the Arabic
language, because of its structure, the mathematical precision of its
manifold formations and the essential assonance of numerous derivatives
from the same root supplying the connexion between the sound and
signification of words, peculiarly lends itself. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

According to Jáḥiz (ob. A.H. 255) the advantages of rhymed prose are
twofold; it is pleasing to the ear and easy to remember. He says the
Arabs have uttered a far greater quantity of simple than of rhymed
prose, and yet not a tenth of the former has been retained while not a
tenth of the latter has been lost. <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38)

In pagan times it is supposed to have been the mode of expression in
dignified discourses, challenges, harangues and orations. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[3](#fn_39) It was also the form in which the oracular
sayings and decisions of the *kahana*, the soothsayers or diviners, each
of whom was supposed to have a familiar spirit, were expressed. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[4](#fn_40)

Because of its association with these pagan practices <span
id="fr_41"></span>[5](#fn_41) its use 'in commands and prohibitions' in
the early days of Islám is said to have been forbidden. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[6](#fn_42) The Prophet is reported to have said: …
'Avoid ye the rhyming prose of the soothsayers or diviners.'

On the high authority of Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal (ob. A.H. 258), the founder of
one of the four Schools of Law, we have it that the Prophet had a rooted
repugnance to this kind of composition. In an incident related by him
the Prophet is reported to have

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

indignantly exclaimed, 'What! rhymed prose after the manner of the Arabs
of the Days of the Ignorance?' <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)

There is, therefore, naturally, no trace of it in the sermon of the
Prophet after the capture of Mecca, nor is it to be found in his
farewell address and final charge on the occasion of the last
pilgrimage. <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) Nor is it used by the
Khalífa Mu‘áwíya in his last khutba. <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45)

In spite of the ban, however, it appears there were orators who spoke in
rhymed prose, and one of the earliest specimens of a khutba in rhymed
prose is by the celebrated preacher and orator, contemporary with
Muḥammad, Saḥbán Wá’il (ob. A.H. 54). <span
id="fr_46"></span>[4](#fn_46) On the other hand he did not use it in his
reply to Ṭalḥa al-Ṭalḥáṭ the governor of Sijistán. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[5](#fn_47)

With the spread of Islám the reason for the prohibition disappears and
rhymed prose reasserts itself in some of the speeches made by Muslim
orators in the presence of the first Khalífas and no objection appears
to have been raised. <span id="fr_48"></span>[6](#fn_48)

In early Islámic times it seems to belong to repartee, sententious
sayings, the epigram, solemn utterances such as paternal advice, <span
id="fr_49"></span>[7](#fn_49) religious formulae, prayers, elogia
addressed to princes and governors. Jáḥiz cites several specimens of
these <span id="fr_50"></span>[8](#fn_50) and the author of the Aghání
quotes a eulogy in rhymed prose <span id="fr_51"></span>[9](#fn_51) by
al-Nabigha al-Ja‘adí, one of the most celebrated of the poets
contemporary with Muḥammad. <span id="fr_52"></span>[10](#fn_52)

During the first century of the Hijra it appears to have been regarded
as the symbol of an elevated style peculiar to the orator. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[11](#fn_53)

In the earlier specimens of female eloquence compiled by Abú’l-Faḍl
Aḥmad ibn Ṭaḥir (A.H. 204-80) there is, however, very little trace of
this species of composition. <span id="fr_54"></span>[12](#fn_54) In
fact it was regarded as a rare accomplishment if not a lost art. But a
few sentences of this form of composition by the wife of Abú’l-Aswad

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

al-Du‘lí sufficed to draw from the Khalífa Mu‘awiya the exclamation,
'Good gracious! What rhymed prose the woman speaks!' <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55)

The institution of the weekly address (khuṭba) by the Khalífa, led no
doubt to careful preparation and thus paved the way for pulpit oratory
which found its loftiest expression in rhymed prose. It is not, however,
until the beginning of the third century of the Hijra that it reappears
in the khutba and becomes the conventional style of the professional
preacher. An excellent specimen of a khutba in rhymed prose on death,
resurrection and judgement is that by Ibn Nubata (A.H. 335-74) entitled
'the sermon of the vision.' <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56) The
language is dignified and solemn, but perfectly plain and intelligible.
A vast empire with its numerous provincial governments and political and
commercial relations with neighbouring states required that its edicts,
foreign despatches, and official correspondence should be expressed in
language at once dignified and forceful.

Out of the necessity of this situation arose the study of the epistolary
art and towards the beginning of the second century of the Hijra
official letter writers had developed that florid style which has ever
since been the distinguishing feature of such compositions. Nevertheless
there were writers who eschewed this ornateness and wrote in language
easy to be understood.

A notable example of this natural and simple style is Jáḥiz whose
diction Hamadhání, writing a century later, condemns as wanting in
artifice, adornment, and ornateness. <span id="fr_57"></span>[3](#fn_57)

With such assiduity was the art of official writing cultivated, so great
was the importance attached to it and so highly did it come to be
appreciated, that the Kátib, or secretary, not infrequently rose to the
highest position in the state, that of Wazír, or chief minister.
Tha‘álibí throws considerable light upon the rise and development of
this official correspondence. He says that epistolary writing began with
‘Abd al-Ḥamíd (ob. A.H. 133), Kátib, or secretary, to Marwán the last of
the Omayyad Khalífas, and ended with Ibn al-Amíd (ob. A.H. 359 or 360),
the Wazír of Rukn al-Daula, the Buwayhid prince. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[4](#fn_58)

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

In this striving after an ornate and elevated style the adoption of a
species of composition, that had raised pulpit oratory above the
language of every-day life, seems to be a natural result, and thus
rhymed prose became the essential feature not only of official writing,
but also of the private correspondence of the learned and the cultured.

It will be sufficient to mention three collections of such Epistles:
those of Abú’l ‘Alá al-Mu‘arrí (A.H. 363-449), edited and translated
into English by Professor D. S. Margoliouth; extracts from those of Abú
Bakr al-Khwárazmí cited by Tha‘álibí; <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) and those of al-Hamadhání himself, edited
and published with notes by Ibráhím Ibn ‘Alí al-Aḥdab (Beyrút).

It was Hamadhání, however, a master of the epistolary art himself, who
conceived the idea of demonstrating in a series of dramatic discourses,
known to us as the Maqámát, how the use of this mode of composition
might be extended to literature so as to include the entire range of the
life and language of the Arabian people. He was, therefore, the
popularizer of rhymed prose, in a class of compositions with which his
name was first associated, and which have not only penetrated all
Islámic literature as well as that of the Syrian Christians, and the
Spanish Jews, but have served as models of style for more than nine
hundred years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[8:1](mhm05.htm#fr_37) See Chenery's
Introduction to Ḥarírí, pp. 50-51.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[8:2](mhm05.htm#fr_38) *Kitáb al-Bayán
wa’l-Tabyín*, i, 112.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[8:3](mhm05.htm#fr_39) Ibid., p. 119 (oration of
Koss ibn Sa‘ida).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[8:4](mhm05.htm#fr_40) Ibid., p. 113; Qur’án
lii, 29.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[8:5](mhm05.htm#fr_41) Life of Muḥammad,
Wüsṭenfeld, Band I, pp. 171, 191.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[8:6](mhm05.htm#fr_42) *Kitáb al-Bayán
wa’l-Tabyín*, p. 113.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[9:1](mhm05.htm#fr_43) *Musnad* of Ibn Ḥanbal,
iv, 245.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[9:2](mhm05.htm#fr_44) *Kitáb al-Bayán
wa’l-Tabyín*, ii, 163-4 and *Life of Muḥammad* (Wüstenfeld) Band iv,
968.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[9:3](mhm05.htm#fr_45) *Kitáb al-Amálí*, ii,
313.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[9:4](mhm05.htm#fr_46) Chenery's Translation of
Ḥarírí, p. 309.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[9:5](mhm05.htm#fr_47) Ḥarírí, p. 49.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[9:6](mhm05.htm#fr_48) *Kitáb al-Bayán
wa’l-Tabyín*, i, 113. s

<span id="fn_49"></span>[9:7](mhm05.htm#fr_49) *Aghání*, iii, 6.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[9:8](mhm05.htm#fr_50) *Kitáb al-Bayán
wa’l-Tabyín*, i, 111.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[9:9](mhm05.htm#fr_51) *Aghání*, xiv, 3,

<span id="fn_52"></span>[9:10](mhm05.htm#fr_52) Ibn Khallikan, i, 456.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[9:11](mhm05.htm#fr_53) *Kitáb al-Amálí*, ü, 73.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[9:12](mhm05.htm#fr_54) See *Balághat al-Nisá*,
pp. 15 and 16.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[10:1](mhm05.htm#fr_55) See *Balághat al-Nisá*,
p. 54.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[10:2](mhm05.htm#fr_56) *Journal Asiatique*,
January, 1840.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[10:3](mhm05.htm#fr_57) Text, p. 72.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[10:4](mhm05.htm#fr_58) *Yatíma*, iii, 3.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[11:1](mhm05.htm#fr_59) *Yatíma*, iv, 114-23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Word Maqáma](mhm06)
