[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm11)  [Next](mhm13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. THE MAQAMA OF SIJISTAN

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: A pressing need impelled me to
go to Sijistán. <span id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_179) So I put my
resolution into effect <span id="fr_180"></span>[3](#fn_180) and mounted
the necessary camel. I sought God's blessing upon my determination which
I set before me, while I made prudence my guide until it directed me
thither. Now I arrived at the gates of the city after sunset and was,
therefore, obliged to pass the night on the spot. <span
id="fr_181"></span>[4](#fn_181)

Now, when the blade of dawn was drawn, and the host of the sun sallied
forth, I went to the business quarter to select a lodging. And when I
had gone from the circumference <span id="fr_182"></span>[5](#fn_182) of
the city to its centre, and walked along the circle of shops

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

till I reached the chief one, <span id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_183) a
loud-toned <span id="fr_184"></span>[2](#fn_184) voice penetrated my
ear. I went towards the speaker until I stood near him, and behold it
was a man mounted on his horse and panting for breath. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[3](#fn_185) He had turned the back of his head
towards me and was saying: He . who knows me, knows me well, and he, who
does not know me, I will make myself known to him. I am the first-fruits
of Yemen, <span id="fr_186"></span>[4](#fn_186) the much-talked-of of
the age, the enigma of men and the puzzle of the ladies of the
harem. <span id="fr_187"></span>[5](#fn_187) Ask of me concerning
countries and their fortresses, mountains and their heights, valleys and
their watercourses, seas and their springs, horses and their backs. Who
has captured their walls, discovered the mysteries of their heights,
explored their paths and penetrated into their lava hills? Ask of kings
and their treasures, precious stones and their mines, <span
id="fr_188"></span>[6](#fn_188) affairs and their inwardness, <span
id="fr_189"></span>[7](#fn_189) sciences and their centres, weighty
matters and their obscurities, wars and their difficult situations. Who
has seized their hoards without paying the price? Who has got
possessions of their keys <span id="fr_190"></span>[8](#fn_190) and
known the way to victory? By Heavens! it is I who have achieved all
that. I have made

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

peace between powerful kings <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_191) and
disclosed the mysteries of dark difficulties. By Heavens! I have been
even in the place where lovers are overthrown. I have even been
afflicted with sickness, even the sickness caused by the languishing
eye. <span id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_192) I have embraced supple
forms, <span id="fr_193"></span>[3](#fn_193) and plucked the rose from
the crimson cheeks. Yet, with all this, I have fled from the world as a
generous nature flees from the faces of the base. I have recoiled from
despicable things as a noble ear recoils from obscene language. But, now
that the morn of hoariness has dawned, and the dignity of old age has
come upon me, I have resolved to make wise provision for my journey to
the next world and I have not perceived any way better to right
guidance, than that which I am treading. One of you will observe me
riding a horse and speaking at random <span
id="fr_194"></span>[4](#fn_194) and say, 'this is the Father of
Wonder', <span id="fr_195"></span>[5](#fn_195) nay, but I am indeed the
Father of Wonders, which I have both seen and experienced, and the
Mother of Enormities which I have estimated and endured. I have with
difficulty obtained the keys of treasures <span
id="fr_196"></span>[6](#fn_196) and then have lightly cast them aside. I
have bought dear and sold cheap. I have, by Heavens! joined their
pageants and jostled against shoulders. I have watched the stars <span
id="fr_197"></span>[7](#fn_197) and ridden the flesh off my mounts, I
have been obliged to engage in dangerous enterprises vowing not to
withhold from the Muslims the benefits accruing therefrom. Now I must
transfer the cord of this trust from my neck to yours and offer for sale
in your streets this medicine of mine. Let him buy from me who shrinks
not from the place

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

where God's servants stand, nor from the formula of unity. And let him
who is of proud pedigree <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198) and good
breeding <span id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_199) preserve the remedy. Said
‘Ísá ibn Hishám: I went round in front of him that I might learn who he
was, and by Heavens! it was our Shaikh Abú’l-Fatḥ al-Iskanderí. So I
waited for the crowd to disperse <span id="fr_200"></span>[3](#fn_200)
from before him, and then addressing him

I asked: 'How big an opening will this nostrum of thine want?' He
answered, 'Thy purse will open as much as thou desirest.' I then left
him and departed. <span id="fr_201"></span>[4](#fn_201)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_179"></span>[35:2](mhm12.htm#fr_179) *Sijistán:* originally
Sagistan, the land of the Sakas, Arabicized to Sijistan, the ancient
Sacastane and the modern Seistan, the name of a district of Persia and
of its chief town. The capital was formerly called Zaranj. It formed a
part of the empire of the Khalífa and was a great Khárijite centre.
About A.D. 860, when it had undergone many changes of Government under
lieutenants of the Baghdad Khalífa, or bold adventurers acting on their
own account, Yaqút ibn Laith al-Saffar, made it the seat of his power.
In A.D. 901, it fell under the power of the Sámanids and towards the end
of the century into that of the Ghaznavids. In Hamadhání's time Khalaf
ibn Aḥmad was the Amír of Sijistán (A.H. 354-93). Yaqút says that when
the inhabitants submitted to their Arab conquerors they stipulated that
no hedgehog was to be killed. The reason assigned for this being that
the country was infested with snakes and that the hedgehogs kept the
number down. Every house had its hedgehog! Yaqút, iii, 41. *Encyclopædia
Britannica*, xxiv, 592.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[35:3](mhm12.htm#fr_180) *I put my resolution
into effect:* Literally, I mounted the intention thereof. Cf. De Sacy,
*Ḥarírí*, i, 14.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[35:4](mhm12.htm#fr_181) *I was obliged to pass
the night on the spot:* Literally, the passing of the night chanced
where I reached.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[35:5](mhm12.htm#fr_182) … *circumference:*
Literally, a necklace.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[36:1](mhm12.htm#fr_183) … *The chief one:*
Literally, the jewel in the middle of a necklace and which is the best
thereof.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[36:2](mhm12.htm#fr_184) … *Loud-toned:*
Literally, with something from every root, and therefore well nourished
and strong.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[36:3](mhm12.htm#fr_185) *Panting for breath:*
Literally, choking himself.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[36:4](mhm12.htm#fr_186) *The first fruits of
Yemen:* Here Abú’l-Fatḥ begins to enigmatically refer to his name. The
fruit of the tree … *nab‘a* resembling that of the *pistachia
terebinthus*, except that it is red, sweet and round, is called …
*Fatḥ*. It is also an allusion to the early conversion to Islám of the
people of Yemen. The name of the first envoy that came from Yemen to
visit the Prophet is said to have been Abú’l-Fatḥ. Al-Fatḥ means the
opening, beginning, victory.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[36:5](mhm12.htm#fr_187) … *Ladies of the
harem:* … pl, of … a kind of curtained canopy, or tent, or chamber for a
bride.

For courteous phrases for ladies, see Jáḥiz, *Ḥaywán*, v. 103-110.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[36:6](mhm12.htm#fr_188) *Precious stones and
their mines:* I have read … instead of … as the former gives the
required sense.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[36:7](mhm12.htm#fr_189) … *Inwardness:* From …
the abdomen. Hence the interior of anything. e. g., … To every verse
thereof is an apparent … (lit. back) sense and a sense requiring
development. (…).

<span id="fn_190"></span>[36:8](mhm12.htm#fr_190) *Their keys:* i.e. the
keys of the positions.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[37:1](mhm12.htm#fr_191) … *Powerful kings:* …
pl. of … a man unable to look aside by reason of disease, probably a
crick in the neck, and hence a king, who by reason of pride, does not
turn his head to the right or left. But more probably … = greatest
hunter = lion = strong. Cf. *Arab Proverbs*, i, 748. See also Buḥturí,
i. 224.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[37:2](mhm12.htm#fr_192) … *Eyes:* pl. of …
Literally, the black of the eye and then the eye absolutely.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[37:3](mhm12.htm#fr_193) *Supple forms:*
Literally, pliant branches; a very common figure for a flexible form.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[37:4](mhm12.htm#fr_194) … *Speaking at random*
… opposed to … in all senses.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[37:5](mhm12.htm#fr_195) *The Father of
Wonder:* Cf. H. De Sacy, *Ḥarírí*, ii, 571.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[37:6](mhm12.htm#fr_196) For … again read …
precious things, or treasures.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[37:7](mhm12.htm#fr_197) *I have watched the
stars:* waited for their disappearance at dawn.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[38:1](mhm12.htm#fr_198) *Of proud pedigree:*
Literally, whose grandfathers are noble.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[38:2](mhm12.htm#fr_199) … *Good breeding:*
Literally, whose wood has been irrigated with pure water.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[38:3](mhm12.htm#fr_200) … *The crowd to
disperse:* Literally, until the ostrich fled. The Paris MS. has &ale
which yields a better sense. Cf. De Sacy, Ḥarírí, ii, … 'He finished his
work.'

<span id="fn_201"></span>[38:4](mhm12.htm#fr_201) This maqáma lacks the
usual concluding lines of poetry and ends very abruptly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. The Maqáma of Kúfa](mhm13)
