[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm16)  [Next](mhm18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IX. THE MAQAMA OF JURJAN

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: While we were at Jurján
discussing in an assembly of ours, and there was none among us who was
not of us, there stood before us a thick-bearded man, neither tall and
lankey, <span id="fr_300"></span>[1](#fn_300) nor short and
stunted, <span id="fr_301"></span>[2](#fn_301) and little children in
worn-out clothes followed him. He began his speech with a greeting and
the salutation of Islám. He approached us graciously and we treated him
generously. He said: 'O people, I am a man, a citizen of
Alexandria <span id="fr_302"></span>[3](#fn_302) of the Umayyad
frontiers; the Sulaim <span id="fr_303"></span>[4](#fn_303) gave me
birth and the tribe of ‘Abs <span id="fr_304"></span>[5](#fn_304)
welcomed me. I have traversed horizons and travelled through the
remotest parts of ‘Iráq. I have been among the dwellers of the desert
and the people of the towns and in the two Houses of Rab‘iah and
Muḍar. <span id="fr_305"></span>[6](#fn_305) Wherever I have been I have
not been slighted. Let not what you see of tattered garments, and
threadbare clothes make me appear despicable, for by Heavens! we once
were of those that help and reform, <span
id="fr_306"></span>[7](#fn_306) giving a camel <span
id="fr_307"></span>[8](#fn_307) in the morning and a sheep <span
id="fr_308"></span>[9](#fn_308) in the evening.

'And among us there are maqámát <span id="fr_309"></span>[10](#fn_309)
whose faces are fair,  
And councils where words are followed by deeds.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

Those of them who have much undertake the support of them who seek their
aid,  
And those who have little are generous and liberal.'

Then, O people, fate singled me out from among them and turned the back
of the shield <span id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_310) towards me.
Therefore, I exchanged sleep for wakefulness and rest for journeying.
The hurlings <span id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_311) have thrown me hither
and thither, desert has passed me on to desert and the haps of time have
stripped me as gum is stripped from the tree, so that at morn and eve I
am barer than the palm of the hand and cleaner than the face of a
new-born babe. My courtyard is void and my vessels are empty. There is
nought for me but the hardship of travel and the constant gripping of
the camel's nose-string. I suffer poverty and I conciliate the deserts.
The hard ground is my bed, my pillow a stone.

Now at Ámid <span id="fr_312"></span>[3](#fn_312) and then at
Ras-u-‘Ainin <span id="fr_313"></span>[4](#fn_313)  
And sometimes at Mayyafáriqín <span id="fr_314"></span>[5](#fn_314)  
One night in Syria and then at Ahwaz  
Is my camel, and another night in ‘Iráq.'

Separation ceased not to hurl me to every hurling-place, till I
traversed the stony hill-tract and then it set me down at Hamadhán. Its
people received me and its friends craned their necks to look at me. But
I inclined to one of them whose dish was most capacious and who was most
stinting of roughness.

'His fire is lit upon the hill tops, <span
id="fr_315"></span>[6](#fn_315)  
At a time of scarcity, when fires are covered up.'

He prepared me a couch and made ready a bed for me. If I felt any
languor a son, like a keen Yemen blade, <span
id="fr_316"></span>[7](#fn_316) or as the new moon appearing in a clear
atmosphere, hastened to attend to me.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

He bestowed favours upon me which made me straitened as to desert and
expansive as to joy. The first of them was house furniture and the last
a thousand dinars. But the only thing that made me flee from Hamadhán
was the stream of gifts <span id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_317) which was
continuous, and the rain of generosity which was constant. So I fled
from Hamadhán as flees the fugitive, and bolted as bolts the wild
animal, <span id="fr_318"></span>[2](#fn_318) traversing the roads,
pursuing dangers and suffering hardships in the countries. But I have
left behind the mother of my abode <span id="fr_319"></span>[3](#fn_319)
and my little one as though he were a precious armlet of silver, broken
and thrown down on the playground <span id="fr_320"></span>[4](#fn_320)
of the maidens of the tribe. And the wind of need and the breeze of
penury have blown me to you. Therefore observe, may God have mercy upon
you! one rendered lean and emaciated by travel, directed by need and
tormented by want.

'A traveller, a mighty traverser of the earth, <span
id="fr_321"></span>[5](#fn_321) cast hither and thither,  
By deserts; his hair is matted and he is dust-stained.'

May God grant you a guide to goodness and may He make no way for evil to
reach you.

Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám: By Heavens! then did hearts feel compassion for
him and eyes streamed with tears at the beauty of his speech. And we
gave him what was then ready to hand, and he turned away from us
praising us. I followed him and lo! by Heavens, it was our Sheikh Abú’l
Fatḥ al-Iskanderí.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[53:1](mhm17.htm#fr_300) *Lankey:* Literally,
stretched.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[53:2](mhm17.htm#fr_301) *Stunted:* Literally,
prevented.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[53:3](mhm17.htm#fr_302) *Alexandria* of the
Umayyad frontiers. A reference to the importance attached to Egypt by
Mu‘awíyah.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[53:4](mhm17.htm#fr_303) *Sulaim:* the name of
a tribe.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[53:5](mhm17.htm#fr_304) *‘Abs*, the name of a
large tribe, the descendants of Sulaim.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[53:6](mhm17.htm#fr_305) *Rab’iah and Muḍar:*
the names of tribes.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[53:7](mhm17.htm#fr_306) … *Those that help and
reform:* A popular saying, i.e. we were the persons to put it into
proper order, literally, the repairers and menders.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[53:8](mhm17.htm#fr_307) … *giving a camel and
a sheep:* Another popular expression, … from … a kind of gurgling growl
made by the camel when it is being laden; then applied to the camel
itself. See *Arab Proverbs*, ii, 327.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[53:9](mhm17.htm#fr_308) *And giving a sheep:*
from … the bleating or cry of the sheep goat or the like, and then
applied to the sheep, absolutely. Cf. the expression … He has neither a
sheep nor a camel.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[53:10](mhm17.htm#fr_309) *And there are
maqámát:* Metre *táwil*. These lines are taken from the Qaṣída of
Zuheir, Shu‘ará an-Naṣrániain, pp. 573-4. In the original the first line
begins with … and not …. It is correctly quoted on p. 32 of the Letters.
The sense of the word *maqámát* here is not known, but the context
indicates that it signifies champions and the like.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[54:1](mhm17.htm#fr_310) *Turned the back of
the shield:* said of a friend who has become inimical. See *Arab
Proverbs*, ii, 258.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[54:2](mhm17.htm#fr_311) … *Hurlings:* from …
the place of the butt where arrows are shot.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[54:3](mhm17.htm#fr_312) *Sometimes at Ámid:*
Metre, *Wáfir*.

*Ámid:* the name of a fortress in Diyar Bakr.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[54:4](mhm17.htm#fr_313) *Ras al-‘Ain:* a large
town in Diyar Bakr between Nasibín and Harran, fifteen parasangs from
the former place. It is noted for its numerous springs. The scene of a
famous battle between the Tamím and Bakr ibn Wá‘il.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[54:5](mhm17.htm#fr_314) *Mayyafáriqín:* Is a
town of Diyar Bakr thirty parasangs from Nasibín.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[54:6](mhm17.htm#fr_315) *His fire is lit upon
the hill tops:* An allusion to the practice of lighting a fire in a
prominent position at night (…) to indicate to the belated traveller
where he might find food and shelter. Metre, *Wáfir*.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[54:7](mhm17.htm#fr_316) *Like a keen Yemen
blade:* In sharpness and effectiveness.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[55:1](mhm17.htm#fr_317) *The stream of gifts
which was constant:* A very strange reason to assign for leaving
Hamadhán. Cf. *The Odes of al-Buḥturí*, ii, 220. (Constantinople edition
A.H. 1300) where the same idea is expressed.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[55:2](mhm17.htm#fr_318) … *A wild animal:*
From … shy or unsociable. Cf. Qaṣída of Imr al-Qais, line 35 (Lyall's
edition) where the fleet horse is said to prevent the wild animals from
escaping. Also the Tradition … 'Benefits are fugitives, or wild animals,
therefore detain them by gratitude.'

<span id="fn_319"></span>[55:3](mhm17.htm#fr_319) *The mother of my
abode:* The mistress of the house, or a man's wife. See Ibn al-Athír,
*Kunya Lexicon*, p. 199.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[55:4](mhm17.htm#fr_320) *Broken and thrown on
the playground:* And therefore in a condition to excite pity.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[55:5](mhm17.htm#fr_321) *A traveller, a mighty
traverser of the earth*. Metre, *tawíl*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The Maqámá of Isfahan](mhm18)
