[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm17)  [Next](mhm19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X. THE MAQAMA OF ISFAHAN

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: I was at Isfahan <span
id="fr_322"></span>[6](#fn_322)

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

intending to go to Rayy <span id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_323) and so I
alighted in the city as alights the fleeting shade. I was expecting to
see the caravan <span id="fr_324"></span>[2](#fn_324) at every glance
and looking out for the mount to appear at every sunrise. Now, when that
which I expected, was about to happen, I heard the call to prayer and to
respond to it was obligatory. So I slipped away from my companions,
taking advantage of the opportunity <span
id="fr_325"></span>[3](#fn_325) of joining in public prayers, and
dreading, at the same time, the loss of the caravan I was leaving. But I
sought aid against the difficulty of the desert through the blessing of
prayer, and, therefore, I went to the front row and stood up. The Imam
went up to the niche and recited the opening chapter of the Qur’án
according to the intonation of Ḥamza, <span
id="fr_326"></span>[4](#fn_326) in regard to using 'madda' and 'ḥamza,'
while I experienced disquieting grief <span
id="fr_327"></span>[5](#fn_327) at the thought of missing the caravan,
and of separation from the mount. Then he followed up the Súratal-Fátiḥa
with Súrat al-Wáqi‘a <span id="fr_328"></span>[6](#fn_328) while I
suffered the fire of patience and tasked myself severely. I was roasting
and grilling on the live coal

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

of rage. But, from what I knew of the savage fanaticism of the
people <span id="fr_329"></span>[1](#fn_329) of that place, if <span
id="fr_330"></span>[2](#fn_330) prayers were cut short of the final
salutation, there was no alternative but silence and endurance, or
speech and the grave. So I remained standing thus on the foot of
necessity till the end of the chapter. I had now despaired of the
caravan and given up all hope of the supplies and the mount. He next
bent his back <span id="fr_331"></span>[3](#fn_331) for the two
prostrations with such humility and emotion, the like of which I had
never seen before. Then he raised his hands and his head and said: 'May
God accept the praise of him who praises Him,' and remained standing
till I doubted not but that he had fallen asleep. Then he placed his
right hand on the ground, put his forehead on the earth and pressed his
face thereto. I raised my head to look for an opportunity to slip away,
but I perceived no opening in the rows, so I re-addressed myself to
prayer until he repeated the Takbír <span
id="fr_332"></span>[4](#fn_332) for the sitting posture. Then he stood
up for the second prostration and recited the Súras of al-Fatíḥa <span
id="fr_333"></span>[5](#fn_333) and al-Qári‘a with an intonation which
occupied the duration of the Last Day <span
id="fr_334"></span>[6](#fn_334) and well-nigh exhausted the spirits of
the congregation. Now, when he had finished his two prostrations and
proceeded to wag his jaws <span id="fr_335"></span>[7](#fn_335) to
pronounce the testimony to God's unity, and to turn his face to the
right and to the left <span id="fr_336"></span>[8](#fn_336) for the
final salutation, I said: 'Now God has made escape easy, and deliverance
is nigh'; but a man stood up and said: 'Whosoever of you loves the
Companions and the Muslim community let him lend me his ears for a
moment.' Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám: I clave to my place in order to save my
dignity. Then he said: 'It is incumbent upon

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

me that I should speak nothing but verity and testify to nought but the
truth. I have brought you good tidings from your Prophet, but I will not
communicate it until God hath purged this musjid of every vile person
who denies his prophetic office.' Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám: Now he had bound
me with cords and fettered me with bands of iron. <span
id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_337) Then he said: 'I saw the Prophet in a
dream!--May God send His blessings upon him--like the sun beneath the
clouds, and the moon at the full. He was walking, the stars following
him; he was trailing his skirts and the angels held them up. Then he
taught me a prayer and admonished me to teach it to his people. So I
wrote it down on these slips of paper <span
id="fr_338"></span>[2](#fn_338) with the perfumes of Khalúq, <span
id="fr_339"></span>[3](#fn_339) musk, saffron and socc, <span
id="fr_340"></span>[4](#fn_340) and whoever asks for a copy as a gift, I
will present it to him, but whosoever hands me back the cost of the
paper I will accept it.' Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám: Dirhems poured upon him
to such an extent that he was bewildered. Then he went out and I
followed him wondering at the cleverness of his imposture <span
id="fr_341"></span>[5](#fn_341) and his artifice to gain his living. And
I determined to question him concerning his condition, but I restrained
myself, and to converse with him, but I remained silent, and I pondered
over his eloquence with his shamelessness, his pleasantness with his
mendicity, his catching men by his artifice and his drawing gold from
men by his ingenuity. Then I looked and lo! it was Abú’l-Fatḥ
al-Iskanderí. So I asked: 'What set thee on this stratagem?' He smiled
and recited, saying:--

'Men are asses, <span id="fr_342"></span>[6](#fn_342) so lead them one
after the other,  
Compete with, and excel them,  
Till thou hast obtained from them  
What thou desirest, then quit.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_322"></span>[55:6](mhm18.htm#fr_322) *Isfahan:* A
well-known city and a former capital of Persia. Captured during the
Khalífate of ‘Umar in A.H. 23 or 24.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[56:1](mhm18.htm#fr_323) *Rayy:* A town in
Persia, 160 parasangs from Qazwín, and the seat of the government of the
province known under the Khalífate as the Daylam. Conquered in the
Khalífate of ‘Umar. During the Arab ascendancy, and under the Seljúks,
it was a place of considerable importance. Ibn Fáris, the poet and
grammarian and instructor of al-Hamadhání, was born here. The derivative
adjective from Rayy is Rází.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[56:2](mhm18.htm#fr_324) … *The caravan:* The
commentator considers it to mean a company of persons returning together
from a journey, so called as auguring their safe return but more likely
from καπηλος through Talmud ‏י־קפיָלה‎ a trader.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[56:3](mhm18.htm#fr_325) *Taking advantage of
the opportunity:* Because of the greater merit in Islám of public over
private prayers. See al-Madhírí, *Kitáb al-Targḥíb wa Tarhíb* (d. A.H.
656) i, 74.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[56:4](mhm18.htm#fr_326) According to the
intonation of Ḥamza in regard to using madda and ḥamza. Al-Madda (…) is
the orthographical sign of prolongation = Hamzah (…) and written … as in
…. For the rules as to its use, in intoning the Qur’án, see Suyúṭí,
*Itqán*, pp. 227-31. (Calcutta, edition, 1852). Ḥamza ibn al-Habíb
(80-156 A.H.) buried at Húlwán, was one of the seven recognized readers
of the Qur’án. He is charged with exaggerating the use of *madda* and
*hamza*. The objection is repudiated, however, by Ḥamza's admirers, see
*Manduat al-‘Ulumín Turkish*, i, 483 (Constantinople edition, A H.
1313). Al-Hamadhání evidently believed the charge to be well grounded
and hence the appropriateness of the allusion.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[56:5](mhm18.htm#fr_327) *Disquieting grief:*
Literally causing to stand up and sit down, hence occasioning
restlessness.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[56:6](mhm18.htm#fr_328) *Al-Waqi‘a:* The
Inevitable. Qur’án lvi. It contains ninety-six verses. According to
Sháfi‘i, *Umm* 88, the choice of the *Súra* rests entirely with the
reader or reciter. See Margoliouth, *Early Development of
Muḥammadanism*, p. 21.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[57:1](mhm18.htm#fr_329) *From what I knew of
the savage fanaticism of the people*. Cf. Yaqút, i, 296.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[57:2](mhm18.htm#fr_330) … should be vocalized
… See Wright, *Grammar*, ii, 348 (*b*).

<span id="fn_331"></span>[57:3](mhm18.htm#fr_331) *His back:* Literally
his bow.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[57:4](mhm18.htm#fr_332) *Takbír:* The
repetition of the well-known formula--God is great, God is great, there
is no god but God.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[57:5](mhm18.htm#fr_333) *Al-Fátíḥa:* The
opening chapter of the Qur’án.

*Al-Qári‘a:* The 'striking'. Qur’án ci. It contains eight verses.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[57:6](mhm18.htm#fr_334) *The duration of the
Last Day:* Literally 'the hour'. According to Qur’án, lxx, 4, fifty
thousand years, and Qur’án, xxxii, 4, a thousand years.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[57:7](mhm18.htm#fr_335) …, *His jaws:*
Literally, the two branches … of the occipital artery which are
distributed upon the occiput branches from the … carotid artery.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[57:8](mhm18.htm#fr_336) *Turn his face to the
right and left:* To salute the guardian angels.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[58:1](mhm18.htm#fr_337) *Bands of iron:*
Literally, with black ropes.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[58:2](mhm18.htm#fr_338) … *Paper:* Arabicized
from the Greek χαρτης.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[58:3](mhm18.htm#fr_339) *Khalúq:* A certain
species of perfume also termed *Khiláq*. It is composed of saffron and
other things, and redness and yellowness are the predominant colours.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[58:4](mhm18.htm#fr_340) *Socc:* A sort of
perfume prepared from ramik which is a kind of black substance like
pitch that is mixed with musk.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[58:5](mhm18.htm#fr_341) … *Fraud or
imposture:* Seems to be a foreign word, probably borrowed from Persian.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[58:6](mhm18.htm#fr_342) *Men are asses:* …
*Then quit:* Literally, then die. Metre, *mujtath*.

This maqáma has been translated by De Sacy, see *Chrestomathie Arabe*,
iii 255.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. The Maqáma of Ahwaz](mhm19)
