[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm18)  [Next](mhm20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### XI. THE MAQAMA OF AHWAZ

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: I was at Ahwaz <span
id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_343) with some friends--'When the beholder's
eye ascends <span id="fr_344"></span>[2](#fn_344) to their heads and
then descends to their feet, it is unable at once to take in all their
beauties'--among us were none but beardless boys with virgin
aspirations, <span id="fr_345"></span>[3](#fn_345) or downy-lipped ones
with refined manners, the hope of the days and the nights. We discussed
fellowship and the rules we should lay down for it, fraternity and how
we should strengthen its bonds, happiness and when we should seek it,
drinking and when we should vie with one another therein, sociability
and how we should mutually contribute towards it, lost chances and how
to recover them, liquor and where we should procure it, and the assembly
and how we should arrange it. Then said one of our company: 'I will be
responsible for the house and entertainment.' <span
id="fr_346"></span>[4](#fn_346) Another said: 'I will undertake to
supply the wine and the dessert.' <span id="fr_347"></span>[5](#fn_347)
Now, when we had determined to proceed, there met us a man wearing two
worn-out garments. In his right hand was a staff and on his shoulder a
bier. When we saw the bier we augured ill from it, turned our faces away
and avoided it. <span id="fr_348"></span>[6](#fn_348) So he shouted at
us with a shout at which the earth was almost cloven <span
id="fr_349"></span>[7](#fn_349) in sunder and the stars were about to
fall, <span id="fr_350"></span>[8](#fn_350) and he said: 'In abasement
ye shall surely see it, and perforce and against your will ye shall
mount it. What aileth ye that ye augur ill <span
id="fr_351"></span>[9](#fn_351) from a mount which your

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

ancestors have ridden and your posterity will soon ride? Wherefore do ye
shun as unclean a couch, that your fathers have used <span
id="fr_352"></span>[1](#fn_352) and your progeny will use? Yet, by
Heavens! upon these timbers ye shall surely be carried to those worms,
and ye shall be transported by these fleet coursers to those pits. A
plague upon ye! Ye augur ill as if ye were free agents, and ye evince
loathing as if ye were sanctified. Vile wretches what profiteth this
prognostication?'

Said ‘Ísá ibn Hishám: Now he had dissolved what we had compacted, and
rendered futile what we had determined, so we inclined to him and said:
'How much are we in need of thy admonition and how greatly are we in
love with thy words. Now if thou wished thou wouldst say something
more?' He continued: 'Verily there are behind you watering-places which
ye, have been travelling towards for twenty years.'--

'And verily a man, <span id="fr_353"></span>[2](#fn_353) who has been
journeying to a watering place for twenty years,  
Is near his drinking time.'

'And there is one above you who knows your secrets and could, if He
would, expose you. In this world He treats you with kindness, and in the
next, He will judge you according to knowledge. Therefore call death to
mind lest evil come upon you, for if ye make this thought cleave unto
you <span id="fr_354"></span>[3](#fn_354) as an innermost garment, ye
will not be refractory; <span id="fr_355"></span>[4](#fn_355) and if ye
remember it, ye will not be frivolous. But if ye do forget it, it will
make you remember, and if he be slothful about it, it will wake you
up, <span id="fr_356"></span>[5](#fn_356)

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

and though ye dislike it, it will visit you.' We said: 'But what is thy
need?' He replied: 'Too far-reaching to set bounds to, and too manifold
to be reckoned up.' We said: 'But for the present time?' He said: 'The
bringing back of the past and protection against the accidents of the
future.' We said: 'That is not in our power, but thou mayest have what
thou desirest of the goods of this world and its vanities.' <span
id="fr_357"></span>[1](#fn_357) He said: 'I have no need of them, but my
need henceforth is rather that ye should bolt <span
id="fr_358"></span>[2](#fn_358) than ye should remember <span
id="fr_359"></span>[3](#fn_359) what I say.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_343"></span>[59:1](mhm19.htm#fr_343) *Ahwaz*: The plural of
… originally … the chief town of Khuzistan, famous for its fair and
formerly noted for its sugar. Captured by Abú Músá al-Ash‘arí in A.H.
17.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[59:2](mhm19.htm#fr_344) *When the eye
ascends:* Adapted from line 69 of the Kaṣída of Imr al-Qais. Already
quoted on p. 29 of the text.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[59:3](mhm19.htm#fr_345) *Virgin aspirations:*
Another reading … Virgin actions.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[59:4](mhm19.htm#fr_346) … *entertainment:*
Literally food prepared for a guest.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[59:5](mhm19.htm#fr_347) … *Dessert:* Dried and
other fruits, such as nuts, almonds, raisins, dried figs, dried dates,
etc., taken as an accompaniment with wine. … is more common than …

<span id="fn_348"></span>[59:6](mhm19.htm#fr_348) … *We avoided it:*
Literally, folded up our flank from it. … is the flank or the part
between the false ribs and the hip. Figure for to turn away from, to
avoid contact with, or to withdraw the countenance.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[59:7](mhm19.htm#fr_349) *The earth was almost
cloven:* An allusion to Qur’án, lxxxii. 1.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[59:8](mhm19.htm#fr_350) *The stars were about
to fall:* An allusion to Qur’án, lxxxi. 2.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[59:9](mhm19.htm#fr_351) *Augur ill:* Cf.
Qur’án, xxvii. 48.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[60:1](mhm19.htm#fr_352) … *Used it:*
Literally, trodden it.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[60:2](mhm19.htm#fr_353) *And verily a man:*
Metre, *basít*. The commentator attributes these lines to Ibn Aḥmad the
Taymite. The original has fifty and not twenty years. This is an example
of … or perversion, to make the sense accord with the youth of the
company he is addressing.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[60:3](mhm19.htm#fr_354) … *If ye make it
cleave to you:* Literally, if ye make it your … inner garment, opposed
to … outer garment. … also means to lay to heart. See *Ḥarírí*, i, 135.
Cf. The tradition relating to the Anṣár … Ye are the special and close
friends and the people in general are less near in friendship.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[60:4](mhm19.htm#fr_355) … *Ye will not be
refractory:* From … (a horse) overcame his rider, bolted.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[60:5](mhm19.htm#fr_356) … *It will wake you
up:* As one who seeks blood revenge (…) or retaliation of the slayer of
his kinsman.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[61:1](mhm19.htm#fr_357) … *Its vanities:* From
… gold … signifies the adorning or embellishing of a thing primarily
with gold.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[61:2](mhm19.htm#fr_358) … *That ye should
bolt:* From … he went quickly like a camel throwing his legs out like an
ostrich. This is an extraordinary use of the verb … and the text is
probably corrupt, in fact the sentence is omitted from the
Constantinople edition which concludes with the words 'I have no need of
them'. Besides the remark is neither witty nor clever.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[61:3](mhm19.htm#fr_359) … *To ponder:* Another
reading … to promise, which yields a better sense. Another edition has
these additional words: 'Then I approached him and lo! it was our Shaikh
al-Iskanderí.'

<span id="fn_360"></span>[61:4](mhm20.htm#fr_360) *Baghdad:* Was the
capital of the Khalífate from 762-1258. It was originally a little
Persian village on the west bank of the Tigris. Yaqút calls it 'the
mother of the world and the queen of cities'. It was founded by the
Khalífa Manṣúr who laid the first brick with his own hands and recited
on the occasion the following passage from the Qur’án: 'The earth is
God's. He giveth it for an inheritance unto such of his servants as he
pleaseth, and the prosperous end shall be unto those who fear Him'
(Qur’án, vii, 125) adding, 'Build under the blessing of God'. The cost
of building the city is said to have been 18,000,000 dinars. Yaqút, i,
677 See also Le Strange, Baghdad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Maqáma of Baghdad](mhm20)
