[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm28)  [Next](mhm30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXI. THE MAQAMA OF MOSUL

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: 'When we were returning from
Moṣul <span id="fr_512"></span>[2](#fn_512) intending to go home, the
caravan was captured and our baggage and mount were stolen from us The
little life I had left carried me to one of its villages <span
id="fr_513"></span>[3](#fn_513) and with me was Abú’-Fatḥ al-Iskanderí.
I asked him: 'What shall we devise?' He answered: 'God will
suffice. <span id="fr_514"></span>[4](#fn_514) Now we were impelled to
go to a house whose master had just died and the female mourners <span
id="fr_515"></span>[5](#fn_515) had already stood up. It was filled with
men, whose hearts grief had cauterized, and whose shirts terror had
rent, and with women who had unloosed their hair, and were beating their
breasts, cutting their necklaces and slapping their cheeks.

Said al-Iskanderí: 'In this mass <span id="fr_516"></span>[6](#fn_516)
there is a palm tree for us and in this flock a lamb.' So he entered the
house to look at the dead man whose chin was tied up ready to be carried
out. The water had been heated to wash him, the bier had been got ready
to bear him away, his garments had been sewn that he might be enshrouded
and his grave had been dug that he might be buried. Now when
al-Iskanderí had observed him, he seized his throat,

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

felt his carotid artery, and said: 'O people, Fear God! Do not bury him
for he is alive, he is [unconscious](errata.htm#4) and a fit has come
upon him. I will hand him over with both eyes open in two days.' They
said 'Whence knowest thou know that?' He replied: 'Verily, when a man
dies his armpit becomes cold. Now I felt this man and I know he is
alive.' Then they put their hands into his armpit and said, 'The fact is
as he asserts, so do what he commands.' Then al-Iskanderí arose and went
to the dead man, stripped him of his clothes, tied on his turban, hung
amulets upon him, introduced <span id="fr_517"></span>[1](#fn_517) some
olive oil into his mouth, cleared the house for him, and said: 'Leave
him alone, and do not interfere with him. If you hear a moan from him,
do not answer him.' Then he went out from the presence of the dead.
Meanwhile the news had spread and circulated that the dead was raised.
Pious gifts came to us from every house, and presents poured upon us
from every neighbour, till our purse was swollen with silver and gold
and our saddle bags were filled with cheese <span
id="fr_518"></span>[2](#fn_518) and dates. We tried hard to seize an
opportunity to bolt, but found none, till the appointed time arrived and
they demanded the fulfilment of the lying promise. Al-Iskanderí
enquired: 'Have ye heard a whisper <span id="fr_519"></span>[3](#fn_519)
from the patient or observed from him a sign?' They answered: 'No.' Then
he said: 'If he has made no sound since I left him, his hour is not yet
come. Let him alone till to-morrow and, verily, if ye hear his voice, ye
may be assured he is not dead. Then inform me that I may prescribe for
his recovery and rectify what is wrong with his constitution.' They
said: 'Do not put it off longer than to-morrow.' He replied: 'No.' Now
when the morning beamed <span id="fr_520"></span>[4](#fn_520) and the
wing of light spread over the horizon of the atmosphere, the men came in
troops <span id="fr_521"></span>[5](#fn_521) and the women in pairs,

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and they said: 'We desire that thou cure the sick man and cease
prating.' Said al-Iskanderí: 'Let us arise and go to him.' Then he took
the amulets from his hands, removed the turban from his body and said:
'Lay him on his face,' and he was laid upon his face. Then he said:
'Stand him on his feet.' So he was made to stand. He then said 'Let go
his hands,' but he fell a lifeless heap. <span
id="fr_522"></span>[1](#fn_522) 'Phew!' ejaculated al-Iskanderí: 'He is
dead, how can I bring him to life?' Then shoes <span
id="fr_523"></span>[2](#fn_523) clave unto him, and palms took
possession of him, and it was so, when one hand was raised, another
banged down upon him. Then the people busied themselves with the funeral
obsequies of the dead man and we slipped away fleeing till we came to a
village situated on the edge of a valley whose torrent was eroding
it, <span id="fr_524"></span>[3](#fn_524) and whose waters were
destroying it. Its people were distressed and had not slept a wink in
the night for fear of the flood. Said al-Iskanderí: 'I will
deliver <span id="fr_525"></span>[4](#fn_525) you from this flood and
its mischief, and will turn away its devastation from this village. So
obey me and attempt nothing without me.' They said: What is thy
command?' He answered: 'Sacrifice in the course of this water a
red <span id="fr_526"></span>[5](#fn_526) heifer, fetch me a young
virgin, and pray behind me two genuflexions, so that God may divert the
direction of this flood to this desert, and, if the waters are not
turned away, my blood will be lawful to you.' <span
id="fr_527"></span>[6](#fn_527) They said: 'We will do that.' So they
immolated the heifer, and married the damsel to him. Then he stood up to
pray the two genuflexions and said: 'O people, be careful with
yourselves that, when standing, there happen no stumbling, in kneeling
no fall, in prostration no slip, in sitting no irregularity, for the
moment we blunder our hopes will be disappointed and our action will go
for nothing. Be patient over these two genuflexions for their

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

way is long.' Then he arose for the first genuflexion and he stood as
rigid as the trunk of a palm tree till they complained of sideache. Then
he prostrated himself so long that they thought he had gone to sleep,
but they dared not to raise their heads until he repeated the takbír for
sitting. Then he returned to the second genuflexion, signed to me, and
we made for the valley and left the people worshipping and we know not
what fate did with them. Then Abú’l-Fatḥ indited, saying:--

'May God not put far from Him the likes of me, <span
id="fr_528"></span>[1](#fn_528)  
But where is the likes of me, aye where?  
How marvellous was the stupidity of the people,  
Which I took advantage of with ease!  
I received from them the full measure of good,  
While I weighed out to them nought but fraud and falsehood.'

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_512"></span>[85:2](mhm29.htm#fr_512) *Moṣul:* A town in
Mesopotamia on the right bank of the Tigris. This city reached its
greatest prosperity towards the beginning of the decline of the
Khalífate when it was for a time an independent capital. The dynasty of
the Hamdánids reigned in Moṣul from A.D., 934 but the town was conquered
by the Syrian Okailids in 990. Yaqút says the three great cities of the
world are 'Nishapur, because it is the gate of the East, Damascus,
because it is the gate of the West, Moṣul, because it is on the road
between the two.' It appears the city had a notorious reputation for
vice in its most degraded form. Yaqút, iv, 682 and *Encyclopaedia
Britannica*, xviii, 904.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[85:3](mhm29.htm#fr_513) *One of its villages:*
Moṣul had a large number of dependent villages.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[85:4](mhm29.htm#fr_514) *God will suffice:*
Cf. English, The Lord will provide.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[85:5](mhm29.htm#fr_515) *The female mourners
had already stood up:* To bewail and eulogize the deceased. … wailing
woman.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[85:6](mhm29.htm#fr_516) *Mass:* Literally,
blackness.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[86:1](mhm29.htm#fr_517) … *Introduced:*
Literally, made him lick, from … he licked his fingers, or he gave him
as a (…) linctus.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[86:2](mhm29.htm#fr_518) … and … cheese: A
preparation of dry curd. See De Sacy, Haréri, ii. 587.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[86:3](mhm29.htm#fr_519) … *whisper:* An
allusion to Qur’án, xix. 98.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[86:4](mhm29.htm#fr_520) … *The morning
beamed:* Literally, the morning smiled so as to show its front teeth.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[86:5](mhm29.htm#fr_521) *In troops:* An
allusion to Qur’án, cx. 2.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[87:1](mhm29.htm#fr_522) … *A lifeless heap:*
Literally, stationary, fixed. Another, but less satisfactory reading, …
on his head.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[87:2](mhm29.htm#fr_523) … *a boot*, or … a
concourse of people. I prefer the former reading. Cf. text p. 115. … I
was attacked with sandals.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[87:3](mhm29.htm#fr_524) *The torrent was
eroding it:* In A.H. 376 the town was visited by an earthquake which
caused great loss of life and property. Ibn al-Athír, ix. 35.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[87:4](mhm29.htm#fr_525) *I will deliver you:*
Literally, I will suffice you.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[87:5](mhm29.htm#fr_526) *Red heifer:*
Literally, an intensely yellow; an allusion to Qur’án, ii, 64.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[87:6](mhm29.htm#fr_527) *My blood will be
lawful to you:* i.e., you may kill me.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[88:1](mhm29.htm#fr_528) *May God not put far
from Him:* Metre, *mujtath*.

It is interesting to observe that the author is said to have been buried
in the very state in which he falsely asserted the dead man was in order
to defraud the too credulous people of Moṣul. See Ibn Khallikan, i. 114.

This maqáma has been translated by De Sacy. *Chrestomathie Arabe*, iii.
247.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. The Maqáma of the Maḍirah](mhm30)
