[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhm36)  [Next](mhm38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Maqámát of Badí‘ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, tr. W.J. Prendergast
\[1915\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXIX. THE MAQAMA OF HAMDAN <span id="fr_709"></span>[4](#fn_709)

‘ÍSÁ IBN HISHÁM related to us and said: We were present one day at the
court of Saif al-Daula ibn Ḥamdán, <span id="fr_710"></span>[5](#fn_710)
and they brought before him a horse--'when the eye looks up at him <span
id="fr_711"></span>[6](#fn_711) it wants to look down again in order to
take in all his beauty.' The company looked at it and Saif al-Daula
said: 'Whoever of

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

you describes it best, I will make him a present of it.' So every one
tried his best endeavour and expended what ability he possessed. One of
his attendants said: 'May God prosper the Amír! Yesterday I saw a man
who put eloquence under his feet <span id="fr_712"></span>[1](#fn_712)
and upon whom men's eyes rested. He was soliciting the people and
getting nothing. <span id="fr_713"></span>[2](#fn_713) Now, if the Amír
would summon him, he would excel them in his repartee.' Said Saif
al-Daula: 'Bring him to me as he is.' Then the attendants flew in search
of him and they forthwith brought him, but they did not tell him with
what object he had been summoned. Then he was taken near and was brought
close up. He was wearing a pair of worn-out garments upon which time had
long eaten and drunken. <span id="fr_714"></span>[3](#fn_714) When he
reached the front rank he kissed the carpet and stood still. Saif
al-Daula said: 'The report of thy eloquence has reached us so exhibit it
on this horse and its description.' He said: 'May God prosper the Amír!
How can it be done before riding him and seeing his jumping, and
disclosing his defects and his latent qualities?' He said: 'Mount it.'
So he mounted it, made it go and then he said, 'God prosper the Amír! He
is long in both ears, scanty of two, spacious in the rectum, soft of
three, thick in the shank, depressed of four, strong-winded, fine of
five, narrow in the gullet, thin of six, sharp of hearing, thick of
seven, fine of tongue, broad of eight, long in the ribs, short of nine,
wide of jaw, remote of ten. He grips with his forefeet, kicks out with
his hind ones, appears with a bright face and laughs exposing his
permanent corner nipper. He cracks <span id="fr_715"></span>[4](#fn_715)
the face of the earth with hoofs of iron, <span
id="fr_716"></span>[5](#fn_716) he rises like the ocean when it is
rough, or the torrent when it

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

rages.' Saif al-Daula said: 'Thou art welcome to the horse.' He said:
'Mayest thou cease not to get precious things and to give away horses!'
Then he turned away and I followed him and said: 'I will undertake to
supply thee with the equipment necessary for this horse, if thou explain
what thou hast described.' He answered, 'Ask what thou desirest.' I
said: 'What is the meaning of thy saying, Remote of ten?' He replied:
'Remote of sight, of pace, of space between the two eye sockets, and
between the two hind quarters, and remote of space between the two
extremities of the haunches, between the nostrils, wide in the space
between the two hind legs, <span id="fr_717"></span>[1](#fn_717) and
between the navel <span id="fr_718"></span>[2](#fn_718) and the
operating point. <span id="fr_719"></span>[3](#fn_719) Remote of goal in
the race.' I said: 'May thy teeth not be broken! And what is the meaning
of thy saying, Short of nine?' <span id="fr_720"></span>[4](#fn_720) He
replied: 'Short of hair, short of hair on the pastern, short of tail
bone, short in the arms, short in the pasterns, short in the sciatic
artery, short in the back, short of shank.' I said: 'How excellent! And
what is the meaning of thy saying, Broad of eight?' He answered: 'Broad
of brow, broad of haunch, broad of back, broad of scapula, broad of
flank, broad of sinew, broad of breast, broad of neck.' I said: 'Well
done! And what is the meaning of thy saying, Thick of seven?' He
answered: 'Thick in the foreleg, stout of girth, thick in the tail root,
thick of skin in the head, thick in the pastern, thick in the thighs,
thick in the back.' I said: 'How wonderful! And what is the meaning of
thy saying, Thin of six?' He answered: 'Thin of eyelid, thin in the
fore-part of the neck, thin in the lip, thin-skinned, thin in the tips
of the ears, thin in the sides of the neck.' I said: 'Well done! And
what is the meaning of thy saying, Fine of five?' He replied: 'Fine in
the uppermost part of the neck, fine in the frog, fine in the forehead,
fine in the knee, fine in the foreleg sinew.' I said: 'May God prolong
thy life! And what is the meaning of thy saying, Depressed of four?' He
answered:

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Depressed in the
top of the shoulders, depressed in the knee joints, depressed in the
eyebrows, depressed in the arm-bone.' I said: 'And what is the meaning
of thy saying, Soft of three?' He said: 'Soft in the upper parts of the
shoulder blades, soft of mane, soft in the mouth.' <span
id="fr_721"></span>[1](#fn_721) Then I said: 'And what is the meaning of
thy saying, Scanty of two?' He answered: 'Scanty in the flesh of the
face, scanty in flesh on both sides of the back.' I asked: 'Whence the
origin of this excellence?' He replied: 'From the frontiers of the
Umayyads and the city of Alexandria.' Then I said: 'Dost thou with this
excellence expose thy self-respect <span id="fr_722"></span>[2](#fn_722)
to this extravagance?' Then he recited saying

'Befool thy time well, for time is a fool, <span
id="fr_723"></span>[3](#fn_723)  
Consign honour to oblivion and live in comfort and plenty,  
And tell this thy slave to bring us a cake.' <span
id="fr_724"></span>[4](#fn_724)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_709"></span>[119:4](mhm37.htm#fr_709) *Abdallah ibn
Ḥamdán:* The name of Saif al-Dan father.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[119:5](mhm37.htm#fr_710) *Saif al-Daula the
Hamdánid:* A.H. 333-66 (A.D. 916-67), made himself master of Aleppo in
944 and founded an independent kingdom in northern Syria.

He was an accomplished scholar and poet himself, a lover of fine poetry
and a renowned patrols of letters. For notices of his life, see Ibn
Khallikan, ii, 334 and Tha‘alibí, *Yatíma*, i, 88.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[119:6](mhm37.htm#fr_711) *When the eye looks
up:* An allusion to the Qaṣída of Imr al-Qais, p. 25, verse 69, Lyall's
edition of the Mu‘allaqát. The text is incorrectly vocalized the ﻕ and ﻫ
should be doubled.

I have varied the translation of these lines in accordance with the
different meanings suggested by Tabrízí. Hamadhání has already twice
quoted this line, but this is the first occasion he has done so
appositely.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[120:1](mhm37.htm#fr_712) *Put eloquence under
his feet:* Literally, tramples upon it, figuratively for having
eloquence in subjection.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[120:2](mhm37.htm#fr_713) *Getting nothing:*
Literally, he made them to drink despair; this is capable of two
explanations:--

\(a\) If we take the verb … to mean he was asking the people for
something, … would signify he made them despair of giving him
sufficient.

\(b\) … means he was questioning the people, then … signifies he made
them despair of answering him. I think the second explanation is more in
consonance with the context.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[120:3](mhm37.htm#fr_714) *Eaten and drunken:*
*Arab Proverbs*, i, 61. Figure for old and much used.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[120:4](mhm37.htm#fr_715) … *He cracks:*
Another reading … he scores.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[120:5](mhm37.htm#fr_716) *Hoofs of iron:*
Literally, an iron pounder.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[121:1](mhm37.htm#fr_717) *Wide in the space
between the two hind legs:* Such a horse is called …

<span id="fn_718"></span>[121:2](mhm37.htm#fr_718) … *Navel:* The point
on the navel where the farrier operates to extract a yellow fluid.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[121:3](mhm37.htm#fr_719) … *The operating
point:* That is, the thin skin next to the navel which the farrier
perforates in order that a yellow fluid may issue forth.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[121:4](mhm37.htm#fr_720) *Short of nine:* Only
eight are mentioned, one having been omitted on grounds of decency.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[122:1](mhm37.htm#fr_721) *Soft in the mouth:*
Literally, soft of, i.e. obedient to, the rein.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[122:2](mhm37.htm#fr_722) *Expose thy
self-respect:* Literally, expose thy face, a common figure for risk of
self-respect.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[122:3](mhm37.htm#fr_723) *Befool thy time:*
Metre, *mujtath*. Cf. p. 128 of the Text.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[122:4](mhm37.htm#fr_724) Saif al-Daula died
about two years before Hamadhání was born. This maqáma is, therefore,
based on an imaginary incident or a popular story. See Ibn Khallikan,
ii, 139, where there is a description of a horse presented by this
prince. Also cf. p. 124 of the same volume. For an example of riddling
with numbers, see Ecclesiastes, xi. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. The Maqama of Ruṣáfa](mhm38)
