[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aar03)  [Next](aar05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

# CHAPTER II

### PRIMITIVE RITUAL: PANTOMIMIC DANCES

IN books and hymns of bygone days, which dealt with the religion of "the
heathen in his blindness," he was pictured as a being of strange
perversity, apt to bow down to "gods of wood and stone." The question
*why* he acted thus foolishly was never raised. It was just his
"blindness"; the light of the gospel had not yet reached him. Now-a-days
the savage has become material not only for conversion and hymn-writing
but for scientific observation. We want to understand his psychology,
*i. e.* how he behaves, not merely for his sake, that we may abruptly
and despotically convert or reform him, but for our own sakes; partly,
of course, for sheer love of knowing, but also,--since we realize that
our own behaviour is based on instincts kindred to his,--in order that,
by understanding his behaviour, we may understand, and it may be better,
our own.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

Anthropologists who study the primitive peoples of to-day find that the
worship of false gods, bowing "down to wood and stone," bulks larger in
the mind of the hymn-writer than in the mind of the savage. We look for
temples to heathen idols; we find dancing-places and ritual dances. The
savage is a man of action. Instead of asking a god to do what he wants
done, he does it or tries to do it himself; instead of prayers he utters
spells. In a word, he practises magic, and above all he is strenuously
and frequently engaged in dancing magical dances. When a savage wants
sun or wind or rain, he does not go to church and prostrate himself
before a false god; he summons his tribe and dances a sun dance or a
wind dance or a rain dance. When he would hunt and catch a bear, he does
not pray to his god for strength to outwit and outmatch the bear, he
rehearses his hunt in a bear dance.

Here, again, we have some modern prejudice and misunderstanding to
overcome. Dancing is to us a light form of recreation practised by the
quite young from sheer *joie de vivre*, and essentially inappropriate to
the mature. But among the Tarahumares of Mexico the word

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

*nolávoa* means both "to work" and "to dance." An old man will reproach
a young man saying, "Why do you not go and work?" (*nolávoa*). He means
"Why do you not dance instead of looking on?" It is strange to us to
learn that among savages, as a man passes from childhood to youth, from
youth to mature manhood, so the number of his "dances" increase, and the
number of these "dances" is the measure *pari passu* of his social
importance. Finally, in extreme old age he falls out, he ceases to
exist, *because he cannot dance*; his dance, and with it his social
status, passes to another and a younger.

 

Magical dancing still goes on in Europe to-day. In Swabia and among the
Transylvanian Saxons it is a common custom, says Dr. Frazer, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) for a man who has some hemp to leap high in
the field in the belief that this will make the hemp grow tall. In many
parts of Germany and Austria the peasant thinks he can make the flax
grow tall by dancing of leaping high or by jumping backwards from a
table; the higher the leap the taller will

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

be the flax that year. There is happily little possible doubt as to the
practical reason of this mimic dancing. When Macedonian farmers have
done digging their fields they throw their spades up into the air and,
catching them again, exclaim, "May the crop grow as high as the spade
has gone." In some parts of Eastern Russia the girls dance one by one in
a large hoop at midnight on Shrove Tuesday. The hoop is decked with
leaves, flowers and ribbons, and attached to it are a small bell and
some flax. While dancing within the hoop each girl has to wave her arms
vigorously and cry, "Flax, grow," or words to that effect. When she has
done she leaps out of the hoop or is lifted out of it by her partner.

Is this art? We shall unhesitatingly answer "No." Is it ritual? With
some hesitation we shall probably again answer "No." It is, we think,
not a rite, but merely a superstitious practice of ignorant men and
women. But take another instance. Among the Omaha Indians of North
America, when the corn is withering for want of rain, the members of the
sacred Buffalo Society fill a large vessel with water and dance four
times

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

round it. One of them drinks some of the water and spirts it into the
air, making a fine spray in imitation of mist or drizzling rain. Then he
upsets the vessel, spilling the water on the ground; whereupon the
dancers fall down and drink up the water, getting mud all over their
faces. This saves the corn. Now probably any dispassionate person would
describe such a ceremonial as "an interesting instance of primitive
*ritual*." The sole difference between the two types is that, in the one
the practice is carried on privately, or at least unofficially, in the
other it is done publicly by a collective authorized body, officially
for the public good.

The distinction is one of high importance, but for the moment what
concerns us is, to see the common factor in the two sets of acts, what
is indeed their source and mainspring. In the case of the girl dancing
in the hoop and leaping out of it there is no doubt. The words she says,
"Flax, grow," prove the point. She *does* what she *wants done*. Her
intense desire finds utterance in an act. She obeys the simplest
possible impulse. Let anyone watch an exciting game of tennis, or better
still perhaps a game of billiards, he

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

will find himself *doing* in sheer sympathy the thing he wants done,
reaching out a tense arm where the billiard cue should go, raising an
unoccupied leg to help the suspended ball over the net. Sympathetic
magic is, modern psychology teaches us, in the main and at the outset,
not the outcome of intellectual illusion, not even the exercise of a
"mimetic instinct," but simply, in its ultimate analysis, an utterance,
a discharge of emotion and longing.

But though the utterance of emotion is the prime and moving, it is not
the sole, factor. We may utter emotion in a prolonged howl, we may even
utter it in a collective prolonged howl, yet we should scarcely call
this ritual, still less art. It is true that a prolonged collective howl
will probably, because it is collective, develop a rhythm, a regular
recurrence, and hence probably issue in a kind of ritual music; but for
the further stage of development into art another step is necessary. We
must not only *utter* emotion, we must *represent* it, that is, we must
in some way reproduce or imitate or express the thought which is causing
us emotion. Art is not imitation, but art and also ritual frequently and
legitimately *contain an element of imitation*.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Plato was so far right. What exactly is imitated
we shall see when we come to discuss the precise difference between art
and ritual.

The Greek word for a *rite* as already noted is *dromenon*, "a thing
done"--and the word is full of instruction. The Greek had realized that
to perform a rite you must *do* something, that is, you must not only
feel something but express it in action, or, to put it psychologically,
you must not only receive an impulse, you must react to it. The word for
rite, *dromenon*, "thing done," arose, of course, not from any
psychological analysis, but from the simple fact that rites among the
primitive Greeks were *things done*, mimetic dances and the like. It is
a fact of cardinal importance that their word for theatrical
representation, *drama*, is own cousin to their word for rite,
*dromenon*; *drama* also means "thing done." Greek linguistic instinct
pointed plainly to the fact that art and ritual are near relations. To
this fact of crucial importance for our argument we shall return later.
But from the outset it should be borne in mind that in these two Greek
words, *dromenon* and

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

*drama*, in their exact meaning, their relation and their distinction,
we have the keynote and clue to our whole discussion.

 

For the moment we have to note that the Greek word for rite, *dromenon*,
"thing done," is not strictly adequate. It omits a factor of prime
importance; it includes too much and not enough. All "things done" are
not rites. You may shrink back from a blow; that is the expression of an
emotion, that is a reaction to a stimulus, but that is not a rite. You
may digest your dinner; that is a thing done, and a thing of high
importance, but it is not a rite.

One element in the rite we have already observed, and that is, that it
be done collectively, by a number of persons feeling the same emotion. A
meal digested alone is certainly no rite; a meal eaten in common, under
the influence of a common emotion, may, and often does, *tend* to become
a rite.

Collectivity and emotional tension, two elements that tend to turn the
simple reaction into a rite, are--specially among primitive
peoples--closely associated, indeed scarcely separable. The individual
among savages

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

has but a thin and meagre personality; high emotional tension is to him
only caused and maintained by a thing felt socially; it is what the
tribe feels that is sacred, that is matter for ritual. He may make by
himself excited movements, he may leap for joy, for fear; but unless
these movements are made by the tribe together they will not become
rhythmical; they will probably lack intensity, and certainly permanence.
Intensity, then, and collectivity go together, and both are necessary
for ritual, but both may be present without constituting art; we have
not yet touched the dividing line between art and ritual. When and how
does the *dromenon*, the *rite done*, pass over into the *drama*?

The genius of the Greek language *felt*, before it consciously *knew*,
the difference. This feeling ahead for distinctions is characteristic of
all languages, as has been well shown by Mr. Pearsall Smith <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) in another manual of our series. It is an
instinctive process arising independently of reason, though afterwards
justified by it. What, then, is the distinction between art and ritual
which the genius of the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Greek language felt after, when it used the two
words *dromenon* and *drama* for two different sorts of "things done"?
To answer our question we must turn for a brief moment to psychology,
the science of human behaviour.

 

We are accustomed for practical convenience to divide up our human
nature into partitions--intellect, will, the emotions, the
passions--with further subdivisions, *e. g.* of the intellect into
reason, imagination, and the like. These partitions we are apt to
arrange into a sort of order of merit or as it is called a hierarchy,
with Reason as head and crown, and under her sway the emotions and
passions. The result of establishing this hierarchy is that the
impulsive side of our nature comes off badly, the passions and even the
emotions lying under a certain ban. This popular psychology is really a
convenient and perhaps indispensable mythology. Reason, the emotions,
and the will have no more separate existences than Jupiter, Juno, and
Minerva.

A more fruitful way of looking at our human constitution is to see it,
not as a bundle of separate faculties, but as a sort of

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

continuous cycle of activities. What really happens is, putting it very
roughly, something of this sort. To each one of us the world is, or
seems to be, eternally divided into two halves. On the one side is
ourself, on the other all the rest of things. All our action, our
behaviour, our life, is a relation between these two halves, and that
behaviour seems to have three, not divisions, but stages. The outside
world, the other half, the object if we like so to call it, acts upon
us, gets at us through our senses. We hear or see or taste or feel
something; to put it roughly, we perceive something, and as we perceive
it, so, instantly, we feel about it, towards it, we have emotion. And,
instantly again, that emotion becomes a motive-power, we *re*-act
towards the object that got at us, we want to alter it or our relation
to it. If we did not perceive we should not feel, if we did not feel we
should not act. When we talk--as we almost must talk--of Reason, the
Emotions, or the Passions and the Will leading to action, we think of
the three stages or aspects of our behaviour as separable and even
perhaps hostile; we want, perhaps, to purge the intellect from all
infection of the emotions. But in reality, though at a given

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

moment one or the other element, knowing, feeling, or acting, may be
dominant in our consciousness, the rest are always immanent.

When we think of the three elements or stages, knowing, feeling,
striving, as all being necessary factors in any complete bit of human
behaviour, we no longer try to arrange them in a hierarchy with knowing
or reason at the head. Knowing--that is, receiving and recognizing a
stimulus from without--would seem to come first; we must be acted on
before we can *re*-act; but priority confers no supremacy. We can look
at it another way. Perceiving is the first rung on the ladder that leads
to action, feeling is the second, action is the topmost rung, the
primary goal, as it were, of all the climbing. For the purpose of our
discussion this is perhaps the simplest way of looking at human
behaviour.

 

Movement, then, action, is, as it were, the goal and the end of thought.
Perception finds its natural outlet and completion in doing. But here
comes in a curious consideration important for our purpose. In animals,
in so far as they act by "instinct," as we say, perception, knowing, is
usually followed immediately

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

and inevitably by doing, by such doing as is calculated to conserve the
animal and his species; but in some of the higher animals, and
especially in man, where the nervous system is more complex, perception
is not instantly transformed into action; there is an interval for
choice between several possible actions. Perception is pent up and
becomes, helped by emotion, conscious *representation*. Now it is,
psychologists tell us, just in this interval, this space between
perception and reaction, this momentary halt, that all our mental life,
our images, our ideas, our consciousness, and assuredly our religion and
our art, is built up. If the cycle of knowing, feeling, acting, were
instantly fulfilled, that is, if we were a mass of well-contrived
instincts, we should hardly have *dromena*, and we should certainly
never pass from *dromena* to *drama*. Art and religion, though perhaps
not wholly ritual, spring from the incomplete cycle, from unsatisfied
desire, from perception and emotion that have somehow not found
immediate outlet in practical action. When we come later to establish
the dividing line between art and ritual we shall find this fact to be
cardinal.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

We have next to watch how out of *representation repeated* there grows
up a kind of *abstraction* which helps the transition from ritual to
art. When the men of a tribe return from a hunt, a journey, a battle, or
any event that has caused them keen and pleasant emotion, they will
often re-act their doings round the camp-fire at night to an attentive
audience of women and young boys. The cause of this world-wide custom is
no doubt in great part the desire to repeat a pleasant experience; the
battle or the hunt will not be re-enacted unless it has been successful.
Together with this must be reckoned a motive seldom absent from human
endeavour, the desire for self-exhibition, self-enhancement. But in this
re-enactment, we see at once, lies the germ of history and of
commemorative ceremonial, and also, oddly enough, an impulse emotional
in itself begets a process we think of as characteristically and
exclusively intellectual, the process of abstraction. The savage begins
with the particular battle that actually did happen; but, it is easy to
see that if he re-enacts it again and again the particular battle or
hunt will be forgotten, the representation

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

cuts itself loose from the particular action from which it arose, and
becomes generalized, as it were abstracted. Like children he plays not
at a funeral, but at "funerals," not at a battle, but at battles; and so
arises the war-dance, or the death-dance, or the hunt-dance. This will
serve to show how inextricably the elements of knowing and feeling are
intertwined.

So, too, with the element of action. If we consider the occasions when a
savage dances, it will soon appear that it is not only after a battle or
a hunt that he dances in order to commemorate it, but before. Once the
commemorative dance has got abstracted or generalized it becomes
material for the magical dance, the dance pre-done. A tribe about to go
to war will work itself up by a war dance; about to start out hunting
they will catch their game in pantomime. Here clearly the main emphasis
is on the practical, the active, doing-element in the cycle. The dance
is, as it were, a sort of precipitated desire, a discharge of pent-up
emotion into action.

In both these kind of dances, the dance that commemorates by
*re*-presenting and the dance that anticipates by *pre*-presenting,
Plato would have seen the element of imitation,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

what the Greeks called *mimesis*, which we saw he believed to be the
very source and essence of all art. In a sense he would have been right.
The commemorative dance does especially *re*-present; it reproduces the
past hunt or battle; but if we analyse a little more closely we see it
is not for the sake of copying the actual battle itself, but for the
*emotion felt about the battle*. This they desire to re-live. The
emotional element is seen still more clearly in the dance *fore*-done
for magical purposes. Success in war or in the hunt is keenly, intensely
desired. The hunt or the battle cannot take place at the moment, so the
cycle cannot complete itself. The desire cannot find utterance in the
actual act; it grows and accumulates by inhibition, till at last the
exasperated nerves and muscles can bear it no longer; it breaks out into
mimetic anticipatory action. But, and this is the important point, the
action is mimetic, not of what you see done by another; but of what you
desire to do yourself. The habit of this *mimesis* of the thing desired,
is set up, and ritual begins. Ritual, then, does imitate, but for an
emotional, not an altogether practical, end.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Plato never saw a savage war-dance or a hunt-dance or a rain-dance, and
it is not likely that, if he had seen one, he would have allowed it to
be art at all. But he must often have seen a class of performances very
similar, to which unquestionably he would give the name of art. He must
have seen plays like those of Aristophanes, with the chorus dressed up
as Birds or Clouds or Frogs or Wasps, and he might undoubtedly have
claimed such plays as evidence of the rightness of his definition. Here
were men *imitating* birds and beasts, dressed in their skins and
feathers, mimicking their gestures. For his own days his judgment would
have been unquestionably right; but again, if we look at the beginning
of things, we find an origin and an impulse much deeper, vaguer, and
more emotional.

The beast dances found widespread over the savage world took their rise
when men really believed, what St. Francis tried to preach: that beasts
and birds and fishes were his "little brothers." Or rather, perhaps,
more strictly, he felt them to be his great brothers and his fathers,
for the attitude of the Australian towards the kangaroo, the North
American towards the grizzly bear, is one of

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

affection tempered by deep religious awe. The beast dances look back to
that early phase of civilization which survives in crystallized form in
what we call *totemism*. "Totem" means tribe, but the tribe was of
animals as well as men. In the Kangaroo tribe there were real leaping
kangaroos as well as men-kangaroos. The men-kangaroos when they danced
and leapt did it, not to *imitate* kangaroos--you cannot imitate
yourself--but just for natural joy of heart because they *were*
kangaroos; they belonged to the Kangaroo tribe, they bore the tribal
marks and delighted to assert their tribal unity. What they felt was not
*mimesis* but "participation," unity, and community. Later, when man
begins to distinguish between himself and his strange fellow-tribesmen,
to realize that he is *not* a kangaroo like other kangaroos, he will try
to revive his old faith, his old sense of participation and oneness, by
conscious imitation. Thus though imitation is not the object of these
dances, it grows up in and through them. It is the same with art. The
origin of art is not *mimesis*, but *mimesis* springs up out of art, out
of emotional expression, and constantly and closely neighbours

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

it. Art and ritual are at the outset alike in this, that they do not
seek to copy a fact, but to reproduce, to re-enact an emotion.

 

We shall see this more clearly if we examine for a moment this Greek
word *mimesis*. We translate mīmēsis by "imitation," and we do very
wrongly. The word *mimesis* means the action or doing of a person called
a *mime*. Now a *mime* was simply a person who dressed up and acted in a
pantomime or primitive drama. He was roughly what we should call an
*actor*, and it is significant that in the word *actor* we stress not
imitating but acting, doing, just what the Greek stressed in his words
*dromenon* and *drama*. The actor dresses up, puts on a mask, wears the
skin of a beast or the feathers of a bird, not, as we have seen, to copy
something or some one who is not himself, but to emphasize, enlarge,
enhance, his own personality; he masquerades, he does not mimic.

The celebrants in the very primitive ritual of the Mountain-Mother in
Thrace were, we know, called *mimes*. In the fragment of his lost play,
Æschylus, after describing the din made by the "mountain gear" of the
Mother,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the maddening hum of the *bombykes*, a sort of spinning-top, the clash
of the brazen cymbals and the twang of the strings, thus goes on:

"And bull-voices roar thereto from some-where out of the unseen, fearful
*mimes*, and from a drum an image, as it were, of thunder underground is
borne on the air heavy with dread."

Here we have undoubtedly some sort of "bull-roaring," thunder- and
wind-making ceremony, like those that go on in Australia to-day. The
*mimes* are not mimicking thunder out of curiosity, they are making it
and enacting and uttering it for magical purposes. When a sailor wants a
wind he makes it, or, as he later says, he whistles *for* it; when a
savage or a Greek wants thunder to bring rain he makes it, becomes it.
But it is easy to see that as the belief in magic declines, what was
once intense desire, issuing in the making of or the being of a thing,
becomes mere copying of it; the mime, the maker, sinks to be in our
modern sense the mimic; as faith declines, folly and futility set in;
the earnest, zealous *act* sinks into a frivolous mimicry, a sort of
child's-play.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[31:1](aar04.htm#fr_4) These instances are all
taken from *The Golden Bough*.<sup>3</sup> *The Magic Art*, I, 139 *ff*.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[37:1](aar04.htm#fr_5) "The English Language,"
*Home University Library*, p. 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Seasonal Rites: The Spring Festival](aar05)
