[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aar08)  [Next](aar10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

# CHAPTER VII

### RITUAL, ART AND LIFE

IN the preceding chapters we have seen ritual emerge from the practical
doings of life. We have noted that in ritual we have the beginning of a
detachment from practical ends; we have watched the merely emotional
dance develop from an undifferentiated chorus into a spectacle performed
by actors and watched by spectators, a spectacle cut off, not only from
real life, but also from ritual issues; a spectacle, in a word, that has
become an end in itself. We have further seen that the choral dance is
an undifferentiated whole which later divides out into three clearly
articulate parts, the artist, the work of art, the spectator or art
lover. We are now in a position to ask what is the good of all this
antiquarian enquiry? Why is it, apart from the mere delight of
scientific enquiry, important to have seen that art arose from ritual?

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

The answer is simple--

The object of this book, as stated in the preface, is to try to throw
some light on the function of art, that is on what it has done, and
still does to-day, for life. Now in the case of a complex growth like
art, it is rarely if ever possible to understand its function--what it
does, how it works--unless we know something of how that growth began,
or, if its origin is hid, at least of the simpler forms of activity that
preceded it. For art, this earlier stage, this simpler form, which is
indeed itself as it were an embryo and rudimentary art, we found to
be--ritual.

Ritual, then, has not been studied for its own sake, still less for its
connection with any particular dogma, though, as a subject of singular
gravity and beauty, ritual is well worth a lifetime's study. It has been
studied because ritual is, we believe, a frequent and perhaps universal
transition stage between actual life and that peculiar contemplation of
or emotion towards life which we call art. All our long examination of
beast-dances, May-day festivals and even of Greek drama has had just
this for its object--to make clear that art--save perhaps in a few
specially

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

gifted natures--did not arise straight out of life, but out of that
collective emphasis of the needs and desires of life which we have
agreed to call ritual.

 

Our formal argument is now over and ritual may drop out of the
discussion. But we would guard against a possible misunderstanding. We
would not be taken to imply that ritual is obsolete and must drop out of
life, giving place to the art it has engendered. It may well be that,
for certain temperaments, ritual is a perennial need. Natures specially
gifted can live lives that are emotionally vivid, even in the rare high
air of art or science; but many, perhaps most of us, breathe more freely
in the *medium*, literally the *midway* space, of some collective
ritual. Moreover, for those of us who are not artists or original
thinkers the life of the imagination, and even of the emotions, has been
perhaps too long lived at second hand, received from the artist ready
made and felt. To-day, owing largely to the progress of science, and a
host of other causes social and economic, life grows daily fuller and
freer, and every manifestation of life is regarded with a new reverence.
With

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

this fresh outpouring of the spirit, this fuller consciousness of life,
there comes a need for *first-hand* emotion and expression, and that
expression is found for all classes in a revival of the ritual dance.
Some of the strenuous, exciting, self-expressive dances of to-day are of
the soil and some exotic, but, based as they mostly are on very
primitive ritual, they stand as singular evidence of this real recurrent
need. Art in these latter days goes back as it were on her own steps,
recrossing the ritual bridge back to life.

 

It remains to ask what, in the light of this ritual origin, is the
function of art? How do we relate it to other forms of life, to science,
to religion, to morality, to philosophy? These are big-sounding
questions, and towards their solution only hints here and there can be
offered, stray thoughts that have grown up out of this study of ritual
origins and which, because they have helped the writer, are offered,
with no thought of dogmatism, to the reader.

 

We English are not supposed to be an artistic people, yet art, in some
form or another, bulks large in the national life. We have theatres, a
National Gallery, we have

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

art-schools, our tradesmen provide for us "art-furniture," we even hear,
absurdly enough, of "art-colours." Moreover, all this is not a matter of
mere antiquarian interest, we do not simply go and admire the beauty of
the past in museums; a movement towards or about art is all alive and
astir among us. We have new developments of the theatre, problem plays,
Reinhardt productions, Gordon Craig scenery, Russian ballets. We have
new schools of painting treading on each other's heels with breathless
rapidity: Impressionists, Post-Impressionists, Futurists. Art--or at
least the desire for, the interest in, art--is assuredly not dead.

Moreover, and this is very important, we all feel about art a certain
obligation, such as some of us feel about religion. There is an "ought"
about it. Perhaps we do not really care much about pictures and poetry
and music, but we feel we "ought to." In the case of music it has
happily been at last recognized that if you have not an "ear" you cannot
care for it, but two generations ago, owing to the unfortunate cheapness
and popularity of keyed instruments, it was widely held that one half of
humanity, the

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

feminine half, "ought" to play the piano. This "ought" is, of course,
like most social "oughts," a very complex product, but its existence is
well worth noting.

It is worth noting because it indicates a vague feeling that art has a
real value, that art is not a mere luxury, nor even a rarefied form of
pleasure. No one feels they *ought* to take pleasure in beautiful scents
or in the touch of velvet; they either do or they don't. The first
point, then, that must be made clear is that art is of real value to
life in a perfectly clear biological sense; it invigorates, enhances,
promotes actual, spiritual, and through it physical life.

This from our historical account we should at the outset expect, because
we have seen art, by way of ritual, arose out of life. And yet the
statement is a sort of paradox, for we have seen also that art differs
from ritual just in this, that in art, whether of the spectator or the
creator, the "motor reactions," *i. e.* practical life, the life of
doing, is for the time checked. This is of the essence of the artist's
vision, that he sees things detached and therefore more vividly, more
completely, and in a different light. This is

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

of the essence of the artist's emotion, that it is purified from
personal desire.

But, though the artist's vision and emotion alike are modified,
purified, they are not devitalized. Far from that, by detachment from
action they are focussed and intensified. Life is enhanced, only it is a
different kind of life, it is the life of the image-world, of the
*imag*ination; it is the spiritual and human life, as differentiated
from the life we share with animals. It is a life we all, as human
beings, possess in some, but very varying, degrees; and the natural man
will always view the spiritual man askance, because he is not
"practical." But the life of imagination, cut off from practical
reaction as it is, becomes in turn a motor-force causing new emotions,
and so pervading the general life, and thus ultimately becoming
"practical." No one function is completely cut off from another. The
main function of art is probably to intensify and purify emotion, but it
is substantially certain that, if we did not feel, we could not think
and should not act. Still it remains true that, in artistic
contemplation and in the realms of the artist's imagination not only are
practical motor-reactions cut off,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

but intelligence is suffused in, and to some extent subordinated to,
emotion.

 

One function, then, of art is to feed and nurture the imagination and
the spirit, and thereby enhance and invigorate the whole of human life.
This is far removed from the view that the end of art is to give
pleasure. Art does usually cause pleasure, singular and intense, and to
that which causes such pleasure we give the name of Beauty. But to
produce and enjoy Beauty is not the function of art. Beauty--or rather,
the sensation of Beauty--is what the Greeks would call an *epigignomenon
ti telos*, words hard to translate, something between a by-product and a
supervening perfection, a thing like--as Aristotle <span
id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53) for once beautifully says of
pleasure--"the bloom of youth to a healthy young body."

That this is so we see most clearly in the simple fact that, when the
artist begins to aim direct at Beauty, he usually misses it. We all
know, perhaps by sad experience, that the man who seeks out pleasure for
herself fails to find her. Let him do his work

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

well for that work's sake, exercise his faculties, "energize" as
Aristotle would say, and he will find pleasure come out unawares to meet
him with her shining face; but let him look for her, think of her, even
desire her, and she hides her head. A man goes out hunting, thinks of
nothing but following the hounds and taking his fences, being in at the
death: his day is full--alas! of pleasure, though he has scarcely known
it. Let him forget the fox and the fences, think of pleasure, desire
her, and he will be in at pleasure's death.

So it is with the artist. Let him feel strongly, and see raptly--that
is, in complete detachment. Let him cast this, his rapt vision and his
intense emotion, into outside form, a statue or a painting; that form
will have about it a nameless thing, an unearthly aroma, which we call
beauty; this nameless presence will cause in the spectator a sensation
too rare to be called pleasure, and we shall call it a "sense of
beauty." But let the artist aim direct at Beauty, and she is gone, gone
before we hear the flutter of her wings.

 

The sign manual, the banner, as it were, of artistic creation is for the
creative artist not

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

pleasure, but something better called joy. Pleasure, it has been well
said, is no more than an instrument contrived by Nature to obtain from
the individual the preservation and the propagation of life. True joy is
not the lure of life, but the consciousness of the triumph of creation.
Wherever joy is, creation has been. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)
It may be the joy of a mother in the physical creation of a child; it
may be the joy of the merchant adventurer in pushing out new enterprise,
or of the engineer in building a bridge, or of the artist in a
master-piece accomplished; but it is always of the thing created. Again,
contrast joy with glory. Glory comes with success and is exceedingly
*pleasant*; it is not joyous. Some men say an artist's crown is glory;
his deepest satisfaction is in the applause of his fellows. There is no
greater mistake; we care for praise just in proportion as we are not
sure we have succeeded. To the real creative artist even praise and
glory are swallowed up in the supreme joy of creation. Only the artist
himself feels the real divine fire, but it flames over into the work of
art,

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

and even the spectator warms his hands at the glow.

We can now, I think, understand the difference between the artist and
true lover of art on the one hand, and the mere æsthete on the other.
The esthete does not produce, or, if he produces, his work is thin and
scanty. In this he differs from the artist; he does not feel so strongly
and see so clearly that he is forced to utterance. He has no joy, only
pleasure. He cannot even feel the reflection of this creative joy. In
fact, he does not so much feel as want to feel. He seeks for pleasure,
for sensual pleasure as his name says, not for the grosser kinds, but
for pleasure of that rarefied kind that we call a sense of beauty. The
esthete, like the flirt, is cold. It is not even that his senses are
easily stirred, but he seeks the sensation of stirring, and most often
feigns it, not finds it. The æsthete is no more released from his own
desires than the practical man, and he is without the practical man's
healthy outlet in action. He sees life, not indeed in relation to
action, but to his own personal sensation. By this alone he is debarred
for ever from being an artist. As M. André Beaunier

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

has well observed, by the irony of things, when we see life in relation
to ourselves we cannot really represent it at all. The profligate thinks
he knows women. It is his irony, his curse that, because he sees them
always in relation to his own desires, his own pleasure, he never really
knows them at all.

There is another important point. We have seen that art promotes a part
of life, the spiritual, image-making side. But this side, wonderful
though it is, is never the whole of actual life. There is always the
practical side. The artist is always also a man. Now the esthete tries
to make his whole attitude artistic--that is, contemplative. He is
always looking and prying and savouring, savourant, as he would say,
when he ought to be living. The result is that there is nothing to
savourer. All art springs by way of ritual out of keen emotion towards
life, and even the power to appreciate art needs this emotional reality
in the spectator. The aesthete leads at best a parasite, artistic life,
dogged always by death and corruption.

 

This brings us straight on to another question: What about Art and
Morality?

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Is Art immoral, or non-moral, or highly moral?
Here again public opinion is worth examining. Artists, we are told, are
bad husbands, and they do not pay their debts. Or if they become good
husbands and take to paying their debts, they take also to wallowing in
domesticity and produce bad art or none at all; they get tangled in the
machinery of practical reactions. Art, again, is apt to deal with risky
subjects. Where should we be if there were not a Censor of Plays? Many
of these instructive attitudes about artists as immoral or non-moral,
explain themselves instantly if we remember that the artist is *ipso
facto* detached from practical life. In so far as he is an artist, for
each and every creative moment he is inevitably a bad husband, if being
a good husband means constant attention to your wife and her interests.
Spiritual creation *a deux* is a happening so rare as to be negligible.

The remoteness of the artist, his essential inherent detachment from
motor-reaction, explains the perplexities of the normal censor. He,
being a "practical man," regards emotion and vision, feeling and ideas,
as leading to action. He does not see that art arises out

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

of ritual and that even ritual is one remove from practical life. In the
censor's world the spectacle of the nude leads straight to desire, so
the dancer must be draped; the problem-play leads straight to the
Divorce Court, therefore it must be censored. The normal censor
apparently knows nothing of that world where motor-reactions are cut
off, that house made without hands, whose doors are closed on desire,
eternal in the heavens. The censor is not for the moment a *persona
grata*, but let us give him his due. He acts according to his lights and
these often quite adequately represent the average darkness. A normal
audience contains many "practical" men whose standard is the same as
that of the normal censor. Art--that is vision detached from practical
reactions--is to them an unknown world full of moral risks from which
the artist is *quâ* artist immune.

So far we might perhaps say that art was non-moral. But the statement
would be misleading, since, as we have seen, art is in its very origin
social, and social means human and collective. Moral and social are, in
their final analysis, the same. That human,

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

collective emotion, out of which we have seen the choral dance arise, is
in its essence moral; that is, it unites. "Art," says Tolstoy, "has this
characteristic, that it unites people." In this conviction, as we shall
later see, he anticipates the modern movement of the Unanimists ([p.
249](#page_249)).

But there is another, and perhaps simpler, way in which art is moral. As
already suggested, it purifies by cutting off the motor-reactions of
personal desire. An artist deeply in love with his friend's wife once
said: "If only I could paint her and get what I want from her, I could
bear it." His wish strikes a chill at first; it sounds egotistic; it has
the peculiar, instinctive, inevitable cruelty of the artist, seeing in
human nature material for his art. But it shows us the moral side of
art. The artist was a good and sensitive man; he saw the misery he had
brought and would bring to people he loved, and he saw, or rather felt,
a way of escape; he saw that through art, through vision, through
detachment, desire might be slain, and the man within him find peace. To
some natures this instinct after art is almost their sole morality. If
they find themselves intimately entangled

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

in hate or jealousy or even contempt, so that they are unable Ito see
the object of their hate or jealousy or contempt in a clear, quiet and
lovely light, they are restless, miserable, morally out of gear, and
they are constrained to fetter or slay personal desire and so find rest.

 

This aloofness, this purgation of emotion from personal passion, art has
in common with philosophy. If the philosopher will seek after truth,
there must be, says Plotinus, a "turning away" of the spirit, a
detachment. He must aim at contemplation; action, he says, is "a
weakening of contemplation." Our word *theory*, which we use in
connection with reasoning and which comes from the same Greek root as
*theatre*, means really looking fixedly at, contemplation; it is very
near in meaning to our *imagination*. But the philosopher differs from
the artist in this: he aims not only at the contemplation of truth, but
at the ordering of truths, he seeks to make of the whole universe an
intelligible structure. Further, he is not driven by the gadfly of
creation, he is not forced to cast his images into visible or audible
shape.

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He is remoter from the push of life. Still, the
philosopher, like the artist, lives in a world of his own, with a spell
of its own near akin to beauty, and the secret of that spell is the same
detachment from the tyranny of practical life. The essence of art, says
Santayana, is "the steady contemplation of things in their order and
worth." He might have been defining philosophy.

 

If art and philosophy are thus near akin, art and science are in their
beginning, though not in their final development, contrasted. Science,
it seems, begins with the desire for practical utility. Science, as
Professor Bergson has told us, has for its initial aim the making of
tools for life. Man tries to find out the laws of Nature, that is, how
natural things behave, in order primarily that he may get the better of
them, rule over them, shape them to his ends. That is why science is at
first so near akin to magic--the cry of both is:

"I'll do, I'll do, and I'll do."

\[paragraph continues\] But, though the feet of science are thus firmly
planted on the solid ground of practical action,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

her head, too, sometimes touches the highest heavens. The real man of
science, like the philosopher, soon comes to seek truth and knowledge
for their own sake. In art, in science, in philosophy, there come
eventually the same detachment from personal desire and practical
reaction; and to artist, man of science, and philosopher alike, through
this detachment there comes at times the same peace that passeth all
understanding.

Attempts have been often made to claim for art the utility, the
tool-making property, that characterizes the beginnings of science.
Nothing is beautiful, it is sometimes said, that is not useful; the
beauty of a jug or a table depends, we are often told, on its perfect
adaptation to its use. There is here some confusion of thought and some
obvious, but possibly unconscious, special pleading. Much of art,
specially decorative art, arises out of utilities, but its aim and its
criterion is not utility. Art may be structural, commemorative, magical,
what-not, may grow up out of all manner of practical needs, but it is
not till it is cut loose from these practical needs that Art is herself
and comes to her own. This does not mean that the jugs or

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

tables are to be bad jugs or tables, still less does it mean that the
jugs or tables should be covered with senseless machine-made ornament;
but the utility of the jug or table is a good in itself independent of,
though often associated with, its merit as art.

No one has, I think, ever called Art "the handmaid of Science." There
is, indeed, no need to establish a hierarchy. Yet in a sense the
converse is true and Science is the hand-maid of Art. Art is only
practicable as we have seen, when it is possible safely to cut off
motor-reactions. By the long discipline of ritual man accustomed himself
to slacken his hold on action, and be content with a shadowy counterfeit
practice. Then last, when through knowledge he was relieved from the
need of immediate reaction to imminent realities, he loosed hold for a
moment altogether, and was free to look, and art was born. He can never
quit his hold for long; but it would seem that, as science advances and
life gets easier and easier, safer and safer, he may loose his hold for
longer spaces. Man subdues the world about him first by force and then
by reason; and when the material world is mastered and lies at his beck,
he needs brute force no longer,

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

and needs reason no more to make tools for conquest. He is free to think
for thought's sake, he may trust intuition once again, and above all
dare to lose himself in contemplation, dare to be more and more an
artist. Only here there lurks an almost ironical danger. Emotion towards
life is the primary stuff of which art is made; there might be a
shortage of this very emotional stuff of which art herself is ultimately
compacted.

Science, then, helps to make art possible by making life safer and
easier, it "makes straight in the desert a highway for our God." But
only rarely and with special limitations easily understood does it
provide actual material for art. Science deals with abstractions,
concepts, class names, made by the intellect for convenience, that we
may handle life on the side desirable to us. When we classify things,
give them class-names, we simply mean that we note for convenience that
certain actually existing objects have similar qualities, a fact it is
convenient for us to know and register. These class-names being
*abstract*--that is, bundles of qualities rent away from living actual
objects, do not easily stir emotion, and, therefore, do not

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

easily become material for art whose function it is to express and
communicate emotion. Particular qualities, like love, honour, faith, may
and *do* stir emotion; and certain bundles of qualities like, for
example, motherhood tend towards personification; but the normal class
label like horse, man, triangle does not easily become material for art;
it remains a practical utility for science.

The abstractions, the class-names of science are in this respect quite
different from those other abstractions or unrealities already
studied--the gods of primitive religion. The very term we use shows
this. *Abstractions* are things, qualities, *dragged away* consciously
by the intellect, from actual things objectively existing. The primitive
gods are personifications--*i. e.* collective emotions taking shape in
imagined form. Dionysos has no more actual, objective existence than the
abstract horse. But the god Dionysos was not made by the intellect for
practical convenience, he was begotten by emotion, and, therefore, he
re-begets it. He and all the other gods are, therefore, the proper
material for art; he is, indeed, one of the earliest forms of art. The
abstract horse,

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

on the other hand, is the outcome of reflection. We must honour him as
of quite extraordinary use for the purposes of practical life, but he
leaves us cold and, by the artist, is best neglected.

 

There remains the relation of Art to Religion. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) By now, it may be hoped, this relation is
transparently clear. The whole object of the present book has been to
show how primitive art grew out of ritual, how art is in fact but a
later and more sublimated, more detached form of ritual. We saw further
that the primitive gods themselves were but projections or, if we like
it better, personifications of the rite. They arose straight out of it.

Now we say advisedly "primitive gods," and this with no intention of
obscurantism. The god of later days, the unknown source of life, the
unresolved mystery of the world, is not begotten of a rite, is not,
essentially not, the occasion or object of art. With his relation to
art--which is indeed practically nonexistent--we have nothing to do. Of
the other

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

gods we may safely say that not only are they objects of art, they are
its prime material; in a word, primitive theology is an early stage in
the formation of art. Each primitive god, like the rite from which he
sprang, is a half-way house between practical life and art; he comes
into being from a half, but only half, inhibited desire.

 

Is there, then, no difference, except in degree of detachment, between
religion and art? Both have the like emotional power; both carry with
them a sense of obligation, though the obligation of religion is the
stronger. But there is one infallible criterion between the two which is
all-important, and of wide-reaching consequences. Primitive religion
asserts that her imaginations have objective existence; art more happily
makes no such claim. The worshipper of Apollo believes, not only that he
has imagined the lovely figure of the god and cast a copy of its shape
in stone, but he also believes that in the outside world the god Apollo
exists as an object. Now this is certainly untrue; that is, it does not
correspond with fact. There is no such thing as the god Apollo, and

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

science makes a clean sweep of Apollo and Dionysos and all such
fictitious objectivities; they are *eidola*, idols, phantasms, not
objective realities. Apollo fades earlier than Dionysos because the
worshipper of Dionysos keeps hold of *the* reality that he and his
church or group have projected the god. He knows that *prier, c’est
élaborer Dieu*; or, as he would put it, he is "one with" his god.
Religion has this in common with art, that it discredits the actual
practical world; but only because it creates a new world and insists on
its actuality and objectivity.

Why does the conception of a god impose obligation? Just because and in
so far as he claims to have objective existence. By giving to his god
from the outset objective existence the worshipper prevents his god from
taking his place in that high kingdom of spiritual realities which is
the imagination, and sets him down in that lower objective world which
always compels practical reaction. What might have been an ideal becomes
an idol. Straightway this objectified idol compels all sorts of ritual
reactions of prayer and praise and sacrifice. It is as though another
and a more exacting and

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

commanding fellow-man were added to the universe. But a moment's
reflection will show that, when we pass from the vague sense of power or
*mana* felt by the savage to the personal god, to Dionysos or Apollo,
though it may seem a set back it is a real advance. It is the
substitution of a human and tolerably humane power for an incalculable
whimsical and often cruel force. The idol is a step towards, not a step
from, the ideal. Ritual makes these idols, and it is the business of
science to shatter them and set the spirit free for contemplation.
Ritual must wane that art may wax.

But we must never forget that ritual is the bridge by which man passes,
the ladder by which he climbs from earth to heaven. The bridge must not
be broken till the transit is made. And the time is not yet. We must not
pull down the ladder till we are sure the last angel has climbed. Only
then, at last, we dare not leave it standing. Earth pulls hard, and it
may be that the angels who ascended might *de*scend and be for ever
fallen.

 

It may be well at the close of our enquiry to test the conclusions at
which we have

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

arrived by comparing them with certain *endoxa*, as Aristotle would call
them, that is, opinions and theories actually current at the present
moment. We take these con-temporary controversies, not implying that
they are necessarily of high moment in the history of art, or that they
are in any fundamental sense new discoveries; but because they are at
this moment current and vital, and consequently form a good test for the
adequacy of our doctrines. It will be satisfactory if we find our view
includes these current opinions, even if it to some extent modifies them
and, it may be hoped, sets them in a new light.

We have already considered the theory that holds art to be the creation
or pursuit or enjoyment of beauty. The other view falls readily into two
groups:

 

\(1\) The "imitation" theory, with its modification, the idealization
theory, which holds that art either copies Nature, or, out of natural
materials, improves on her.

\(2\) The "expression" theory, which holds that the aim of art is to
express the emotions and thoughts of the artist.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

The "Imitation" theory is out of fashion now-a-days. Plato and Aristotle
held it; though Aristotle, as we have seen, did not mean by "imitating
Nature" quite what we mean to-day. The Imitation theory began to die
down with the rise of Romanticism, which stressed the personal,
individual emotion of the artist. Whistler dealt it a rude,
ill-considered blow by his effective, but really foolish and irrelevant,
remark that to attempt to create Art by imitating Nature was "like
trying to make music by sitting on the piano." But, as already noted,
the Imitation theory of art was really killed by the invention of
photography. It was impossible for the most insensate not to see that in
a work of art, of sculpture or painting, there was an element of value
not to be found in the exact transcript of a photograph. Henceforth the
Imitation theory lived on only in the weakened form of Idealization.

The reaction against the Imitation theory has naturally and inevitably
gone much too far. We have "thrown out the child with the bath-water."
All through the present book we have tried to show that art *arises
from* ritual, and ritual is in its essence a faded

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

action, an imitation. Moreover, every work of art *is* a copy of
something, only not a copy of anything having actual existence in the
outside world. Rather it is a copy of that inner and highly
emotionalized vision of the artist which it is granted to him to see and
recreate when he is released from certain practical reactions.

 

The Impressionism that dominated the pictorial art of the later years of
the nineteenth century was largely a modified and very delicate
imitation. Breaking with conventions as to how things are *supposed to
be*--conventions mainly based not on seeing but on knowing or
imagining--the Impressionist insists on purging his vision from
knowledge, and representing things not as they are but as they really
*look*. He imitates Nature not as a whole, but as she presents herself
to his eyes. It was a most needful and valuable purgation, since
painting is the art proper of the eye. But, when the new effects of the
world as simply *seen*, the new material of light and shadow and tone,
had been to some extent--never completely--mastered, there was
inevitable reaction. Up sprang Post-Impressionists

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

and Futurists. They will not gladly be classed together, but both have
this in common--they are Expressionists, not Impressionists, not
Imitators.

The Expressionists, no matter by what name they call themselves, have
one criterion. They believe that art is not the copying or idealizing of
Nature, or of any aspect of Nature, but the expression and communication
of the artist's emotion. We can see that, between them and the
Imitationists, the Impressionists form a delicate bridge. They, too,
focus their attention on the artist rather than the object, only it is
on the artist's particular vision, his impression, what he actually
sees, not on his emotion, what he feels.

Modern life is *not* simple--cannot be simple--ought not to be; it is
not for nothing that we are heirs to the ages. Therefore the art that
utters and expresses our emotion towards modern life cannot be simple;
and, moreover, it must before all things embody not only that living
tangle which is felt by the Futurists as so real, but it must purge and
order it, by complexities of tone and rhythm hitherto unattempted. One
art, beyond all others, has blossomed into real, spontaneous,
unconscious

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

life to-day, and that is Music; the other arts stand round arrayed, half
paralyzed, with drooping, empty hands. The nineteenth century saw vast
developments in an art that could express abstract, unlocalized,
unpersonified feelings more completely than painting or poetry, the art
of Music.

 

As a modern critic <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) has well observed
"In tone and rhythm music has a notation for every kind and degree of
action and passion, presenting abstract moulds of its excitement,
fluctuation, suspense, crisis, appeasement; and all this *anonymously*,
without place, actors, circumstances, named or described, without a word
spoken. Poetry has to supply definite thought, arguments driving at a
conclusion, ideas mortgaged to this or that creed or system; and to give
force to these can command only a few rhythms limited by the duration of
a human breath and the pitch of an octave. The little effects worked out
in this small compass music sweeps up and builds into vast fabrics of
emotion with a dissolute freedom undreamed of in any other art."

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

It may be that music provides for a century too stagnant and listless to
act out its own emotions, too reflective to be frankly sensuous, a
shadowy pageant of sense and emotion, that serves as a *katharsis* or
purgation.

Anyhow, "an art that came out of the old world two centuries ago, with a
few chants, love-songs, and dances; that a century ago was still tied to
the words of a mass or an opera; or threading little dance-movements
together in a 'suite,' became in the last century this extraordinary
debauch, in which the man who has never seen a battle, loved a woman, or
worshipped a god, may not only ideally, but through the response of his
nerves and pulses to immediate rhythmical attack, enjoy the ghosts of
struggle, rapture, and exaltation with a volume and intricacy, an
anguish, a triumph, an irresponsibility, unheard of. An amplified
pattern of action and emotion is given: each man may fit to it what
images he will." <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57)

 

If our contention throughout this book be correct the Expressionists are
in one matter abundantly right. Art, we have seen, again

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

and again rises by way of ritual out of emotion, out of life keenly and
vividly livid. The younger generation are always talking of life; they
have a sort of cult of life. Some of the more valorous spirits among
them even tend to disparage art that life may be the more exalted. "Stop
painting and sculping," they cry, "and go and see a football match."
There you have life! Life is, undoubtedly, essential to art because life
is the stuff of emotion, but some thinkers and artists have an oddly
limited notion of what life is. It must, it seems, in the first place,
be essentially physical. To sit and dream in your study is not to live.
The reason of this odd limitation is easy to see. We all think life is
especially the sort of life we are not living ourselves. The hard-worked
University professor thinks that "Life" is to be found in a French
*café*; the polished London journalist looks for "Life" among the naked
Polynesians. The cult of savagery, and even of simplicity, in every
form, simply spells complex civilization and diminished physical
vitality.

The Expressionist is, then, triumphantly right in the stress he lays on
emotion; but he is not right if he limits life to certain of

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

its more elementary manifestations; and still less is he right, to our
minds, in making life and art in any sense coextensive. Art, as we have
seen, sustains and invigorates life, but only does it by withdrawal from
these very same elementary forms of life, by inhibiting certain sensuous
reactions.

 

In another matter one section of Expressionists, the Futurists, are in
the main right. The emotion to be expressed is the emotion of to-day, or
still better to-morrow. The mimetic dance arose not only nor chiefly out
of reflection on the past; but out of either immediate joy or imminent
fear or insistent hope for the future. We are not prepared perhaps to go
all lengths, to "burn all museums" because of their contagious
corruption, though we might be prepared to "banish the nude for the
space of ten years." If there is to be any true living art, it must
arise, not from the contemplation of Greek statues, not from the revival
of folk-songs, not even from the re-enacting of Greek plays, but from a
keen emotion felt towards things and people living to-day, in modern
conditions, including, among other and deeper forms of life, the haste
and

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

hurry of the modern street, the whirr of motor cars and aeroplanes.

There are artists alive to-day, strayed revellers, who wish themselves
back in the Middle Ages, who long for the time when each man would have
his house carved with a bit of lovely ornament, when every village
church had its Madonna and Child, when, in a word, art and life and
religion went hand in hand, not sharply sundered by castes and
professions. But we may not put back the clock, and, if by
differentiation we lose some-thing, we gain much. The old choral dance
on the orchestral floor was an undifferentiated thing, it had a beauty
of its own; but by its differentiation, by the severance of artist and
actors and spectators, we have gained--the drama. We may not cast
reluctant eyes back-wards; the world goes forward to new forms of life,
and the Churches of to-day must and should become the Museums of
to-morrow.

 

It is curious and instructive to note that Tolstoy's theory of Art,
though not his practice, is essentially Expressive and even approaches
the dogmas of the Futurist. Art is to him just the transmission of
personal

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

emotion to others. It may be bad emotion or it may be good emotion,
emotion it must be. To take his simple and instructive instance: a boy
goes out into a wood and meets a wolf, he is frightened, he comes back
and tells the other villagers what he felt, how he went to the wood
feeling happy and light-hearted and the wolf came, and what the wolf
looked like, and how he began to be frightened. This is, according to
Tolstoy, art. Even if the boy never saw a wolf at all, if he had really
at another time been frightened, and if he was able to conjure up fear
in himself and communicate it to others--that also would be art. The
essential is, according to Tolstoy, that he should feel himself and so
represent his feeling that he communicates it to others. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) Art-schools, art-professionalism,
art-criticism are all useless or worse than useless, because they cannot
teach a man to feel. Only life can do that.

All art is, according to Tolstoi, good *quâ* 

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

art that succeeds in transmitting emotion. But there is good emotion and
bad emotion, and the only right material for art is good emotion, and
the only good emotion, the only emotion worth expressing, is subsumed,
according to Tolstoy, in the religion of the day. This is how he
explains the constant affinity in nearly all ages of art and religion.
Instead of regarding religion as an early phase of art, he proceeds to
define religious perception as the highest social ideal of the moment,
as that "understanding of the meaning of life which represents the
highest level to which men of that society have attained, an
understanding defining the highest good at which that society aims."
"Religious perception in a society," he beautifully adds, "is like the
direction of a flowing river. If the river flows at all, it must have a
direction." Thus, religion, to Tolstoy, is not dogma, not petrifaction,
it makes indeed dogma impossible. The religious perception of to-day
flows, Tolstoi says, in the Christian channel towards the union of man
in a common brotherhood. It is the business of the modern artist to feel
and transmit emotion towards this unity of man.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

Now it is not our purpose to examine whether Tolstoy's definition of
religion is adequate or indeed illuminating. What we wish to note is
that he grasps the truth that in art we must look and feel, and look and
feel forward, not backward, if we would live. Art somehow, like
language, is always feeling forward to newer, fuller, subtler emotions.
She seems indeed in a way to feel ahead even of science; a poet will
forecast dimly what a later discovery will confirm. Whether and how long
old channels, old forms will suffice for the new spirit can never be
foreseen.

 

We end with a point of great importance, though the doctrine we would
emphasize may be to some a hard saying, even a stumbling-block. Art, as
Tolstoy divined, is social, not individual. Art is, as we have seen,
social in origin, it remains and must remain social in function. The
dance from which the drama rose was a choral dance, the dance of a band,
a group, a church, a community, what the Greeks called a *thiasos*. The
word means a *band* and a *thing of demotion*; and reverence, devotion,
collective emotion, is social in its very being. That band was, to

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

begin with, as we saw, the whole collection of initiated tribesmen,
linked by a common name, rallying round a common symbol.

Even to-day, when individualism is rampant, art bears traces of its
collective, social origin. We feel about it, as noted before, a certain
"ought" which always spells social obligation. Moreover, whenever we
have a new movement in art, it issues from a group, usually from a small
professional coterie, but marked by strong social instincts, by a
missionary spirit, by intemperate zeal in propaganda, by a tendency,
always social, to crystallize conviction into dogma. We can scarcely,
unless we are as high-hearted as Tolstoy, hope now-a-days for an art
that shall be world-wide. The tribe is extinct, the family in its old
rigid form moribund, the social groups we now look to as centres of
emotion are the groups of industry, of professionalism and of sheer
mutual attraction. Small and strange though such groups may appear, they
are real social factors.

Now this social, collective element in art is too apt to be forgotten.
When an artist claims that expression is the aim of art he is too apt to
mean self-expression only--

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

utterance of individual emotion. Utterance of individual emotion is very
closely neighboured by, is almost identical with, self-enhancement. What
should be a generous, and in part altruistic, exaltation becomes mere
*megalomania*. This egotism is, of course, a danger inherent in all art.
The suspension of motor-reactions to the practical world isolates the
artist, cuts him off from his fellow-men, makes him in a sense an
egotist. Art, said Zola, is "the world seen through a temperament." But
this suspension is, not that he should turn inward to feed on his own
vitals, but rather to free him for contemplation. All great art releases
from self.

 

The young are often temporary artists; art. being based on life, calls
for a strong vitality. The young are also self-centred and seek
self-enhancement. This need of self-expression is a sort of artistic
impulse. The young are. partly from sheer immaturity, still more through
a foolish convention, shut out from real life; they are secluded, forced
to become in a sense artists, or, if they have not the power for that,
at least self-aggrandizers. They write lyric poems, they love
masquerading,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

they focus life on to themselves in a way which, later on, life itself
makes impossible. This pseudo-art, this self-aggrandizement usually dies
a natural death before the age of thirty. If it live on, one remedy is,
of course, the scientific attitude; that attitude which is bent on
considering and discovering the relations of things among themselves,
not their personal relation to us. The study of science is a priceless
discipline in self-abnegation, but only in negation; it looses us from
self, it does not link us to others. The real and natural remedy for the
egotism of youth is Life, not necessarily the haunting of *cafés*, or
even the watching of football matches, but strenuous activity in the
simplest human relations of daily happenings. "Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do it with thy might."

 

There is always apt to be some discord between the artist and the large
practical world in which he lives, but those ages are happiest in which
the discord is least. The nineteenth century, amid its splendid
achievements in science and industry, in government and learning, and
above all in humanity, illustrates this conflict in an interesting way.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

\[paragraph continues\] To literature, an art which can explain itself,
the great public world lent on the whole a reverent and intelligent ear.
Its great prose writers were at peace with their audience and were
inspired by great public interests. Some of the greatest, for example
Tolstoy, produced their finest work on widely human subjects, and
numbered their readers and admirers probably by the million. Writers
like Dickens, Thackeray, Kingsley, Mill, and Carlyle, even poets like
Tennyson and Browning, were full of great public interests and causes,
and, in different degrees and at different stages of their lives, were
thoroughly and immensely popular. On the other hand, one can find, at
the beginning of the period, figures like Blake and Shelley, and all
through it a number of painters--the pre-Raphaelites, the
Impressionists--walking like aliens in a Philistine world. Even great
figures like Burne-Jones and Whistler were for the greater part of their
lives unrecognized or mocked at. Millais reached the attention of the
world, but was thought by the stricter fraternity to have in some sense
or other sold his soul and committed the great sin of considering the
bourgeois. The bourgeois should be despised not partially

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

but completely. His life, his interests, his code of ethics and conduct
must all be matters of entire indifference or amused contempt, to the
true artist who intends to do his own true work and call his soul his
own.

At a certain moment, during the eighties and nineties, it looked as if
these doctrines were generally accepted, and the divorce between art and
the community had become permanent. But it seems as if this attitude,
which coincided with a period of reaction in political matters and a
recrudescence of a belief in force and on reasoned authority, is already
passing away. There are not wanting signs that art, both in painting and
sculpture, and in poetry and novel-writing, is beginning again to
realize its social function, beginning to be impatient of mere
individual emotion, beginning to aim at something bigger, more bound up
with a feeling towards and for the common weal.

Take work like that of Mr. Galsworthy or Mr. Masefield or Mr. Arnold
Bennett. With-out appraising its merits or demerits we cannot but note
that the social sense is always there, whether it be of a class or of a
whole community. In a play like *Justice* the writer

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

does not "express" himself, he does not, even merely show the pathos of
a single human being's destiny, he sets before us a much bigger
thing--man tragically caught and torn in the iron hands of a man-made
machine, Society itself. Incarnate Law is the protagonist, and, as it
happens, the villain of the piece. It is a fragment of *Les Misérables*
over again, in a severer and more restrained technique. An art like this
starts, no doubt, from emotion towards personal happenings--there is
nothing else from which it can start; but, even as it sets sail for
wider seas, it is loosed from personal moorings.

Science has given us back something strangely like a World-Soul, and art
is beginning to feel she must utter our emotion towards it. Such art is
exposed to an inherent and imminent peril. Its very bigness and newness
tends to set up fresh and powerful reactions. Unless, in the process of
creation, these can be inhibited, the artist will be lost in the
reformer, and the play or the novel turn tract. This does not mean that
the artist, if he is strong enough, may not be reformer too, only not at
the moment of creation.

The art of Mr. Arnold Bennett gets its

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

bigness, its collectivity, in part--from extension over time. Far from
seeking after beauty, he almost goes out to embrace ugliness. He does
not spare us even dullness, that we may get a sense of the long, waste
spaces of life, their dreary reality. We are keenly interested in the
loves of hero and heroine, but all the time something much bigger is
going on, generation after generation rolls by in ceaseless panorama; it
is the life not of Edwin and Hilda, it is the life of the Five Towns.
After a vision so big, to come back to the ordinary individualistic
love-story is like looking through the wrong end of a telescope.

Art of high quality and calibre is seldom obscure. The great popular
writers of the nineteenth century--Dickens, Thackeray, Tennyson,
Tolstoy--wrote so that all could understand. A really big artist has
something important to say, something vast to show, something that moves
him and presses on him; and he will say it simply because he must get it
said. He will trick it out with no devices, most of all with no
obscurities. It has vexed and torn him enough while it was pushing its
way to be born. He has no peace till it is said, and said as clearly as
he

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

may. He says it, not consciously for the sake of others, but for
himself, to ease him from the burden of big thought. Moreover, art,
whose business is to transmit emotion, should need no commentary. Art
comes out of *theoria*, contemplation, steady looking at, but never out
of *theory*. Theory can neither engender nor finally support it. An
exhibition of pictures with an explanatory catalogue, scientifically
interesting though it may be, stands, in a sense, self-condemned.

We must, however, remember that all art is not of the whole community.
There are small groups feeling their own small but still collective
emotion, fashioning their own language, obscure sometimes to all but
them-selves. They are right so to fashion it, but, if they appeal to a
wider world, they must strive to speak in the vulgar tongue,
understanded of the people.

 

It is, indeed, a hopeful sign of the times, a mark of the revival of
social as contrasted with merely individualistic instincts that a
younger generation of poets, at least in France, tend to form themselves
into small groups, held together not merely by eccentricities

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

of language or garb, but by some deep inner conviction strongly held in
common. Such a unity of spirit is seen in the works of the latter group
of thinkers and writers known as *Unanimists*. They tried and failed to
found a community. Their doctrine, if doctrine convictions so fluid can
be called, is strangely like the old group-religion of the common dance,
only more articulate. Of the Unanimist it might truly be said, "*il
buvait l’indistinction*." To him the harsh old Roman mandate *Divide et
impera*, "Divide men that you may rule them," spells death. His dream is
not of empire and personal property but of the realization of life,
common to all. To this school the great reality is the social group,
whatever form it take, family, village or town. Their only dogma is the
unity and immeasurable sanctity of life. In practice they are Christian,
yet wholly free from the asceticism of modern Christianity. Their
attitude in art is as remote as possible from, it is indeed the very
antithesis to, the æsthetic exclusiveness of the close of last century.
Like St. Peter, the Unanimists have seen a sheet let down and heard a
voice from heaven saying: "Call thou nothing common nor unclean."

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

Above all, the Unanimist remembers and realizes afresh the old truth
that "no man liveth unto himself." According to the Expressionist's
creed, as we have seen, the end of art is to utter and communicate
emotion. The fullest and finest emotions are those one human being feels
towards another. Every sympathy is an enrichment of life, every
antipathy a negation. It follows then, that, for the Unanimist, Love is
the fulfilling of his Law.

It is a beautiful and life-giving faith, felt and with a perfect
sincerity expressed towards all nature by the Indian poet Tagore, and
towards humanity especially by M. Vildrac in his *Book of Love* ("Livre
d’Amour"). He tells us in his "Commentary" how to-day the poet, sitting
at home with pen and paper before him, feels that he is pent in, stifled
by himself. He had been about to re-tell the old, old story of himself,
to set himself once more on the stage of his poem--the same old dusty
self tricked out, costumed anew. Suddenly he knows the figure to be
tawdry and shameful. He is hot all over when he looks at it; he must out
into the air, into the street, out of the stuffy museum

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

where so long he has stirred the dead egotist ashes, out into the bigger
life, the life of his fellows; he must live, with them, by them, in
them.

"I am weary of deeds done inside myself,  
I am weary of voyages inside myself,  
And of heroism wrought by strokes of the pen,  
And of a beauty made up of formulæ.

"I am ashamed of lying to my work,  
Of my work lying to my life,  
And of being able to content myself,  
By burning sweet spices,  
With the mouldering smell that is master here."

Again, in "The Conquerors," the poet dreams of the Victorious One who
has no army, the Knight who rides afoot, the Crusader without breviary
or scrip, the Pilgrim of Love who, by the shining in his eyes, draws all
men to him, and they in turn draw other men until, at last:

"The time came in the land,  
The time of the Great Conquest, <span id="page_252">p. 252</span>  
When the people with this desire  
Left the threshold of their door  
To go forth towards one another.

"And the time came in the land  
When to fill all its story  
There was nothing but songs in unison,  
*One round danced about the houses*,  
One battle and one victory."

And so our tale ends where it began, with the Choral Dance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[211:1](aar09.htm#fr_53) *Ethics*, X, 4.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[213:1](aar09.htm#fr_54) H. Bergson, *Life and
Consciousness*, Huxley Lecture, May 29, 1911.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[225:1](aar09.htm#fr_55) Religion is here used
as meaning the worship of some form of god, as the practical counterpart
of theology.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[233:1](aar09.htm#fr_56) Mr. D. S. MacColl.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[234:1](aar09.htm#fr_57) D. S. MacColl,
*Nineteenth Century Art*, p. 21. (1902.)

<span id="fn_58"></span>[238:1](aar09.htm#fr_58) It is interesting to
find, since the above was written, that the Confession of Faith
published in the catalogue of the Second Post-Impressionist Exhibition
(1912, p. 21) reproduces, consciously or unconsciously, Tolstoy's view:
We have ceased to ask, "What does this picture represent?" and ask
instead, "What does it make us feel?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](aar10)
