[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aar09)  [Next](aar11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

# BIBLIOGRAPHY

Fox Ancient and Primitive Ritual the best general book of reference is:

FRAZER, J. G. *The Golden Bough*, 3rd edition, 1911, from which most of
the instances in the present manual are taken. Part IV of *The Golden
Bough*, *i. e.* the section dealing with *Adonis, Attis, and Osiris*,
should especially be consulted.

Also an earlier, epoch-making book:

ROBERTSON SMITH, W. *Lectures on the Religion of the Semites*, 1889. For
certain fundamental ritual notions, *e. g.* sacrifice, holiness, etc.

For the Greek Drama, as arising out of the ritual dance: Professor
GILBERT MURRAY'S *Excursus on the Ritual Forms preserved in Greek
Tragedy* in J. E. HARRISON'S *Themis*, 1912, and pp. 327--40 in the same
book; and for the religion of Dionysos and the drama, J. E. HARRISON'S
*Prolegomena*, 1907, Chapters VIII and X. For the fusion of the ritual
dance and hero-worship, see Dr. W. LEAF, *Homer and History*, 1915,
Chapter VII. For a quite different view of drama as arising wholly from
the worship of the dead, see Professor W. RIDGEWAY, *The Origin of
Tragedy*, 1910. An important discussion of the relation of *tragedy* to
the winter festival of the *Lenaia* will appear in Mr. A. B. COOK'S
forthcoming Zeus, vol. i, sec. 6 (xxi).

 

For Primitive Art:

HIRN, Y. *The Origins of Art*, 1900. The main theory of the book the
present writer believes to be inadequate, but it contains an excellent
collection of facts relating to Art, Magic, Art and Work, Mimetic
Dances, etc., and much valuable discussion of principles.

GROSSE, E. *The Beginnings of Art*, 1897, in the Chicago Anthropological
Series. Valuable for its full illustrations of primitive art, as well as
for text.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

For the Theory of Art:

TOLSTOY, L. *What is Art?* Translated by Aylmer Maude, in the Scott
Library.

FRY, ROGER E. *An Essay in Æsthetics*, in the New Quarterly, April 1909,
p. 174.

This is the best general statement of the function of Art known to me.
It should be read in connection with Mr. Bullough's article, quoted on
[p. 129](aar07.htm#page_129), which gives the psycho-logical basis of a
similar view of the nature of art. My own theory was formulated
independently, in relation to the development of the Greek theatre, but
I am very glad to find that it is in substantial agreement with those of
two such distinguished authorities on esthetics. For my later
conclusions on art, see *Alpha and Omega*, 1915, pp. 208-220.

For more advanced students:

DUSSAUZE, HENRI. *Les Règles esthétiques et les lois du sentiment*,
1911.

MÜLLER-FREIENFELS, R. *Psychologie der Kunst*, 1912.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](aar11)
