[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt10)  [Next](kt12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 10. Wî'wag\*êsawê?.

Tradition of the <u>L</u>ê'<u>L</u>E<u>g</u>êd, a clan of the ?wâlas
Kwâ'g\*û~~l~~.

(*Dictated by Yâ'gô<u>L</u>as*, 1900)

The people lived at Xukwê'k\*<u>î</u>n. They staid at the salmon-weir.
Then they went up river to see whether salmon were jumping. Then one
jumped. Wî'wag\*êsawê? started and went up the river to look at his
salmon-weir. The fish went right into his salmon-weir. It was a sockeye.
Then he went on up the river to look for jumping salmon. Then he saw two
jumping. He walked up the river to look at his salmon-weir. Then two
were in his trap. He took them and roasted them. Day came again. He went
on up the river to look for jumping salmon. Then

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

three were jumping. He went up the river and looked at his salmon-weir,
and three were in it. He took them and roasted them. And day came again.
He went up the river. Then he discovered a pretty woman on the trail. He
went right up to her. "I will have you for wife," he said. "Yes, I will
have you for husband," said the woman. Then Wî'wag\*êsawê? sat down on
the ground and put his arms around the neck of the woman. He waited to
cohabit with her. Then they cohabited.

Then Wî'wag\*êsawê? arose. "Come, and let us go home."--"Go on," said
the woman. Then Wî'wag\*êsawê? started and turned his head back, and
there was a big frog sitting on four coppers; and he went home and sat
down in the house. Then his stomach was sick. Night came, and he had a
swollen belly. His belly sounded. Frogs whistled in the belly of
Wî'wag\*êsawê?. Then he was brought to Land-Slide, the frogs being in
his belly. He continued to groan on account of the sickness of his
belly. Then (a whale) was heard blowing, and the noise arrived the
beach. A man who had a cape on went up from the beach. "What is the
matter with you!"--"Has it not unfortunately gone wrong with me? I tried
in vain to get supernatural power. Behold! it was she who is named
Copper-Noise-Woman. I tried to get her for my supernatural treasure."
Then the man said, on his part, "Put me on your body. Do you recognize
me?" said the man. "I am Property-Noise. I am Whale." A whale was the
man. He had only come and struck the beach and landed. Then he treated
Wî'wag\*êsawê? with medicine, and squeezed out the belly of
Wî'wag\*êsawê?. There were a great many frogs. Then he did away with
them all. "Now you are alive," he was told by the Whale. "Have you no
x\*ûlê?" said the Whale. "What is called x\*ûlê?" said, on his part,
Wî'wag\*êsawê?. "This, that belongs to the

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

salmon."--"Oh! this is salmon-roe," said, on his part, to the Whale.
"Now I am going," said the Whale. "Now your name shall be Property-Body.
Now your name shall be Reef. These shall be your names. Go to the place
where you came from."

Then Wî'wag\*êsawê? went up the river to his place,
K\*!â'~~l~~k\*!ämEndzês. There was no salmon. Then he went up the river,
walking along the rocks. Then he discovered people at the salmon-weir.
He shouted to them, "What are you doing at my river?"--"Is that your
river?" said the men. "Is it yours?" said Wî'wag\*êsawê?. "It is ours,"
said the men. "But what is the name of your river?"--"You are foolish
that you want me to say this, that I should give the names of my
salmon-weirs. Isn't this G\*<u>î</u>p!ä'? Isn't that
Dâ'yu<u>x</u>wîwê<sup>?</sup>? Is not that on the other Tsê'sk\*as?
These are my salmon-weirs. To what tribe do you belong--you funny
fellows?"--"Are we not Ravens?"--"Oh, wonder! really the river is yours.
Now I will go up to my traps." Then he followed the Ravens to his river
at Xukwê'k\*in.

Then he went down the river, and built a house at the lower side. He
made a house site and dug up the ground, and he made an embankment of
soil; and the house site of the Ravens was called K\*!<u>î</u>'msê?las.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. The Dzô'noq!wa](kt12)
