[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt11)  [Next](kt13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 11. The Dzô'noq!wa.

(*Dictated by Yâ'<u>g</u>ô<u>L</u>as, a ?nE'm<u>g</u>ês*, 1900.)

A child was crying. Then it was \[sent\] told, "Go to sleep, else the
Dzô'noq!wa will pick you up in her arms." Thus was said. Its grandmother
tried to frighten it. Then the child arose in the house and went out at
night. Then it screamed when the one came who took it. (The

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

child) entered its house. "Why are you afraid?" said its grandmother. It
looks like a big person with a hairy hand. It looks like a big person
with a hairy hand."

"They only tried to frighten you. Go!\` she said. Then the child arose
and went Out. As soon as (the child) showed its face, it screamed, and
it was picked up by the Dzô'noq!wa in her arms. It was taken down
(underground). Then her (the child's) grandmothers and her father and
her mother went out and tried to dig after their child. It cried aloud
underground. Sometimes it would come nearer, and sometimes it would
move. Then they gave it up. Then the child was taken upward, and was
taken inland. It was taken to the house of the Dzô'noq!wa. Then the
child broke off hemlock-branches and threw them down, that it might know
the trail if it should escape. Then they, arrived at the house of the
Dzô'noq!wa. Immediately the child was given tallow to eat. There were
many crab-apples and dried berries and dried meat, and many skins.

Then (the Dzô'noq!wa saw) the child. "Oh, oh!" she said, "how was it
done? Your ear-ornaments are nice. Please lend me your
ear-ornaments."--"Have you holes in your ears?" said the child to the
Dzô'noq!wa. "Not I, master."--"Then don't say so in vain."--"Go on, make
holes in my ears."--"But you are not at all able to bear the way in
which punches were driven through my ears."--"What were they driven
with?"--"With these branches. It was done by my father." Then the child
took a branch. "Lie down on your back. Where is your hammer, that I may
drive them in?" Then (the child) put them on top and drove in (the
branches). Then the Dzô'noq!wa, screamed. "Don't do this in vain (you
don't need to do it)," said the child. "Go on, master," said the
Dzô'noq!wa. Then (the child) struck with the hammer again, and the
branches went right through the

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

ears of the Dzô'noq!wa, and she was nailed to the floor. The floor was
very thick. Then (the child) also punched (a branch) through the other
side, and it also went through into the floor. (The child) took four
branches, and there were four holes in her ears. Then the Dzô'noq!wa was
dead. She just said "Oh!" and, behold! she died. Then the child pushed
her into the fire and burned her.

The child went out and went straight on the trail. It saw the
hemlock-branches which it had broken and thrown on the ground. Then it
arrived behind the house, and it heard its tribe, singing the
mourning-song on account of their child. Then the child started; and
when the whole tribe had gone into the house, it arose and jumped in.
Then it was stared at. Its father and mother dropped clown. Then one man
arose and took it in his arms and questioned it. "Tell us what has
happened to you. What was it that took you?"--"Indeed, the Dzô'noq!wa
carried me away."--"How did you save yourself? How did you come
back?"--"Did she not wish for my ear-ornaments? I said, 'Only you cannot
bear what was done to me. My ears were punched by my father.' That is
the way I did it: I punched branches through the ears of the Dzô'noq!wa.
Now she is dead," said the child. 'Let us go and carry on our backs all
kinds of things,--cranberries, dried berries, dried meats,
mountain-goat, and many skins." Then day came, and the many tribes
started. They carried everything on their backs, and arrived in the
house. There was only the head in the house. Then strong men carried
(the goods) on their backs. They carried cranberries and crabapples and
dried berries and many skins, and they arrived at the house of the
child's father. Then they went to the child's father, and the child's
father gave a feast to the tribe. Then he distributed the skins among
the tribes, and he became a chief

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

on account of his potlatch to the tribes with the magic treasure that
his child had obtained. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. The Mink Legend](kt13)
