[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt23)  [Next](kt25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mink imitates his Hosts.

(Dictated by Yâ'<u>g</u>ô<u>L</u>as, a ?nE'm<u>g</u>ês, 1900.)

The people were invited by Thrush-Woman to go to a feast with their
friends. They sat down in the house, and Thrush-Woman arose and broke
salmon-berry bushes, and huckle-berry bushes. Then she put down a dish,
and put salmon-berry bushes and huckle-berry bushes by its side. Then
Thrush-Woman said, "WâxwaxolîdzElî'dzElî'dzElî'! Then the salmon-berry
bushes became green. Then she said again, "WâxwaxolîdzElî'dzElî'dzElî'!"
and the salmon-berries and the huckle-berries became red. Then she said
again, "WâxwaxolîdzElî'dzElî'dzElî'!"," and all the salmon-berries and
huckle-berries became ripe. Then she put them into a dish and placed
them before the guests, and the salmon-berries were eaten with spoons.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then they finished and went home. "Mother," said
Born-to-be-the-Sun, "I want very much to give a feast."--"You don't say
so! What provisions may you have for a feast," said Mother. "Shall I not
do just the same as my, friend did when she just broke the
salmon-berries and huckle-berries?"--"You are like her!" Then
Born-to-be-the-Sun invited Thrush-Woman and Sparrow and Water-Ousel and
Hawk. "We shall dine at Born-to-be-the-Sun's. "We will go at once," they
said. The guests came, and sat down in the house. Then
Born-to-be-the-Sun broke off salmon-berries and huckle-berries, and took
a dish and put the salmon-berries by its side. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun
said "WâxwaxolîdzElî'dzElî'dzElî'!" but there was not one (berry); and
again he said "WâxwaxolîdzElî'dzElî'dzElî'!" Nothing. Then again he said
"WâxwaxolîdzElî'dzElî'dzElî'!" just one little green one was there.
Those whom he tried to invite just went out. "I tried to tell you that
she would make you ashamed." Thus said Mother to him.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Then Water-Ousel invited Born-to-be-the-Sun and his friends. They came
and sat down. Then he took a dish, and stretched out his foot over the
rim. Then he struck the side of his foot, and salmon-eggs came out. Then
the dish was full. Then he put the dishes before his guests. He
finished. They went out, and Born-to-be-the-Sun took the rest of the
salmon-eggs home. "Mother," said Born-to-be-the-Sun, "let me give, a
feast also."--"And what may you have to give a feast with?"--"But shall
I not do the same as my friend Water-Ousel has done?"--"You are the same
as he is! Everything about you is quite different."--"What should be
difficult about it?"--"Go on, you ugly one, who makes (me) really
ashamed!" Then Born-to-be-the-Sun invited (people) in.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

"We will eat with spoons," he said to his friends. His friends came and
sat down in the house. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun took a dish, and
Born-to-be-the-Sun stretched out his foot over the dish. Then he struck
the side of his foot. One little salmon-roe was there. Then those whom
he had invited in vain just went out.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Then Hawk invited his friends in. The guests came and sat down in the
house. Then he went out and put on his hawk garment. He sat on the end
of a pole which stuck out over the water. He said, "MESê' mESê'
mESe'k<sup>u</sup> mESe'k<sup>u</sup>!" Then a steel-head salmon swam
along; and he took it with his talons, and took it to the house and
roasted it, that his friends might eat it whole. Then they finished, and
went out and went home. Born-to-be-the-Sun went to his house. "Mother,
let me also invite (the people)."--"Don't say so. Again you want to do
that, and what have you got to give a feast with?"--"Can I not just
borrow the hawk garment of my friend Hawk?"--"This little thing will
really make (me) ashamed. You think you will succeed, because you have
no sense or shame," said Mother. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun invited his
friends. They came and sat down. Then he went to borrow (the hawk
garment). "Friend, let me borrow your hawk garment."--"Go and take it."
Then Born-to-be-the-Sun put on the bird garment, and sat down on the end
of a pole sticking out over the water. Then Born-to-be-the-Sun said,
"MESê' mESê' mESe'k<sup>u</sup> mESe'k<sup>u</sup>!" A steel-head salmon
came. He tried to grasp it with his talons. He only fell into the water;
and he just paddled ashore with his wings. Then he was advised by his
friends, "Don't try to jump. Just let yourself drop down." Then he
spread his wings to dry the bird garment.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Now they became dry. He said, "MESê' mESê'
mESe'k<sup>u</sup> mESe'k<sup>u</sup>!" and a spring salmon came. Then
he jumped and soared. Then the intestines of Born-to-be-the-Sun just
hung down, and Born-to-be-the-Sun just hung from the top of the tree.
Then he was taken by his friends. "What are you doing?"--"I don't know,"
said Born-to-be-the-Sun. Then his friends went out. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mink goes to make War with his Friend Land-Otter](kt25)
