[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt54)  [Next](kt56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ô'?mâ~~l~~ obtains the Tides.

Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ borrowed the head of the squid and put it on his head,
and went to his house and cried, "Oh, my good younger brother, my good
younger brother, died at Sea!" Thus said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Then the news was
reported to Wolf. "Ô'?mâ~~l~~ has a hard time. His younger brother died
at sea." Thus was said to Wolf. Then Deer was put down on the ground
behind the house of Ô'?mâ~~l~~.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Wolf came and went around the place where the
box with the Deer was. Then he felt with his tail for Deer. "Swing it
about, swing it about, swing it about!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Then he again
felt with his tail for Deer. Then Deer took his knife and cut off the
tail of Wolf. He was just notched behind. The Wolf had no tail.

 

Then Deer went out of the grave-box. Ô'?mâ~~l~~ entered, and said,
"Split, split, split!" Then there was a fire in the house, and (the
tail) was pushed into the wood (like a peg). Then the Mouse went and
told Wolf. "Oh, great one! your tail has been put up." Thus said Mouse.
Then Wolf said, "Don't! Don't do this in the house to my fellow-warrior!
(The sea) shall run down two fingers' widths, and the barnacles shall
emerge." Thus said Wolf. Then Mouse went. "Don't do this in the house!
Stop in the house!" Thus said Mouse. "It shall be two finger-widths. The
barnacles shall emerge."--"The barnacles are too little," said
Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "Farther down, farther down, farther down!"

 

Then the tail of Wolf was lowered, and Mouse started, going to the house
of Wolf. "Yours has only been lowered." Thus said Mouse to Wolf. "Don't,
don't do this in the house! The clams shall emerge." Thus said Wolf.
Then Mouse went again. "Don't do this! Stop in the house. The clams
shall emerge."--"That is too little," said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "Farther down,
farther down, farther down," said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Then they put down the
tail of Wolf. Mouse went again. "Your tail has just been lowered," said
Mouse. "Don't, don't do that in the house. It shall never be flood-tide
in the world. They shall only carry

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

up from the beach fishes,--halibut, red-cod, black-cod." Mouse started.
"Don't do this in the house, stop, in the house!" said Mouse. "Your
world will be dry." Thus said Mouse. Then Wolf got his tail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ô'?mâ~~l~~ Paints the Birds](kt56)
