[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt56)  [Next](kt58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ô'?mâ~~l~~ obtains Daylight.

Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ tried to get our daylight. He quickly became the child
of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman (the gull). Then Daylight-Receptacle-Woman
gave birth to her child, and the child of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman
quickly began to speak. Then he said that he wanted to play with a toy
canoe. Therefore his mother, Daylight-Receptacle-Woman, made a toy canoe
for him. Then the child of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman spoke again, and
said that he wanted to paddle on the water. His mother,
Daylight-Receptacle-Woman, tried to forbid him, but he just cried,
therefore she launched the canoe. Then he spoke again,

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

and desired to have the daylight-receptacle of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman
in the bow of the canoe. She tried to deny, him the daylight-receptacle.
Then that child, the son of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman, cried very much,
and after that the daylight-receptacle was taken. He desired to have the
daylight-receptacle in the bow of the canoe. Then it was put into the
bow of the canoe, and he paddled. "Don't go too far," said
Daylight-Receptacle-Woman to her child. Then he paddled by, in front of
the house of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman. "Forget, forget, forget!" said
the child of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman. Behold! it was he, Ô'?mâ~~l~~.
Then Daylight-Receptacle-Woman forgot her child. Then he paddled and
stole the daylight-receptacle of Daylight-Receptacle-Woman. Therefore we
have the daylight of our world. (Before) it never used to get daylight.
It was always night in our world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ô'?mâ~~l~~ gambles with Gull](kt58)
