[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt57)  [Next](kt59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ô'?mâ~~l~~ gambles with Gull.

Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ said that he would gamble with Gull. He gambled with
Gull, and Ô'?mâ~~l~~ staked his bear-skin blanket, and Gull also staked
his blanket against Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Then he gambled with Gull, and
Ô'?mâ~~l~~ lost to Gull. "Hungry, hungry, hungry!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~ to
Gull. "Hë!" Gull. "I am hungry." Thus said Gull. "Oh, you said are
hungry!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "Yes, I am hungry."--"Let me point at the pit
of your stomach," (said Ô'?mâ~~l~~). Then he pointed at the pit of
Gull's stomach. Ô'?mâ~~l~~ arose and pointed at the pit of the stomach
of Gull. Then Gull screamed, and vomited the food in his belly. Herring
was the food in his belly. Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ took the food that had been
in the belly of Gull and started for his canoe, and rubbed it inside
with the herring. Then he also rubbed the outside, and his hat and his

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

bailer. He rubbed everything in the canoe. Then he paddled, and arrived
at the house of Wealthy. He went up from the beach, and sat down on the
floor of the house of Wealthy. "Hë!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~, "I am tired of my
work." Thus said Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "What have you been working?" said Wealthy
to Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "These great many herrings that came up," said
Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "Ha, ha!" said Wealthy, and laughed. "Where should they come
from?" Thus said Wealthy to Ô'?mâ~~l~~. "Go and look at my canoe," said
Ô'?mâ~~l~~. Then Mouse went and came back. "It is true," said Mouse.
"Then let us pull down the (room) faced with boards." Thus said Wealthy
to Mouse. Then the (room) faced with boards were pulled down, and great
masses of herrings rushed out. Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ was down on his stomach
among the herrings. He went out of the house of Wealthy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ô'?mâ~~l~~ imitates his Hosts](kt59)
