[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt59)  [Next](kt61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Ô'?mâ~~l~~ kills the Thunder-Birds.

Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ considered what to do \[looked at his heart\]; and he
was going to make war against the Thunder-Bird. He took poles and made a
whale of them. Then the work of Ô'?mâ~~l~~ was finished. Then he sent
Mink to borrow the whale mask of the Whale. Mink started. "I was told by
Ô'?mâ~~l~~ to borrow your whale mask." Thus said Mink. Then Whale
gave-him the whale mask. "Don't try to open it," said Whale to Mink.
Then Mink started on the trail. He untied the bag. A small piece of root
was in it. Then it spouted, and came up to blow on the ground. Mink
returned to Whale. Then, "Come, take your whale mask," said Mink to
Whale.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The Whale started. What should there be! Behold!
the whale mask of Whale came up blowing on the beach. Then Whale folded
up his whale mask and put it into the bag, and it was an old piece of
root In the bag, of the whale mask of Whale. Mink started, and arrived
at Ô'?mâ~~l~~'s (house). Then Ô'?mâ~~l~~ went into the whale that he had
made of poles.

Then the younger brothers of Ô'?mâ~~l~~ got ready, and they all went
into the whale. "I shall be in the spout-hole," said Mink. Then the
whale went down and came up below (the house of) Thunder-Bird.

The father of Thunder-Bird was sitting on the ground. Then he saw the
whale. "Come, One-Whale-Carrier!" he said to his child. Then he put on
his thunder-bird mask and went to grasp it. He just lifted the face of
the whale. Then Mink was grasped. "Tsâ, tsâ," said Mink when he was
grasped. Then Thunder-Bird was struck. His eye was stung by the wasp. He
was killed by Grizzly Bear and the Wolf. Then Thunder-Bird was dead.

"Come, Two-Whale-Carrier!" said the father. Then Two-Whale-Carrier
arose, put on his thunder-bird mask, and grasped (the whale). Then he
lifted it out of the water, and Two-Whale-Carrier was also killed.

"Come, it is wrong with your younger brothers on the water," said the
father. Then Three-Whale- Carrier arose, put on his thunder-bird mask,
and grasped (the whale). He lifted it higher. Then the Grizzly Bear, the
Wolves, and the Black Bear also struck him. His face was covered by the
squid, and he fell down.

"Come, arise, Four-Whale-Carrier!" Then he arose and put on his
thunder-bird mask and grasped (the whale). There just began to be the
sound of dripping water. Then he carried it to the beach of his house.
"Unfold,

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

unfold, unfold, unfold!" said Ô'?mâ~~l~~ to his folding canoe. Then it
lay across the doorway. Then (the Thunder-Bird) fell down when it came
to the beach. Then those were all killed that might have grasped those
who go paddling about.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. Hâ'da<u>g</u>a (Raven-Sound-in-House).](kt61)
