[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt60)  [Next](kt62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 19. Hâ'da<u>g</u>a (Raven-Sound-in-House).

Traditions of the L!a'L!asiqwEla.

(*Recorded by George Hunt*.)

Now I will tell you a story about the ancestors of Those-who-throw-away,
a clan of the Sea-Dwellers. It is said that the village of the ancestors
of Those-who-throwaway was at River-in-Front. Their chief was
Raven-Sound-in-House, and his princess was Hâ'da-Woman; and he had for
his attendants Smell-of-Canoe and Staying-in-Canoe, and
Expert-Canoe-Calker; and Hâ'da-Woman and Winter-Dance-Woman were
friends.

They would all the time walk down to the beach at the other side of the
point of the village. Hâ'da-Woman had two dogs; and she had a
grandmother, an old woman. Chief Raven-Sound-in-House was really proud;
and his tribe were happy on account of the number of the tribe; and it
is said Hâ'da-Woman and Winter-Dance-Woman did not follow their tribe
when they invited one another. One fine day when it was low water,
Winter-Dance-Woman asked Hâ'da-Woman to go to the other side of the
point of the village. Hâ'da-Woman got ready at once, and the friends
went down to the beach. They were going to dig clams on the beach.
Winter-Dance-Woman went ahead, and Hâ'da-Woman followed her.

Now, Winter-Dance-Woman saw some sea-urchins, and

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

she picked up four of them. When she had just taken the four
sea-urchins, Hâ'da-Woman came up to her. Then Winter-Dance-Woman spoke,
and said, "O Hâ'da-Woman! Now do eat these sea-eggs, for they are really
good." Thus she said to her. Hâ'da-Woman replied to her, and said, "O
Winter-Dance-Woman! Don't say that, for I do not wish to be seen eating
sea-eggs." Thus she said to her. Then Winter-Dance-Woman spoke again,
and said, "Oh, I am not going to talk about you, for you really desire
to eat the sea-eggs." Thus she said to her.

Then Hâ'da-Woman believed what the one who was wiser than she said. She
broke the sea-eggs and ate them. Winter-Dance-Woman was just watching
her. After she had eaten two, Winter-Dance-Woman spoke, and said,
"K\*âx, k\*âx, k\*âx, she is eating on the rocks, she is eating on the
rocks, she is eating on the rocks, the princess of
Raven-Sound-in-House!" Thus she said. Hâ'da-Woman tried to forbid her to
act in this manner; but she only shouted louder, saying "K\*âx, k\*âx,
k\*âx, she is eating on the rocks, she is eating on the rocks, she is
eating on the rocks, this princess of Raven-Sound-in-House!" Hâ'da-Woman
tried in vain to take her four arm-rings, and said, "O
Winter-Dance-Woman! I will pay you with these my four arm-rings if you
will not talk about my eating sea-eggs." Thus she said to her.
Winter-Dance-Woman just went up a small hill, turned towards the
village, and said again, "K\*âx, k\*âx, k\*âx, mâ'wawô, mâ'wawô,
mâ'wawô, she is eating sea-eggs on the rocks, she is eating sea-eggs on
the rocks, she is eating sea-eggs on the rocks, this princess of
Raven-Sound-in-House!" Thus she said.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

Now she was heard by the people in the village, and the tribe understood
her. Then Winter-Dance-Woman ran and went home; and as soon as she
arrived at the house of Raven-Sound-in-House, she said to him, "K\*âx,
k\*âx, k\*âx, mâ'wawô, mâ'wawô, mâ'wawô; she is eating sea-eggs on the
rocks, she is eating sea-eggs on the rocks, she is eating sea-eggs on
the rocks the princess of Raven-Sound-in-House!" Then
Raven-Sound-in-House spoke, and said, "Let us move, let us move, let us
move, let us move, you, my younger brothers;" and at once his tribe
pulled down the roof-boards of their houses, and they loaded them on
their canoes; and as soon as they were all on board,
Raven-Sound-in-House put out the fires in the houses, and they started.
They were going to a good beach, the name of which is Kelp-Place.

Now they said that Raven-Sound-in-House did not know that his mother had
gone and buried a burning slow-match (made of) fern-root. The old woman
had put it into a clam-shell.

 

Raven-Sound-in-House and his tribe began to build houses at Kelp-Place.
In the evening Hâ'da-Woman, with her two dogs, came home. Then she saw
that the village site was quite bare (without a house). Then she
gathered together old mats to make a roof for her little house. She was
hard up for something to start a fire, for all the fires on the ground
were extinguished, and her dogs were hungry. Then they scratched the old
fireplaces, and there it is said one of the dogs found buried under the
floor of the house a burning slow-match made of fern-root. Hâ'da-Woman
took it at once, and she started a fire with it. Now she began to have a

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

fire in this manner. Then she worked at her house, and she also went to
dig shell-fish for her food.

When she had finished, she felt downcast. Her two dogs were lying down
on the ground, and Hâ'da-Woman tried to speak to them. She said, "Oh,
you dog, I wish you were a man, that I might send you for what I want to
get, I mean cedar-twigs to make a fish-trap." Then the dog spoke. "What
do you think I am? Am I not a man? Will I not go and get them?" Thus he
said to her. Then, it is said, the dog went out of the house, and
Hâ'da-Woman spoke to the other dog. She said to him, "O dog! I wish you
were a man, that I might send you to go and get spruce-root to tie my
fish-trap that I am going to make." Thus she said. Immediately the dog
answered, and said, "Oh, what do you think I am? Am I not a man?" Thus
he said, and went out of the house.

 

It was not long before the two dogs came and entered the house, carrying
on their backs cedar-twigs and the spruce-roots which they had gone to
get, and they put them down on the floor of the house. Immediately
Hâ'da-Woman took the cedar-twigs and put them on the fire, and she took
the tongs and stripped the bark off the cedar-twigs. As soon as the bark
of the twigs was off, she split the spruce-roots; and when the roots
were split, she at once wove a basket. She made a fish-trap. It did not
take long before she had finished two fish-traps; and she plaited a rope
out of the bark of the cedar-twigs for an anchor-line for her
fish-traps.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

Now it was evening; and in the morning, when day came again, she arose
early. Immediately Hâ'da-Woman carried the two fish-traps in her hands.
She carried them down to the rocks. She was going to the point of land.
Then she sent the two dogs to go and get some mussels. The speaking dogs
went at once, and it was not long before the dogs came back, bringing
many mussels. Hâ'da-Woman took the mussels at once and broke them to
pieces, and threw them into the fish-traps. Then she threw one of the
traps into the water; and she said, "I want to obtain Wealthiest in this
trap." Thus said Hâ'da-Woman. Then she took the other fish-trap and
threw it into the water, and said, "O fish-trap! I want you to catch the
prince of Wealthiest." Thus she said. The fish-traps had not been under
water long when she pulled them up again. They were really full of
kelp-fish. Then Hâ'da-Woman spoke, and said, "Why did you come, for,
working on this rock I did not want to catch you. I am trying to catch
Wealthiest on this rock." Thus she said, while she poured the kelp-fish
out on the rock.

 

Then she again threw the fish-trap into the water, and said, "Now you
will catch Wealthiest." Thus she said to it. Then she pulled up also the
other fish-trap, and it is said it was full of really large kelp-fish;
and Hâ'da-Woman at once said what she had said before. Then she also
said, "O you! I don't want to catch you, working on this rock. I want to
catch the prince of Wealthiest on this rock." Thus she said. Then she
poured them

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

out on the rock. Then she threw the fish-trap again into the water, and
said, "That is what I wish for. It is that you catch Wealthiest." Thus
she said to it.

Then she pulled up the basket-trap again, and it was full of kelp-fish.
Then Hâ'da-Woman said, "O you! I am not working for you on this rock. I
am trying to catch the prince of Wealthiest on the rock." Thus she said
while she poured them out. Then she threw the fish-trap into the water
again, and again she pulled it up. Then she saw a really handsome man
sitting in the fish-trap; and a little small box was at one end in the
fish-trap, and a little house was put down in the other corner of the
fish-trap. As soon as Hâ'da-Woman saw the handsome man, she spoke, and
said to him, "Are you Wealthiest, whom I am trying to catch in my
fish-trap?" Thus she said to him. The handsome man replied to her at
once, and said on his part, "O you! I am the prince of Chief Wealthiest.
I will have you for my wife." Thus he said to her. Hâ'da-Woman spoke at
once, and said, "Thank you, my dear! I am poor now. Come, and let us go
up from the beach." Thus she said.

 

Then the handsome man took the little box and the little house out of
the fish-trap, and he carried them. The name of the place where
Hâ'da-Woman caught the prince of Wealthiest is Having-Fish-Traps. As
soon as the handsome man came up to the high-water mark, he put down his
little box, and he took off the cover of the box, and he took out of it
a little small whale, and he put it down at the foot of the bushes; and
he took out another whale also; and as soon as he had put it down

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

on the beach, the two whales became large. Then the handsome man spoke,
and said, "This food is given to me by my father." Thus he said to her.
Then Hâ'da-Woman spoke, and said, "Oh, my dear, welcome! Let us go to my
house." Thus she said to him. Then they went up from the beach, and they
entered the house covered with old mats. As soon as he saw the house of
Hâ'da-Woman, he spoke, and said, "Let us go and clear from bushes (a
place) ten fathoms in length and ten fathoms in breadth." Thus he said
to her, and went out of the house made of old mats. Then Hâ'da-Woman and
the handsome man began to work together; and it did not take them long
before they finished working. Then the handsome man took the small house
and put it down on the ground in the middle of \[their work\] the place
they had cleared. As soon as he had put the small house on the ground,
it became large, and the large house had a snapping door. Then he took
(out of the box) all kinds of things to eat, and grease-dishes.

 

Then his house was finished, and the prince of Wealthiest really had
Hâ'da-Woman for his wife. As soon as they were husband and wife,
Hâ'da-Woman spoke to her two dogs in the evening. She said, "Go on,
howl! and this is what you shall say. 'Howl! for the tribe of this my
mother.' Thus you will say," she said to them. Immediately the dogs
howled. Then night came; and in the morning, when day came, Hâ'da-Woman
heard the sound as though

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

really many people were talking. Then she arose and went out of her
house. As soon as she had gone out of the door of her house, she saw
four large houses north of her house; and she turned her face southward
from the house, and she saw four large houses. They were really full of
men and their wives. The house of Hâ'da-Woman was in the middle of the
village. Hâ'da-Woman did not know where these many tribes came from.
Immediately the many tribes felt happy. They visited each other, and
they began to carve the two large whales. The many tribes treated the
prince of Wealthiest as their chief.

 

When Hâ'da-Woman had carved the whales, she saw a sea-gull woman flying
along, and Hâ'da-Woman spoke to her while she was flying, saying, "O
Daylight-Receptacle! I wish you were a person, that I might send
something on your back to my grandmother." Thus she said to her.
Immediately the Sea-Gull-Woman replied, and said to her, "Am I not a
person? Go on, and send something \[to me\] on my back." Thus said
Daylight-Receptacle to her. Hâ'da-Woman at once made a package of
whale-blubber, and hung it on the back of Daylight-Receptacle; and
Hâ'da-Woman said to her, "O Daylight-Receptacle! I send this blubber to
the old woman who will be seen by you crying on the beach. Then report
to her that I am well, and also that I have this Copper-Maker for my
husband." Thus she said to her.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

Then Daylight-Receptacle flew away, and went northward to
River-in-Front. It was not long before she saw an old woman mending her
blanket, and she was crying. Then Daylight-Receptacle sat down by her
side, and repeated the word (that was sent) to the old woman; and she
gave the blubber to her. The old woman began to eat of the package at
once.

 

Some of the grandchildren of Raven-Sound-in-House were playing on the
beach at the place where the old woman was sitting. At this place the
children saw her biting a piece of what was sent to her. Then the old
woman was asked by the children what she was doing, for the old woman
was chewing something after she had bitten the blanket that she was
mending. The old woman just went home to the house of
Raven-Sound-in-House, and she just sat down in a corner of the house,
for the tribe of Raven-Sound-in-House were really hungry. Then the old
woman was watched by the children while she put the end of the blubber
through the blanket she was mending. She pretended to bite what she was
mending. Then the children saw that the old woman was chewing some food,
and they went and told Raven-Sound-in-House. Raven-Sound-in-House went
at once and questioned the old woman. Then the old woman got really
angry at Raven-Sound-in-House, and she threw the blubber at him. Then
Raven-Sound-in-House said, "Ah! where did you get this piece of
blubber?" Thus he said to her. Then the old woman spoke, and said, "Oh,
you ugly one! The sea at the place where Hâ'da-Woman stays smells (of
blubber); and it is said that she has Copper-Maker,

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

the prince of Wealthiest, for her husband." Thus she said to him.

Raven-Sound-in-House at once made a request of his three attendants,
Smell-of-Canoe, Staying-in-Canoe, and Expert-Canoe-Calker, and said,
"Let us go in our canoe to Place-without-Landing to get some mussels."
Thus he said to them. Immediately they got ready and went aboard the
canoe that was anchored out at sea. He was going to get mussels, for he
knew that Hâ'da-Woman desired mussels. Therefore he wished to go for
mussels, for he was going to make up with his princess. He was wearing a
bear-skin blanket. Now they arrived at Place-without-Landing, and they
quickly gathered the mussels. As soon as they had done so, they came
paddling along, and went to River-in-Front.

 

Hâ'da-Woman and her husband were sitting on the summer seat outside of
their house when Raven-Sound-in-House came in sight. Hâ'da-Woman
recognized him at once, and she spoke to her husband, and requested that
they should go into the house because her father was coming. Thus she
said to him. Therefore Copper-Maker and his wife at once went into the
house, and they barred the door of the house. Then Raven-Sound-in-House
arrived at the beach of the house, and went up from the beach. He
knocked at the door of the large house, and said, "O Hâ'da-Woman! open
the door, my dear! I have brought some mussels for you from
Place-without-Landing." Thus he said to her. It was not long

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

before Copper-Maker opened the door of the house, and he saw his
father-in-law wearing the bear-skin blanket.

Then Copper-Maker invited them in, and gave Raven-Sound-in-House and his
three attendants the dried edge of some red cod to eat. Then Hâ'da-Woman
took a small grease-dish with a bowl as large as the thumb of a man; and
Hâ'da-Woman whispered under the small grease-dish, and said, "O
grease-dish! keep full." Thus she said to it. Then Hâ'da-Woman put the
small grease-dish and the dried edge of red cod before her father.
Raven-Sound-in-House spoke at once to his three attendants, and said,
"Oh, you Smell-of-Canoe, and you Staying-in-Canoe, and you also
Expert-Canoe-Calker! don't dip your food in this whale-oil, that I may
eat alone for a while." Now the little grease-dish was full, and in vain
he dipped into the whale-oil. The whale-oil never decreased. Then
Raven-Sound-in-House put really much whale-oil on what he was eating,
and he did not know that the whale-oil was going right through him (and
out) at his anus. The floor of the house was just overflowing with
whale-oil where he was sitting. Afterwards he broke wind. Then
Raven-Sound-in-House said, "Oh, my new bear-skin blanket creaks!" Thus
he said to them. Then Hâ'da-Woman became ashamed of her father, and he
was driven out of the house. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 20. NômasE'nxêlis (Oldest-One-in-the-World)](kt62)
