[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt61)  [Next](kt63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

# 20. NômasE'nxêlis (Oldest-One-in-the-World).

Tradition of the L!a'L!asiqwEla.

(Recorded by George Hunt.)

Oldest-One-in-the-World and his tribe lived at Red-Sand-Beach; and
Oldest-One-in-the-World had for his princess Man y-colored-Woman, and
the woman was blind. Many-colored-Woman had twelve slaves; and she would
always go to ?ne?wê'd, where there is wild rice. For a long time she was
in the habit of going there; and a long pole stood outside of the house
of Chief Oldest-One-in-the-World, and on top of the long pole an eagle
was sitting; and it screeched all the time whenever Many-colored-Woman
went out paddling with her twelve slaves. Thus Many-colored-Woman knew
which way they were going, on account of the princess-pole.

 

One day the sea was very smooth, and Many-colored-Woman asked her slaves
to go to ?ne?wê'd. The slaves were content. They had been paddling a
long time when Many-colored-Woman questioned her slaves, and said, "O
slaves! why does it take so long before we arrive at ?ne?wê'd," Thus she
said. One of them spoke, and said, "O mistress! we cannot make any
headway against the tide." Thus he said. Then Many-colored-Woman began
to hear the screeching of the eagle faintly. She hardly heard it. Then
Many-colored-Woman spoke again, and said, "O slaves! what are you
doing?" Thus she said, and took away their paddles and threw them into
the water. Then she knew that they were intending to paddle away with
their mistress.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

Now they were just drifting about on the sea. They were overtaken by
night, and day came. Then it was foggy, and Many-colored-Woman could not
hear her princess-pole. Then they just went to sleep again. They were
again overtaken by night; and in the morning, when daylight came, they
heard their canoe, when they were waking, going through something like
ice. They looked, and saw that there was much charcoal. Then they found
that it was the place named Charcoal-at-North-End-of-World. They went
through it, for there was a strong tide. Therefore they went through the
charcoal. Night came again; and in the morning, when day came, one of
them heard the canoe again running through something. He raised his head
and looked, and he saw sand floating on the sea; and they knew now that
they were at the place named Floating-Sands.

 

That is where the charcoal of all the fireplaces of the houses of the
villages goes from all around the world. It drifts to the place named
Charcoal-at-North-End-of-World, and the sand that is dry on the surface
drifts to Sand-floating-on-the-Sea.

They went through it. Again night came; and in the morning, when
daylight came, they heard the canoe striking against something hard. One
of the slaves again raised his head and saw much driftwood; and this is
named Driftwood-floating-on-the-Sea. There all the driftwood goes that
comes from all around our world.

 

It is said they passed right through it, and again night came. In the
morning, when day came again, one of the slaves saw that it was shallow
where they were drifting

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

along. Their canoe almost went aground on the sand. They passed over
this place; and when evening came, they saw a country far off. It was
just as though the land was drawing the canoe towards it. The slaves did
not feel like sleeping, because they felt glad on account of the islands
that were in sight.

 

Then they all felt giddy, and they all went to sleep. In the morning,
when daylight came, Many-colored-Woman wakened her slaves, for she had
heard that the canoe was knocking against something like land. One of
the slaves raised his head, and he saw that there was a fine sandy
beach, and many houses were there. Then the slave wakened his
fellow-slaves; and as soon as they were all awake, they saw a handsome
young man coming towards the visitors. As soon as the man arrived at the
side of the canoe, he went straight to the place where
Many-colored-Woman was sitting, and he took hold of her hand. The man
asked Many-colored-Woman, "What brought you here, my dear?" Thus he
said. Many-colored-Woman replied at once, and said, "Oh, my dear! this
is what brought me here: I came to have you for my husband, my dear!"
Thus she said to him. Immediately the handsome man spoke thankfully on
account of what Many-colored-Woman had said; and the man said, "Let us
go up from the beach to my house." Thus he said to her.

 

Then they went up from the beach, and Many-colored-Woman held the hand
of the man. Now the wise one

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

among the slaves spoke to the handsome man. H e said, "Oh, my dear! take
good care of this woman. She is the princess of Oldest-One-in-the-World.
She is blind." Thus he said to him. Immediately they went up from the
beach and entered through the snapping door of the house. As soon as
they had gone in, the handsome man spoke, and said to
Many-colored-Woman, "Welcome, my dear! Go and bathe in the pond of water
of life in the house." Thus he said.

 

Immediately Many-colored-Woman spoke gratefully on account of what he
had said. She came to the corner of the large house, and the man asked
Many-colored-Woman to take off her blanket. Many-colored-Woman took off
her blanket and her apron, and the man took her on his arms and made her
sit down in the water of life. Then the man said, "Oh, my dear! now
dive. Dive four times." Thus he said. Immediately Many-colored-Woman
dived; and as soon as she came up again, she was able to see our
daylight. She dived again, and she continued to dive until she had done
so four times. As soon as she had finished, she was a young woman, and
she was no longer blind. Immediately Many-colored-Woman was called out
of the water by her husband. Then Many-colored-Woman was able to see
everything in the house. It is said that the two posts in the rear of
the house were thunder-birds, and sea-bears were under the two
thunder-birds; and it is said the cross-piece over the thunder-bird
posts was a sea-lion, and the posts on each side of the door of the
house were each one sea-lion,

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

and the cross-piece of the post was one sea-lion; and she also saw a
carved figure standing at the right-hand side of the door of the house.

As soon as the slaves of Many-colored-Woman came in, the carved
figure <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) spoke, and said, "O chief,
Abelone-Shell-of-the-World! O chief! treat those well who come into your
house, chief." (This is the indwelling power of Chief Wealthy.) Then she
saw many feast-dishes,--four seal dishes and the same number of
killer-whale dishes, and four whale dishes, and four sea-otter dishes.

 

Now, Abelone-Shell-of-the-World and Many-colored-Woman were living as
husband and wife. They had not been married long when Many-colored-
Woman was with child, and she gave birth to a small boy.
Abelone-Shell-of-the-World at once named his son Copper-Maker.

Many-colored-Woman did not know who the old man was who was always lying
in the rear of the large house. She asked her husband, and said, "Who is
that ugly old man lying in the rear of the house?" Thus
Many-colored-Woman said to her husband. Abelone-Shell-of-the-World
laughed, and said, "Oh, my dear! that is Wealthiest, Copper-Maker. He is
my father." Thus he said to her. Then Many-colored-Woman was happy,
because she knew that her husband was an important person.

Then she was again with child, and it was not long before she gave birth
to a little boy. Abelone-Shell-of-the-World

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

at once named his son Seaside-of-the-World. Then Many-colored-Woman was
very glad on account of her two children; and it was not long before she
was again with child, and she gave birth to a little boy; and
Abelone-Shell-of-the-World gave one of his own names to his son. Then he
had the name Copper-Surface. Now she had three children.

 

Now, Many-colored-Woman had forgotten her parents on account of her
children. After a long time she was again with child, and she gave birth
to a boy, and she called her son Place-of-Desire. A long time passed,
and the four children of Many-colored-Woman grew up.

 

One day the four children were left alone, because she had gone out to
dig clams. The four boys played, and Place-of-Desire fell down where
Copper-Maker was lying on his back. Then Copper-Maker became angry at
Place-of-Desire, and he said, "O children! go away. The reason why you
came here is not known, children." Thus said Copper-Maker to his
grandchildren. At once the eldest of the brothers spoke, and said to his
younger brothers, "Don't play. The word that the old man said to us is
important." Thus he said, and they went out of the house. As soon as
Many-colored-Woman came home, the eldest one called his mother out of
the house. He said, "O mother! how did you come into this country?" Thus
he said to her. At once Many-colored- Woman replied to their words, and
said, "O children! my slaves

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

paddled away with me, and I was carried by the tide to this place where
we are now." Thus she said.

The children said at once that they would go to see their grandfather;
and Many-colored-Woman advised her children, and said to them, "O sons!
the name of my father is Oldest-One-in-the-World, and the long pole with
an eagle sitting on top of it stands outside his house. The eagle
screeches all the time;" and she told them about the shallow water, and
the floating sand on the sea, and the drifting logs floating on the sea,
and the Charcoal-at-North-End-of-World. (She continued,) "These you will
meet if you are minded to go to see your grandfather."

 

The eldest son spoke at once, and said to his mother, "We will escape,
for I do not want our father to know it. We will only say that we will
go to see the world." The children got ready at once. They took the old
canoe and calked it; and as soon as the old canoe was finished, they got
ready; and Abelone-Shell-of-the-World questioned his sons, and said, "O
sons! what are you getting ready for?" Thus he said to them. The oldest
one spoke, and said, "Oh, we are getting ready for this: we want to go
and see the world." Thus he said. Then Abelone-Shell-of-the-World just
laughed, and said, "My sons, don't conceal your wishes: just tell me
that you are going to see your grandfather, Oldest-One-in-the-World. You
shall use the self-paddling copper canoe." Thus he said to them. Then
he--namely, Abelone-Shell-of-the-World--

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

took the four baskets, and put into them all kinds of things, and he put
them aboard the self-paddling canoe. Then he told Many-colored-Woman
that she should also come aboard; but she was unwilling, and she just
sent her children (and told them) to go and just leave her.

 

They started at once, and they steered towards the sun. Then they met
what Many-colored-Woman had referred to,--what had been seen by her at
the places where she had been paddling. Three days after they had left
their father, they heard an eagle screeching. Then the four sons of
Many-colored-Woman felt glad. It was evening when they arrived at
Red-Sand-Beach, and they went in their canoes right to the beach of the
large house in front of which a pole was standing on top of which the
eagle was sitting. At once Place-of-Desire was sent by his elder
brothers. Place-of-Desire at once went to look at the large house. There
was no one sitting in the house. Then he went to look at a small house.
There he saw two old people, husband and wife. Place-of-Desire
questioned the man, and said, "Oh, my dear! where is
Oldest-One-in-the-World?" Thus he said. The old man said at once, "What
was your word? Where did you come from? Don't you recognize me? I am
called Oldest-One-in-the-World." Thus he said. Place-of-Desire said at
once, "O old man! we are the children of Many-colored-Woman, your
princess." Thus he said. The old man at once became angry on account of
the word of Place-of-Desire; and he said, "Oh, what is your word? Why do
you come and make fun of my princess?"

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Thus he said, while he was beginning to strike
Place-of-Desire with the tongs. Then he drove him away.

Then Place-of-Desire went down to the beach, and told his elder
brothers. As soon as Place-of-Desire had gone out of the house, the wife
of Oldest-One-in-the-World spoke, and said, "Oh, my dear! don't be
inconsiderate \[in your mind\]. Do look at him, if he should come again
who came in before. It might be true that he came from our daughter,
Many-colored-Woman." Thus she said to him. As soon as she had finished
speaking, the four children of Many-colored-Woman came in. Immediately
Oldest-One-in-the-World spread out a mat, and the four young men went
there and sat down on it. Then Oldest-One-in-the-World split some
boards.

At once it was heard by his tribe, and they came immediately to discover
why Oldest-One-in-the-World was splitting wood. Then the tribe saw the
four children of Many-colored-Woman sitting there.
Oldest-One-in-the-World spoke, and praised his children. Then
Oldest-One-in-the-World asked them to build a fire in his large house.
The young men went at once and built a fire in the middle of it; and as
soon as the fire in the large house began to burn, the tribe went in,
and also the four children of Many-colored-Woman went into it. When the
tribe had gone into the house, the oldest of the four young men said to
the tribe of their grandfather that they should go and bring the four
baskets out of the canoe. At once they went, but in vain. It was not
long before they came back. They were not able to lift them. Then
Place-of-Desire was just sent by his elder brothers to go and bring the
four baskets. It was not long before

285

he came, carrying the four baskets. Immediately they opened out what was
contained in them, and the house was almost \[not\] filled with all
kinds of property. The eldest of the brothers, Copper-Maker, spoke at
once, and said, "O old man! this is sent to you by Many-colored-Woman.
This is what is piled up here in the house, that you may invite with it
your tribe." Thus he said.

Then, on account of this, they all believed that they were the sons of
Many-colored-Woman; and it is said that Oldest-One-in-the-World was the
first one to give a potlatch. Then he gave a feast with the food that
was sent to him by Many-colored-Woman; and then he came and showed the
large house, and the carvings, and the four seal dishes, and the
killer-whale dishes, and the others. And this was first given by
Copper-Maker; and Seaside-of-the-World came next, and after that came
Copper-Surface, and then the youngest one, Place-of-Desire; and then
Oldest-One-in-the-World distributed coppers among his tribe, and he was
the first who handed down coppers. The four sons of Many-colored-Woman
never went back, and Many-colored-Woman never came back to her country.

Some say that Many-colored-Woman did come back, and that the
self-paddling copper canoe came back, and that it staid in our country.
That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[275:2](kt62.htm#fr_25) This figure is
illustrated in Plate XLV, Fig. 4, F. Boas, The Kwakiutl of Vancouver
Island (Publications of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. V).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ô'?meä~~l~~ (Chief-of-the-Ancients)](kt63)
