[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt69)  [Next](kt71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# 28. The Descendants of Surpassing.

Tradition of the Gwa?s<u>î</u>'la.

(*Recorded by George Hunt*.)

Now I will tell another story about those who followed next to
Surpassing, about his children,--Shelter, and his younger brother
Great-Body,--the ancestors of the North people. They were their first
ancestors. I do not know why they lived on the island in the mouth of
the bay. There were two of them,--Shelter, and his younger brother
Great-Body. They had been staying there a long time when they saw many
gulls that had laid eggs. Then Shelter requested Great-Body to go and
gather the eggs. Great-Body went at once and gathered many eggs. Then he
saw many kinds of shells; and he picked them up, and he carried them on
his back to their house. As soon as Shelter saw the many eggs and the
many kinds of shells, he spoke to his younger brother, and said, "O
brother! let us alone have enough of this on this island. Now I will
work so that they shall be our tribe." Thus he said, while he
transformed the many eggs into men, and he transformed the many kinds of
shells into women. Now they were the numerous tribe of the brothers.
Then Shelter again sent his younger brother to go and search for
bull-heads on the beach. In vain he searched for bull-heads. Then he saw
something like quartz, and he

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

went back and looked at it; but the quartz that had been seen just
disappeared. It was just like the shadow of a man, what was seen by him.
Now he saw really clearly that it turned into a man. Then the man, who
was standing on the beach, spoke, and said, "Oh, my dear! what are you
trying to get on the beach Great-Body? I am the Tide-Maker, the chief of
the tides of the sea that are running to and fro." Then Great-Body
became afraid. Therefore he jumped on a drift-log lying on the beach.

 

Then he saw something like a woman standing on the water at the edge of
the sea. He tried to see her clearly. Then the woman spoke, and said, "I
am the one who is named Swell-Woman. (I am) the woman (who controls) the
swell." Then the woman said, "Come and take this for your supernatural
power." Thus she said. Immediately Great-Body went to the woman. Then
the woman gave him a large crab. Then the woman said, "Oh, my dear! your
dance will be the war dance, and you will have for your supernatural
treasure this large crab," thus she said; "and you will have this
Tide-Maker for your dance in the winter dance." Thus she said. Then
Swell-Woman disappeared, and Great-Body went home to his house.

Immediately he reported about the two things that he had met,--the
Tide-Maker and Swell-Woman. Then he gave the large crab to Shelter. Then
he told about what Swell-Woman had said when she gave him the large
crab. It is said that the crab was alive . It was the crab of the door
of the house of Wealthy. Then Shelter felt glad on account of the report
of his younger brother, and Shelter said that he would give a winter
dance when the winter should come; for then was the time when the

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

salmon-berry bushes were Just sprouting: therefore the ancestors of the
North people had no winter dance at that time.

Shelter just kept it secret. Shelter and his tribe were all sitting in
their summer seats. They had not been long in their summer seats when
many young sawbill ducks were seen swimming along. Then Shelter
requested his tribe to launch their canoes and to paddle after the young
sawbill ducks. Shelter knew that the sawbill ducks lay their eggs in the
rivers; and therefore they paddled after the young sawbill ducks,
because they knew that they would go back to the place where they had
come from. Now all the canoes of the North people were on the water.
Then the young sawbill ducks turned towards the lake, As soon as they
arrived at the lake, the ancestors of the North tribe steered again for
the river whose name is Narrow-Channel; and as soon as they approached
it, Shelter saw smoke. Then they left the young sawbill ducks and
steered for the smoke that was seen. As soon as they got near it, they
saw a man sitting on the bank of a river. Immediately they spoke to him,
and questioned him (as to) why the man was sitting on the bank of the
river. The man replied to them at once, and a silver salmon stood
alongside the fire roasting, and that is what the man had in mind. The
man said, "Oh, my dear! how do you roast salmon, and what goes up this
river'" Shelter replied at once, and said, "Oh, my dear! this way you
roast salmon is not the way I roast salmon, for we put the salmon across
the roasting-tongs."

 

Then Shelter guessed that the silver salmon was going up the river, and
he said, "Oh, my dear! silver salmon go up my river." Thus he said to
him. Then he asked

383

for the name of the man who was sitting on the bank of the river, and
where he came from. Then the one who was sitting by the fire replied to
Shelter, and said, "I am Worker (Sô'sEgulä  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)), and I live in my house on the bank of my
river here, and I come from Cherry, and I am
Nâ'k!wax\*da?x<sup>u</sup>." Thus he said to him. Then Shelter
questioned him, and said, "But where is your house?" Thus he said to
him. Then Worker was just impressed on account of this. Shelter went
ashore from the river and speared some salmon; and as soon as he had
four salmon, Shelter at once requested his young men to cut them. Then
one of the young men took along roasting-tongs and put the four salmon
across the one roasting-tong, and placed it by the side of the fire; and
as soon as he had finished the work of roasting, Shelter spoke to
Worker, and said, "Oh, my dear! now look at this. That is the way
\[how\] we North people roast this." Then Worker spoke to Shelter. "That
is the way of our roasting salmon at Cherry." Thus he said to him. Then
one of the attendants of Shelter hurriedly battered a stone, and thus he
had a pile-driver for his salmon-weir for (catching) silver salmon. Then
they made a salmon-weir,--many salmon-weirs for salmon. That was the
first stone pile-driver. Then the ancestors of the North people moved to
T!ô'xsê. Therefore the Nâ'k!wax\*da?x<sup>u</sup> and the ancestors of
the North tribe always fight about T!ô'xsê; but the North tribe say that
they obtained it, and Shelter also obtained the war dance and the crab,
and also Tide-Maker and the stone pile-driver. That is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[381:1](kt70.htm#fr_29) When the first French
missionaries taught the Indians the name of Jesus Christ, the Indians
pronounced it as Sô'sEgulä.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 29. Nô'aqaua (Wisest-One)](kt71)
