[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](kt75)  [Next](kt77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

# 34. Song-Dance.

Tradition of the Clans Q!a'mq!amtala~~l~~, Q!wê'q!waênox<sup>u</sup>,
and P!ê'p!awiLênox<sup>u</sup>, of the DEna'x\*da?x<sup>u</sup>.

Song-Dance (Q!a'mtala~~l~~), Always-staying-at-Olachen-Place
(Dzâ'wadalalîs), Born-to-fly (P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup>),
Xa'niatsEmg\*i?lak<sup>u</sup>, and Only-One (?nEmô'gwis), the ancestors
of the DEna'x\*da?x<sup>u</sup>, came down from the sky. They lived at
the upper end of the inlet. Song-Dance (Q!a'mtala~~l~~) built a house at
the mouth of the river, opposite the house of
Always-staying-at-Olachen-Place (Dzâ'wadalalîs). His wife was
X\*î'nt!ala<u>g</u>a. He was a shaman, and wore a head-ring of
cedar-bark dyed red, which he had on when he came down from the sky. His
house was very long, and the front had four doors.
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>, when he came to meet him, stood behind the
house and looked at Song-Dance, who was engaged in driving piles into
the river to make an olachen-trap. Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> thought,
"Drop it!" and the pile-driver dropped into deep water and went down.
Then Song-Dance cried, "Op, op, op, op!" at the same time moving the
palms of his hands a little ways upward. Then the pile-driver came
floating up again. This was repeated four times. Then
Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup> went down to meet him, and said, "This is
enough. It is true, what I heard; you are a man of supernatural power
(nau'alak<sup>u</sup>). Please give me part of your cedar bark ring.
That is the only thing for which I ask you." Song-Dance gave him a piece
of the cedar-bark, and put it around his neck. Q!â'nêqê?lak<sup>u</sup>
said he was going to show it at the place he was going,--to visit.

When Song-Dance's children--P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup>, his eldest
son; Nau'alagum<u>g</u>a, the next one, a daughter; and
K\*!ê'Estali~~l~~a, his second daughter--saw what had happened, they
resolved to show that they also had supernatural

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

power. They told their father to make his house ready, saying that they
saw the Deluge coming. Song-Dance prepared his house. He caulked all the
cracks and closed the doors; and when the Flood came, it just covered
the house, in which they staid unharmed.

After the waters had receded, P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> and his
sisters went up the river to look for a mountain that had not been
covered by the Deluge, there to save themselves if the waters should
return. They found it.

On their way back they saw in the water some fish which looked like
worms. His sister said, "These must be the olachen of which our
grandfathers spoke. Step on that log and drive them ashore. They are so
fat that they melt over the fire." They caught them with their hands in
the water, and they boiled them, and they now knew that they were the
olachen. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

Then the sisters danced their shaman's dance. Afterwards they started to
go down to the mouth of the river. There they found a large log of
driftwood. They went ashore; and while the sisters staid there,
P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> was preparing to continue his journey. just
at that time a canoe came up the inlet. P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> was
sitting on the drift-log, and he asked the people who they were. Their
chief said that he was Wä'qaê. P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> asked him
where he was going, and Wä'qaê replied that he was going up to see his
river. Then P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> said, "Is it your river? I did
not know that."--"Yes, it is my river," replied Wä'qaê. Then
P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> asked, "What kind of fish go up this
river," Then Wä'qaê mentioned all kinds of salmon.
P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> asked, "Is that all?" and Wä'qaê replied,
"Yes, that is all."--"Nothing else?"--"No, nothing else," Then

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

\[paragraph continues\] P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> said, "I was
inclined to believe you first, but now I do not believe you. If the
river belonged to you, you would have named all the kinds of fish. You
do not know what is running in my river. It is the olachen, not the
others. The olachen is fat, and melts when you put it near the fire."

Then Wä'qaê became angry, and said, "Little slave, what are you talking
there?" and turning to his men, he ordered them to take him into his
canoe and enslave him. The men went and tied him.
P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup> said to his sisters, "Don't move away! Wait
until I return." Wä'qaê travelled down the river with his slave. When
they came to Dô'x?walits!ênê?, they poked him, and said, "Why don't you
fly away? We thought you had supernatural power. Why don't you fly back
home?" P!â'Lelag\*i?lak<sup>u</sup>, who was tied firmly, began to move
his back, and he heard the tearing of the ropes with which he was tied.
He said to his enemies, "It is not difficult for me to get away." Then
they pushed him again and made fun of him. When they saw his attempts to
free himself, they laughed at him; but suddenly, with a great effort, he
freed himself, and flew up, carrying the canoe along until the thwart by
which he held it gave way. They tried to hit him with poles, while he
pretended not to be able to fly well; but suddenly he flew high up, and
disappeared from their view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_32"></span>[454:1](kt76.htm#fr_32) The narrator remarked
here that the people who had been exterminated by the Flood evidently
had known and caught olachen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. Dzâ'wadalalîs](kt77)
