[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1928)  [Next](sbe1930) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

### VARGA 27. PRAISING NIRVÂ*N*A.

At this time there was a Devaputra, riding on (or in) his thousand <span
id="fr_829"></span>[1](#fn_829) white-swan palace <span
id="fr_830"></span>[2](#fn_830) in the midst of space, who beheld the
Parinirvâ*n*a of Buddha. <span class="margnote">. 2115</span>

This one, for the universal benefit of the Deva assembly, sounded forth
at large these verses (gâthas) on impermanence: 'Impermanency is the
nature of all (things), quickly born, they quickly die. <span
class="margnote">. 2116</span>

'With birth there comes the rush <span id="fr_831"></span>[3](#fn_831)
of sorrows, only in Nirvâ*n*a <span id="fr_832"></span>[4](#fn_832) is
there joy. The accumulated fuel heaped up by the power of karman <span
id="fr_833"></span>[5](#fn_833) (deeds), this the fire of wisdom alone
can consume. <span class="margnote">. 2117</span>

'Though the fame (of our deeds <span id="fr_834"></span>[6](#fn_834))
reach up to heaven as smoke, yet in time the rains which descend will
extinguish all, as the fire that rages at the kalpa's end is put out by
the judgment <span id="fr_835"></span>[7](#fn_835) (calamity) of water.'
<span class="margnote">. 2118</span>

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

Again there was a Brahma-*Ri*shi-deva, like a most exalted *Ri*shi (a
highest-principle *Ri*shi <span id="fr_836"></span>[1](#fn_836)),
dwelling in heaven, possessed of superior happiness, with no taint in
his bliss (heavenly inheritance), <span class="margnote">. 2119</span>

Who thus sighed forth his praises of Tathâgata's Nirvâ*n*a, with his
mind fixed in abstraction as he spoke: 'Looking through all the
conditions of life (of the three worlds), from first to last nought is
free from destruction. <span class="margnote">. 2120</span>

'But the incomparable seer dwelling in the world, thoroughly acquainted
with the highest truth <span id="fr_837"></span>[2](#fn_837), whose
wisdom grasps that which is beyond the (world's) ken <span
id="fr_838"></span>[3](#fn_838), he it is who can save the
worldly-dwellers <span id="fr_839"></span>[4](#fn_839). <span
class="margnote">. 2121</span>

'He it is who can provide lasting escape (preservation) from the
destructive power of impermanence. But, alas! through the wide world,
all that lives is sunk in unbelief (heretical teaching).' <span
class="margnote">. 2122</span>

At this time Anuruddha, 'not stopped' (ruddha) <span
id="fr_840"></span>[5](#fn_840) by the world, 'not stopped' from being
delivered

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

(delivered and not stopped), the stream of birth and death for ever
'stopped <span id="fr_841"></span>[1](#fn_841)' (niruddha), <span
class="margnote">. 2123</span>

Sighed forth the praises of Tathâgata's Nirvâ*n*a: 'All living things
completely blind and dark <span id="fr_842"></span>[2](#fn_842)! the
mass of deeds (sa*m*skâra) all perishing (inconstant), even as the
fleeting cloud-pile <span id="fr_843"></span>[3](#fn_843)! <span
class="margnote">. 2124</span>

'Quickly arising and as quickly perishing! the wise man holds not to
such a refuge, for the diamond mace of inconstancy. can (even) overturn
the mountain of the *Ri*shi hermit <span id="fr_844"></span>[4](#fn_844)
(muni). <span class="margnote">. 2125</span>

'How despicable and how weak the world! doomed to destruction, without
strength! Impermanence, like the fierce lion, can even spoil the
Nâga-elephant-great-*Ri*shi <span id="fr_845"></span>[5](#fn_845). <span
class="margnote">. 2126</span>

'Only the diamond curtain of Tathâgata can overwhelm <span
id="fr_846"></span>[6](#fn_846) inconstancy! How much more should those
not yet delivered from desire (passion), fear and dread its power. <span
class="margnote">. 2127</span>

'From the six seeds there grows one sprout <span
id="fr_847"></span>[7](#fn_847), one kind of water from the rain, the
origin of the

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

four points <span id="fr_848"></span>[1](#fn_848) is far removed, five
kinds of fruit from the two "koo <span id="fr_849"></span>[2](#fn_849);"
<span class="margnote">. 2128</span>

'The three periods (past, present, future) are but one in substance; the
Muni-great-elephant plucks up the great tree of sorrow, and yet he (even
he) cannot avoid the power of impermanence. <span class="margnote">.
2129</span>

'For like the crested <span id="fr_850"></span>[3](#fn_850) (*s*ikhin)
bird delights (within) the pool (water) to seize the poisonous snake,
but when from sudden drought he is left in the dry pool, he dies; <span
class="margnote">. 2130</span>

'Or as the prancing steed advances fearlessly to battle, but when the
fight has passed goes back subdued and quiet; or as the raging fire
burns with the fuel, but when the fuel is done, expires; <span
class="margnote">. 2131</span>

'So is it with Tathâgata, his task accomplished he returns <span
id="fr_851"></span>[4](#fn_851) to (find his refuge in) Nirvâ*n*a: just
as the shining of the radiant moon sheds everywhere its light and drives
away the gloom, 2132.

'All creatures grateful for its light, (then suddenly) it disappears
concealed by Sumeru; such is the case with Tathâgata, the brightness of
his wisdom lit up the gloomy darkness, <span class="margnote">.
2133</span>

'And for the good of all that lives drove it away, when suddenly it
disappears behind the mountain of Nirvâ*n*a. The splendour of his fame
throughout the world diffused, <span class="margnote">. 2134</span>

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

'Had banished all obscurity, but like the stream that ever flows, it
rests not with us the illustrious charioteer with his seven prancing
steeds <span id="fr_852"></span>[1](#fn_852) flies through the host (and
disappears); <span class="margnote">. 2135</span>

'The bright-rayed <span id="fr_853"></span>[2](#fn_853) Sûrya-deva,
entering the Yen-tsz’ <span id="fr_854"></span>[3](#fn_854) cave, was,
with the moon, surrounded with fivefold barriers; "all things that
live," deprived of light, <span class="margnote">. 2136</span>

'Present their offerings to heaven; but from their sacrifice nought but
the blacken’d smoke ascends <span id="fr_855"></span>[4](#fn_855); thus
is it with Tathâgata, his glory hidden, the world has lost its light.
<span class="margnote">. 2137</span>

'Rare was the expectancy of grateful love <span
id="fr_856"></span>[5](#fn_856) that filled the heart of all that lives;
that love, reached its full limit, then was left to perish! <span
class="margnote">. 2138</span>

'The cords of sorrow all removed, we found the true and only way; but
now he leaves the tangled mesh of life, and enters on the quiet place!
<span class="margnote">. 2139</span>

'His spirit (or, by spiritual power) mounting through space, he leaves
the sorrow-bearing vessel of his body! the gloom of doubt and the great

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (heaped-up)
darkness all dispelled, by the bright rays of wisdom! <span
class="margnote">. 2140</span>

'The earthy soil of sorrow's dust his wisdom's water purifies! no more,
no more, returns he here! for ever gone to the place of rest! <span
class="margnote">. 2141</span>

'(The power of) birth and death destroyed, the world (all things)
instructed in the highest doctrine! he bids the world rejoice in
(knowledge of) his law, and gives to all the benefit of wisdom! <span
class="margnote">. 2142</span>

'Giving complete rest to the world, the virtuous streams <span
id="fr_857"></span>[1](#fn_857) flow forth! his fame known (spread)
throughout the world, shines still with increased splendour! <span
class="margnote">. 2143</span>

'How great his pity and his love to those who opposed his claims,
neither rejoicing in their defeat nor exulting in his own success <span
id="fr_858"></span>[2](#fn_858). <span class="margnote">. 2144</span>

'Illustriously controlling his feelings, all his senses completely
enlightened, his heart impartially observing events, unpolluted by the
six objects (or, fields) of sense! <span class="margnote">. 2145</span>

'Reaching to that unreached before! obtaining that which man had not
obtained! with the water which he provided filling every thirsty soul!
<span class="margnote">. 2146</span>

'Bestowing that which never yet was given, and providing a reward not
hoped for! his peaceful, well-marked person, perfectly knowing the
thoughts <span id="fr_859"></span>[3](#fn_859) (prayers) of all. <span
class="margnote">. 2147</span>

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

'Not greatly moved either by loving or disliking! overcoming all enemies
by the force (of his love)! the welcome physician for all diseases, the
one destroyer of impermanency! <span class="margnote">. 2148</span>

'All living things rejoicing in religion, fully satisfied <span
id="fr_860"></span>[1](#fn_860)! obtaining all they need (seek), their
every wish (vow) fulfilled! <span class="margnote">. 2149</span>

'The great master of holy wisdom once gone returns no more! even as the
fire gone out for want of fuel! <span class="margnote">. 2150</span>

'(Declaring) the eight rules (noble truths?) without taint <span
id="fr_861"></span>[2](#fn_861); overcoming the five <span
id="fr_862"></span>[3](#fn_862) (senses), difficult to compose! with the
three <span id="fr_863"></span>[4](#fn_863) (powers of sight) seeing the
three (precious ones); removing the three (robbers, i.e. lust, anger,
ignorance); perfecting the three (the three grades of a holy life).
<span class="margnote">. 2151</span>

'Concealing <span id="fr_864"></span>[5](#fn_864) the one (himself) and
obtaining the one (saintship)--leaping over the seven (bodhyaṅgas?) and
(obtaining) the long sleep; the end of all, the quiet, peaceful way; the
highest prize of sages and of saints! <span class="margnote">.
2152</span>

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

'Having himself severed the barriers of sorrow, now he is able to save
his followers, and to provide the draught of immortality (sweet dew) for
all who are parched with thirst! <span class="margnote">. 2153</span>

'Armed with the heavy cuirass of patience, he has overcome all enemies!
(now) by the subtle principles of his excellent law (able to) satisfy
every heart. <span class="margnote">. 2154</span>

'Planting a sacred seed (seed of holiness) in the hearts of those
practising virtue (worldly virtue <span id="fr_865"></span>[1](#fn_865))
impartially directing and not casting off those who are right or not
right (in their views)! <span class="margnote">. 2155</span>

'Turning the wheel of the superlative law! received with gladness
through the world by those (the elect) who have in former conditions
implanted in themselves a love for religion, these all saved by his
preaching! <span class="margnote">. 2156</span>

'Going forth <span id="fr_866"></span>[2](#fn_866) among men converting
those not yet converted; those who had not seen (learned) the truth,
causing them to see the truth! <span class="margnote">. 2157</span>

'All those practising a false method (heretical) of religion, delivering
to them deep principles (of his religion)! preaching the doctrines of
birth and death and impermanency; (declaring that) without a
master <span id="fr_867"></span>[3](#fn_867) (teacher) there can be no
happiness! <span class="margnote">. 2158</span>

'Erecting the standard of his great renown, overcoming and destroying
the armies of Mâra (all the Mâras)! advancing to the point of
indifference to

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

pleasure or pain, caring not for life, desiring only rest (Nirvâ*n*a)!
2159.

'Causing those not yet converted to obtain conversion! those not yet
saved to be saved! those not yet at rest to find rest! those not yet
enlightened to be enlightened! <span class="margnote">. 2160</span>

'(Thus) the Muni (taught) the way of rest for the direction of all
living things! alas! that any transgressing the way of holiness should
practise impure (not right) works. <span class="margnote">. 2161</span>

'Even as at the end of the great kalpa, those holding the law who die
(or, are dead <span id="fr_868"></span>[1](#fn_868)), (when) the rolling
sound of the mysterious thunder-cloud severs the forests, upon these
there shall fall the rain of sweet dew (immortality). <span
class="margnote">. 2162</span>

'The little elephant breaks down the prickly forest, and by cherishing
it we know that it can profit men <span id="fr_869"></span>[2](#fn_869);
but the cloud that removes the sorrow of the elephant old-age <span
id="fr_870"></span>[3](#fn_870), this none can bear <span
id="fr_871"></span>[3](#fn_870). <span class="margnote">. 2163</span>

'He by destroying systems of religion (sights, i.e. modes of seeing,
dar*s*anas) has perfected his

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

system, in saving the world and yet saving! he has destroyed- the
teaching of heresy, in order to reach his independent (self-sufficient)
mode (way) \[of doctrine\]. <span class="margnote">. 2164</span>

'And now he enters the great quiet (place)! no longer has the world a
protector or saviour! the great army host of Mâra-râ*g*a, rousing their
warrior (spirits), shaking the great earth, <span class="margnote">.
2165</span>

'Desired to injure the honour’d Muni! but they could not move him, whom
in a moment now the Mâra "inconstancy" destroys. <span
class="margnote">. 2166</span>

'The heavenly occupants (Devas) everywhere assemble as a cloud! they
fill the space of heaven, fearing the endless (mastery of) birth and
death! their hearts are full of (give birth to) grief and dread! <span
class="margnote">. 2167</span>

'His Deva eyes clearly behold, without the limitations of near or
distant, the fruits of works discerned throughout, as an image perceived
in a mirror! <span class="margnote">. 2168</span>

'His Deva ears perfect and discriminating throughout, hear all, though
far away (not near), mounting through space he teaches all the Devas,
surpassing his method (limit) of converting men! <span
class="margnote">. 2169</span>

'He divides his body still one in substance, crosses the water as if it
were not weak (to bear) <span id="fr_872"></span>[1](#fn_871)! remembers
all his former births, through countless kalpas none forgotten! <span
class="margnote">. 2170</span>

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

'His senses (roots) wandering through the fields . of sense
(limits) <span id="fr_873"></span>[1](#fn_872), all these distinctly
remembered; knowing the wisdom learned in every (state of) mind, all
this perfectly understood! <span class="margnote">. 2171</span>

'By spiritual discernment and pure mysterious wisdom equally
(impartially) surveying all (things)! every vestige of imperfection
(leak) removed! thus he has accomplished all (he had to do). <span
class="margnote">. 2172</span>

'By wisdom rejecting other spheres of life, his wisdom now completely
perfected, to! he dies! let the world, hard and unyielding, still,
beholding it, relent! <span class="margnote">. 2173</span>

'All living things though blunt in sense, beholding him, receive the
enlightenment of wisdom! their endless evil deeds long past, as they
behold, are cancelled and completely cleansed! <span class="margnote">.
2174</span>

'In a moment gone! who shall again exhibit qualities like his? no
saviour now in all the world--our hope cut off, our very breath (life)
is stopped and gone! <span class="margnote">. 2175</span>

'Who now shall give us life again with the cool water (of his doctrine)?
his own great work accomplished, his great compassion now has ceased to
work for long (has long ceased or stopped)! <span class="margnote">.
2176</span>

'The world ensnared in the toils of folly, who shall destroy the net?
who shall, by his teaching, cause the stream of birth and death to turn
again? <span class="margnote">. 2177</span>

'Who shall declare the way of rest (to instruct)

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

the heart of all that lives, deceived by ignorance? Who will point out
the quiet place, or who make known the one true doctrine (system of
doctrine)? <span class="margnote">. 2178</span>

'All flesh suffering (receiving) great sorrow, who shall deliver, like a
loving father? Like the horse changing his master loses all
gracefulness, as he forgets his many words of guidance (so are we)!
<span class="margnote">. 2179</span>

'As a king without a kingdom, such is the world without a Buddha! as a
disciple (a *S*râvaka, a "much hearer") with no power of dialectic
(distinguishing powers) left, or like a physician without wisdom, <span
class="margnote">. 2180</span>

'As men whose king has lost the marks of royalty (bright or glorious
marks), so, Buddha dead, the world has lost its glory! the gentle horses
left without a charioteer, the boat without a pilot left! <span
class="margnote">. 2181</span>

'The three divisions <span id="fr_874"></span>[1](#fn_873) of an army
left without a general! the merchantmen without a guide! the suffering
and diseased without a physician! a holy king (*k*akravartin) without
his seven insignia (jewels, ratnâni)! 218 <span class="margnote">.
2</span>

'The stars without the moon! the loving years (the planet Jupiter?)
without the power of life!--such is the world now that Buddha, the great
teacher, dies!' <span class="margnote">. 2183</span>

Thus (spake) the Arhat <span id="fr_875"></span>[2](#fn_874), all done
that should be done, all imperfections quite removed, knowing the meed
of gratitude, he was grateful therefore (spake gratefully of his
master); <span class="margnote">. 2184</span>

Thus thinking of his master's love he spake!

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

setting forth the world's great sorrow; whilst those, not yet freed from
the power of passion, wept with many tears, unable to control
themselves. <span class="margnote">. 2185</span>

Yet even those who had put away all faults, sighed as they thought of
the pain of birth and death. And now the Malla host <span
id="fr_876"></span>[1](#fn_875) hearing that Buddha had attained
Nirvâ*n*a, <span class="margnote">. 2186</span>

With cries confused, wept piteously, greatly moved, as when a flight of
herons meet a hawk (kite). In a body now they reach the twin (*S*âla)
trees, and as they gaze upon Tathâgata dead (entered on his long sleep),
<span class="margnote">. 2187</span>

Those features never again to awake to consciousness, they smote their
breasts and sighed to heaven; as when a lion seizing, on a calf, the
whole herd rushes on with mingled sounds. <span class="margnote">.
2188</span>

In the midst there was one Malla, his mind enamoured of the righteous
law, who gazed with steadfastness upon the holy <span
id="fr_877"></span>[2](#fn_876) law-king, now entered on the mighty
calm, <span class="margnote">. 2189</span>

And said: 'The world was everywhere asleep, when Buddha setting forth
his law caused it to awake; but now he has entered on the mighty calm,
and all is finished in an unending sleep. <span class="margnote">.
2190</span>

'For man's sake he had raised the standard of his law, and now, in a
moment, it has fallen; the sun of Tathâgata's wisdom spreading abroad
the lustre of its "great awakening <span
id="fr_878"></span>[3](#fn_877)," <span class="margnote">. 2191</span>

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

'Increasing ever more and more in glory, spreading abroad the thousand
rays of highest knowledge, scattering and destroying all the gloom (of
earth), why has the darkness great come back again? <span
class="margnote">. 2192</span>

'His unequalled wisdom lightening the three worlds, giving eyes that all
the world might see, now suddenly (the world is) blind again,
bewildered, ignorant of the way; <span class="margnote">. 2193</span>

'In a moment fallen the bridge of truth (that spanned) the rolling
stream of birth and death, the swelling flood of lust and rage and
doubt, and all flesh overwhelmed therein, for ever lost.' <span
class="margnote">. 2194</span>

Thus all that Malla host wept piteously and lamented; whilst some
concealed their grief nor spoke a word; others sank prostrate on the
earth; <span class="margnote">. 2195</span>

Others stood silent, lost in meditation; others, with sorrowful heart,
groaned deeply. Then on a gold and silver gem-decked couch <span
id="fr_879"></span>[1](#fn_878), richly adorned with flowers and scents,
<span class="margnote">. 2196</span>

They placed the body of Tathâgata; a jewelled canopy they raised above,
and round it flags and streamers and embroidered banners; then using
every kind of dance and music <span id="fr_880"></span>[2](#fn_879),
<span class="margnote">. 2197</span>

The lords and ladies of the Mallas followed

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

along the road presenting offerings, whilst all the Devas scattered
scents and flowers, and raised the sound of drums and music in the
heavens. <span class="margnote">. 2198</span>

Thus men and Devas shared one common sorrow, their cries united as they
grieved together. Entering the city, there the men and women, old and
young, completed their religious offerings. <span class="margnote">.
2199</span>

Leaving the city, then, and passing through the Lung-tsiang gate <span
id="fr_881"></span>[1](#fn_880), and crossing over the Hira*n*yavatî
river, they repaired to where the former Buddhas having died, had
*K*aityas raised to them <span id="fr_882"></span>[2](#fn_881). <span
class="margnote">. 2200</span>

There collecting ox-head sandal wood and every famous scented wood, they
placed the whole above the Buddha's body, pouring various scented oils
upon the pyre; <span class="margnote">. 2201</span>

Then placing fire beneath to kindle it, three times they walked around;
but yet it burned not. At this time the great Kâ*s*yapa had taken his
abode at Râ*g*ag*ri*ha <span id="fr_883"></span>[3](#fn_882), <span
class="margnote">. 2202</span>

And knowing Buddha was about to die was coming thence with all his
followers; his pure mind, deeply moved, desired to see the body of the
lord; <span class="margnote">. 2203</span>

And so, because of that his sincere wish, the fire went out and would
not kindle. Then Kâ*s*yapa and his followers coming, with piteous sighs
looked on the sight <span class="margnote">. 2204</span>

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

And reverenced at the master's feet; and then, forthwith, the fire burst
out. Quenched the fire of grief within; without, the fire has little
power to burn. 2205 '

Or though it burn the outside skin and flesh, the diamond true-bone
still remains. The scented oil consumed, the fire declines, the bones
they place within a golden pitcher; <span class="margnote">. 2206</span>

For as the mystic world <span id="fr_884"></span>[1](#fn_883)
(dharma-dhâtu) is not destroyed, neither can these, the bones (of
Buddha), perish; the consequence (fruit) of diamond <span
id="fr_885"></span>[2](#fn_884) wisdom, difficult to move as Sumeru.
<span class="margnote">. 2207</span>

The relics which the mighty golden-pinioned bird cannot remove or
change, they place within the precious vase; to remain until the world
shall pass away; <span class="margnote">. 2208</span>

And wonderful! the power of men (the world) can thus fulfil Nirvâ*n*a's
laws, the illustrious name of one far spread, is sounded thus throughout
the universe; <span class="margnote">. 2209</span>

And as the ages roll, the long Nirvâ*n*a, by these, the sacred relics
(bones), sheds through the world its glorious light, and brightens up
the abodes of life. <span class="margnote">. 2210</span>

He perished (quenched his splendour) in a moment! but these relics,
placed within the vase, the imperishable signs of wisdom, can overturn
the mount of sorrow; <span class="margnote">. 2211</span>

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

The body of accumulated griefs <span id="fr_886"></span>[1](#fn_885)
this imperishable mind (ki) can cause to rest, and banish once for ever
all the miseries of life. <span class="margnote">. 2212</span>

Thus the diamond substance (body) was dealt with at the place of
burning. And now those valiant Mallas, unrivalled in the world for
strength, <span class="margnote">. 2213</span>

Subduing all private animosities, sought escape from sorrow in the true
refuge. Finding sweet comfort in united love, they resolved to banish
every complaining thought. <span class="margnote">. 2214</span>

Beholding thus the death of Tathâgata, they controlled their grieving
hearts, and with full strength of manly virtue dismissing every listless
thought, they submitted to the course (laws) of nature. <span
class="margnote">. 2215</span>

Oppressed by thoughts of grievous sorrow, they entered the city as a
deserted wild, holding the relics thus they entered, whilst from every
street were offered gifts. <span class="margnote">. 2216</span>

They placed the relics then upon a tower <span
id="fr_887"></span>[2](#fn_886), for men and Devas to adore. <span
class="margnote">. 2217</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_829"></span>[309:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_829) The symbol for
'thousand' is probably an error for the preposition 'u' upon.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[309:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_830) The ha*m*sa is the
vehicle of Brahmâ. The white ha*m*sa is probably the same.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[309:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_831) The accumulation,
or crowd of sorrows.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[309:4](sbe1929.htm#fr_832) Ts’ie mih, quiet
extinction, or the destruction ending in quietness.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[309:5](sbe1929.htm#fr_833) The collection of
the pile of fuel of the deeds (or beams) of conduct (sa*m*skâras).

<span id="fn_834"></span>[309:6](sbe1929.htm#fr_834) Or, simply, 'though
our fame;' or it may refer to the renown of Buddha.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[309:7](sbe1929.htm#fr_835) Referring to the
Buddhist account of the destruction and renovation of the universe; the
last 'calamity' or 'judgment' was the destruction by water.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[310:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_836) This may refer to
one of the highest *Ri*shis, or Pra*g*âpatî *Ri*shis, belonging to the
Vedic literature.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[310:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_837) Here is the same
phrase, 'ti yih i,' the first, or highest, truth, or principle of truth
(paramârtha).

<span id="fn_838"></span>[310:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_838) Whose wisdom sees
that which (*k*é) is above, or superior, (to man.)

<span id="fn_839"></span>[310:4](sbe1929.htm#fr_839) The difficulty is
to find a word in English corresponding to the Buddhist phrase 'all in
the world;' it is not only 'mankind' (Sacred Books of the East, vol. xi,
p. 183) that are invited to trust in Buddha, but all things that have
life. The Chinese phrase is '*k*ung sing,' all that lives.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[310:5](sbe1929.htm#fr_840) Not 'liu to,' where
'liu to' is equivalent to 'ruddha' in the proper name Anuruddha. I take
the word, therefore, in the sense of 'stopped'--it is used, of course,
as a figure of speech; so also in the next phrase. Anuruddha is here
taken as A-niruddha.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[311:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_841) Ni-liu-to, equal to
'niruddha.'

<span id="fn_842"></span>[311:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_842) <span
id="img_31100"></span> ![](img/31100.jpg) for <span
id="img_31101"></span> ![](img/31101.jpg)

<span id="fn_843"></span>[311:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_843) The Chinese 'feou'
means a 'floating' pile or mass, whether of clouds or fanciful worlds.
Hence its use in the later Buddhist development to mean a 'series of
worlds' (as in the successive stages of the pagoda).

<span id="fn_844"></span>[311:4](sbe1929.htm#fr_844) Or, the
*Ri*shi-hermit-mountain, referring probably to Buddha.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[311:5](sbe1929.htm#fr_845) Referring again to
Buddha.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[311:6](sbe1929.htm#fr_846) The literal
translation would be, 'only makes impermanence, destruction.' There may
be an error in the text, but this sense is sufficiently plain. The
meaning of the word 'curtain,' or, perhaps, 'standard,' is not quite so
evident in this connection, it is evidently used in opposition to the
'diamond mace,' in the preceding clause.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[311:7](sbe1929.htm#fr_847) This and the
following lines are obscure; the reference must be gathered from
Sanskrit rather than Chinese. The line before us, rendered literally, is
'six seeds, one bud.'

<span id="fn_848"></span>[312:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_848) The four 'yin' may
be the four points of the compass. But the text is without note or
comment.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[312:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_849) The Chinese symbol
'koo' means a 'libation cup.'

<span id="fn_850"></span>[312:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_850) The symbols
'shi-hi' correspond with Sanskrit *s*ikhin; I have therefore taken it in
the sense of 'crested.' There may be a bird, however, called *S*ikhin.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[312:4](sbe1929.htm#fr_851) The expression 'he
returns to Nirvâ*n*a' is unusual; I have therefore used the alternative
meaning which the symbol 'kwei' sometimes has, 'finding refuge in.'

<span id="fn_852"></span>[313:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_852) This passage is a
difficult one; if the construction is closely followed, the rendering
would be this,' The illustrious charioteer (with) his seven swift
steeds, the army host quickly (or, the wings of the army host) following
him about.' Possibly it must be connected with the lines which follow,
and refers to the saptâ*s*vavâhana of Sûrya.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[313:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_853) Kwong-kwong,
well-rayed.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[313:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_854) The Yen-tsz’ cave
is the fabulous hiding-place of the sun. The fable is a common one,
particularly in Japanese mythology. I do not know whether it is found in
Sanskrit literature.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[313:4](sbe1929.htm#fr_855) The reference in
this and the preceding lines is to the disappearance of the sun and
moon, and the darkness of the world, compared to the Nirvâ*n*a of
Tathâgata.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[313:5](sbe1929.htm#fr_856) This is a free
translation; I have taken 'tsiueh' as an intensitive particle.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[314:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_857) The streams of his
virtuous qualities.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[314:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_858) This verse again is
doubtful. The entire section (a hymn of praise in honour of the departed
Buddha) is couched in obscure, figurative language.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[314:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_859) His well-composed
and illustrious person, knowing perfectly all the reflections of men.
'Nim' is sometimes used to signify 'prayers' or 'aspirations.'

<span id="fn_860"></span>[315:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_860) Each one satisfied;
the sense seems to be that through him, i.e. Buddha, all things obtained
the completion of their religious desires.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[315:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_861) Or it may be by way
of exclamation, 'those eight rules which admit of no pollution!'
referring perhaps to the name 'the noble rules.'

<span id="fn_862"></span>[315:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_862) I suppose 'the
five' are the five senses. The expression 'difficult to compose' might
be also rendered 'the difficult to compose group.'

<span id="fn_863"></span>[315:4](sbe1929.htm#fr_863) Using (i) 'the
three,' and yet seeing the 'three.' The next line is, 'removing the
three,' and yet perfecting 'the three.'

<span id="fn_864"></span>[315:5](sbe1929.htm#fr_864) Or it may be
'treasuring the one,' where 'the one' may be the one duty of a religious
life; but it is difficult to interpret these paradoxes.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[316:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_865) The sense seems to
be, that in the case of those leading a virtuous life, i.e. a moral
life, the seeds of holiness take root.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[316:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_866) All these verses
might be introduced with some such exclamation as this, 'See! how he
went forth!' &c.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[316:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_867) Perhaps the word
'*k*u' might be rendered 'a ruling principle,' viz. of religion.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[317:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_868) The literal
translation of this passage is curious: 'Even as at the end of the great
kalpa, those holding the law, asleep; the mysterious cloud rolling forth
its cracking (thunder), riving the forests, there descends as rain sweet
dew.' The end of the great kalpa is the consummation of all things: 'the
religious who sleep' would mean the good who are dead; 'the cracking
thunder and riven forests' would point to a general overthrow; 'the rain
of sweet dew' seems to refer to the good who sleep, receiving
immortality, or perfection of life.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[317:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_869) 'The little
elephant' may mean 'the young elephant' in its literal sense; or it may
refer to 'the young disciple.' 'By cherishing it we know' may also be
rendered 'knowledge-cherishing' is able, &c.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[317:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_871) 'The cloud removing
the elephant old and sorrowful;' but what is 'the cloud' and who 'the
elephant?'

<span id="fn_871"></span>[318:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_872) This sentence may
perhaps be rendered thus, 'dividing his body yet one in substance,
wading through water and yet not weak,' but the allusion is obscure.
\[It refers, probably, to Buddha's miraculous powers.\]

<span id="fn_872"></span>[319:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_873) The meaning is, all
his births, in which his senses or material body took every kind of
shape; all these he knew. The figurative style of this 'hymn' may be
gathered from this one instance, where instead of saying 'all his
previous births' it is said 'his senses wandering through the field
(limits or boundaries) of sense.'

<span id="fn_873"></span>[320:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_874) Infantry, cavalry,
and chariots.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[320:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_875) That is, as it
seems, Anuruddha.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[321:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_876) The Mallas
(wrestlers) are termed 'lih-sse,' strong-masters, in Chinese. They dwelt
at Ku*s*inagara and Pavâ. The Li*kkh*avis are also called lih-sse.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[321:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_877) The holy law-king,
dharmarâ*g*a.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[321:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_878) The 'great
awakening' refers, of course, to Buddha as 'the awakened.'

<span id="fn_878"></span>[322:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_879) The 'gem-decked
couch' or palanquin is probably represented in plate lxiv, fig. 1 (Tree
and Serpent Worship, first edition). This is the procession of the couch
through Ku*s*inagara. The curly-haired men bearing it would indicate
that the Mallas and Li*kkh*avis of Vai*s*âlî were the same race.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[322:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_880) The use of 'dance
and music' at funerals is an old and well-understood custom. Compare
Sacred Books of the East, vol. xi, pp. 122, 123.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[323:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_881) The Nâga or
Nâga-Elephant gate.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[323:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_882) Had their
Nirvâ*n*a-*k*aityas erected. The account in the text does not agree with
the Southern account; but the popular Chinese record of the Nirvâ*n*a is
the same as the Pâli.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[323:3](sbe1929.htm#fr_883) He was between Pâvâ
and Ku*s*inagara, according to the common account.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[324:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_884) The dharma-dhâtu
(fă kai) is the mystic or ideal world of the Northern Buddhists.
Literally it is the 'limit (ὅπος) of dharma;' dharma being the universal
essence. This bears a striking resemblance to the gnostic (Valentinian)
theory of limitation of the Divine essence.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[324:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_885) Diamond wisdom,
indestructible wisdom.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[325:1](sbe1929.htm#fr_886) That is, the body
subject to accumulation of sorrow.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[325:2](sbe1929.htm#fr_887) 'In their council
hall with a lattice work of spears, and with a rampart of bows,' Sacred
Books of the East, vol. xi, p. 131.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 28. Division of the *S*arîras](sbe1930)
