[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1915)  [Next](sbe1917) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 14. O-WEI-SAN-POU-TI (ABHISAMBODHI) <span id="fr_402"></span>[1](#fn_402).

Bodhisattva having subdued Mâra, his firmly fixed mind at rest,
thoroughly exhausting the first principle of truth <span
id="fr_403"></span>[2](#fn_403), he entered into deep and subtle
contemplation, <span class="margnote">. 1111</span>

Self-contained. Every kind of Sâmadhi in order passed before his eyes.
During the first watch he entered on 'right perception <span
id="fr_404"></span>[3](#fn_404),' and in recollection all former births
passed before his eyes; <span class="margnote">. 1112</span>

Born in such a place, of such a name, and downwards to his present
birth, so through hundreds, thousands, myriads, all his births and
deaths he knew; <span class="margnote">. 1113</span>

Countless in number were they, of every kind and sort; then knowing,
too, his family relationships, great pity rose within his heart. <span
class="margnote">. 1114</span>

This sense of deep compassion passed, he once again considered 'all that
lives,' and how they moved within the six <span
id="fr_405"></span>[4](#fn_405) portions of life's revolution, no final
term to birth and death; <span class="margnote">. 1115</span>

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

Hollow all, and false and transient (unfixed) as the plantain tree, or
as a dream, or phantasy. Then in the middle watch of night, he reached
to knowledge (eyes) of the pure Devas <span
id="fr_406"></span>[1](#fn_406), <span class="margnote">. 1116</span>

And beheld before him every creature, as one sees images upon a mirror;
all creatures born and born again to die, noble and mean, the poor and
rich, <span class="margnote">. 1117</span>

Reaping the fruit of right or evil doing, and sharing happiness or
misery in consequence. First he considered and distinguished evil-doers
(works), that such must ever reap an evil birth; <span
class="margnote">. 1118</span>

Then he considered those who practise righteous deeds, that these must
gain a place with men or gods; but those again born in the nether hells,
(he saw) participating in every kind of misery; <span class="margnote">.
1119</span>

Swallowing (drinking) molten brass (metal), the iron skewers piercing
their bodies, confined within the boiling caldron, driven and made to
enter the fiery oven (dwelling), <span class="margnote">. 1120</span>

Food for hungry, long-toothed dogs, or preyed upon by brain-devouring
birds; dismayed by fire, then (they wander through) thick woods, with
leaves like razors gashing their limbs, <span class="margnote">.
1121</span>

While knives divide their (writhing) bodies, or hatchets lop their
members, bit by bit; drinking the bitterest poisons, their fate yet
holds them back from death. <span class="margnote">. 1122</span>

Thus those who found their joy in evil deeds, he saw receiving now their
direst sorrow; a momentary taste of pleasure here, a dreary length of
suffering there; <span class="margnote">. 1123</span>

A laugh or joke because of others' pain, a crying

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

out and weeping now at punishment received. Surely if living creatures
saw the consequence of all their evils deeds, self-visited, <span
class="margnote">. 1124</span>

With hatred would they turn and leave them, fearing the ruin
following--the blood and death. He saw, moreover, all the fruits of
birth as beasts, each deed entailing its own return, <span
class="margnote">. 1125</span>

(And) when death ensues born in some other form (beast shape), different
in kind according to the deeds. Some doomed to die for the sake of skin
or flesh <span id="fr_407"></span>[1](#fn_407), some for their horns or
hair or bones or wings, <span class="margnote">. 1126</span>

Others torn or killed in mutual conflict, friend or relative before,
contending thus; (some) burthened with loads or dragging heavy weights,
(others) pierced and urged on by pricking goads, <span
class="margnote">. 1127</span>

Blood flowing down their tortured forms, parched and hungry--no relief
afforded; then, turning round, (he saw) one with the other struggling,
possessed of no independent strength; <span class="margnote">.
1128</span>

Flying through air or sunk in deep water, yet no place as a refuge left
from death. He saw, moreover, those, misers and covetous, born now as
hungry ghosts, <span class="margnote">. 1129</span>

Vast bodies like the towering mountain, with mouths as small as any
needle-tube, hungry and thirsty, nought but fire and poison’d flame to
enwrap their burning forms within. <span class="margnote">. 1130</span>

Covetous, they would not give to those who sought, or duped the man who
gave in charity, now born among the famished ghosts, they seek for food,
but cannot find withal. <span class="margnote">. 1131</span>

The refuse of the unclean man they fain would

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

eat, but this is changed and lost (before it can be eaten); oh! if a man
believes that covetousness is thus repaid, as in their case, <span
class="margnote">. 1132</span>

Would he not give his very flesh in charity even as *S*ivi râ*g*a did!
Then, once more (he saw), those reborn as men, with bodies like some
foul sewer, <span class="margnote">. 1133</span>

Ever moving ’midst the direst sufferings, born from the womb to fear and
trembling, with body tender, touching anything its feelings painful, as
if cut with knives; <span class="margnote">. 1134</span>

Whilst born in this condition, no moment free from chance of death,
labour, and sorrow, yet seeking birth again, and being born again,
enduring pain. <span class="margnote">. 1135</span>

Then (he saw those who) by a higher merit were enjoying heaven; a thirst
for love ever consuming them, their merit ended with the end of life,
the five signs <span id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_408) warning them of
death (their beauty fades), <span class="margnote">. 1136</span>

Just as the blossom that decays, withering away, is robbed of all its
shining tints; not all their associates, living still, though grieving,
can avail to save the rest; <span class="margnote">. 1137</span>

The palaces and joyous precincts empty now, the Devîs all alone and
desolate, sitting or asleep upon the dusty earth, weep bitterly in
recollection of their loves; <span class="margnote">. 1138</span>

Those who are born, sad in decay; those who are dead, belovéd, cause of
grief; thus ever struggling on, preparing future pain, covetous they
seek the joys of heaven, <span class="margnote">. 1139</span>

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

Obtaining which, these sorrows come apace; despicable joys! oh, who
would covet them! using such mighty efforts (means) to obtain, and yet
unable thence to banish pain. <span class="margnote">. 1140</span>

Alas, alas! these Devas, too, alike deceived--no difference is there!
thro’ lapse of ages bearing suffering, striving to crush desire and
lust, <span class="margnote">. 1141</span>

Now certainly expecting long reprieve, and yet once more destined to
fall! in hell enduring every kind of pain, as beasts tearing and killing
one the other, <span class="margnote">. 1142</span>

As Pretas parched with direst thirst, as men worn out, seeking
enjoyment; although, they say, when born in heaven, 'then we shall
escape these greater ills,' <span class="margnote">. 1143</span>

Deceived, alas! no single place exempt, in every birth incessant pain!
Alas! the sea of birth and death revolving thus--an ever-whirling
wheel--1144

All flesh immersed within its waves cast here and there without
reliance! thus with his pure Deva eyes he thoughtfully considered the
five domains of life. <span class="margnote">. 1145</span>

He saw that all was empty and vain alike! with no dependence! like the
plantain or the bubble. Then, on the third eventful watch, he entered on
the deep, true <span id="fr_409"></span>[1](#fn_409) apprehension <span
id="fr_410"></span>[2](#fn_410); <span class="margnote">. 1146</span>

He meditated on the entire world of creatures, whirling in life's
tangle, born <span id="fr_411"></span>[3](#fn_411) to sorrow; the crowds
who live, grow old, and die, innumerable for multitude, <span
class="margnote">. 1147</span>

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

Covetous, lustful, ignorant, darkly-fettered, with no way known for
final rescue. Rightly considering, inwardly he reflected from what
source birth and death proceed; <span class="margnote">. 1148</span>

He was assured that age and death must come from birth as from a source.
For since a man has born with him a body, that body must inherit pain
(disease). <span class="margnote">. 1149</span>

Then looking further whence comes birth, he saw it came from life-deeds
done elsewhere; then with his Deva-eyes scanning these deeds, he saw
they were not framed by I*s*vara; <span class="margnote">. 1150</span>

They were not self-caused, they were not personal existences, nor were
they either uncaused; then, as one who breaks the first bamboo joint
finds all the rest easy to separate, <span class="margnote">.
1151</span>

Having discerned the cause of birth and death, he gradually came to see
the truth; deeds come from upâdâna (cleaving), like as fire which
catches hold of grass; <span class="margnote">. 1152</span>

Upâdâna (tsu) comes from t*ri*sh*n*â (’ngai), just as a little fire
enflames the mountains; t*ri*sh*n*â comes from vedanâ (shau), (the
perception of pain and pleasure, the desire for rest); <span
class="margnote">. 1153</span>

As the starving or the thirsty man seeks food and drink, so 'sensation'
(perception) brings 'desire' for life; then contact (spar*s*a) is the
cause of all sensation, producing the three kinds of pain or pleasure,
<span class="margnote">. 1154</span>

Even as by art of man the rubbing wood produces fire for any use or
purpose; spar*s*a (contact) is born from the six entrances
(âyatanas) <span id="fr_412"></span>[1](#fn_412),

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

(a man is blind because he cannot see the light) <span
id="fr_413"></span>[1](#fn_413); <span class="margnote">. 1155</span>

The six entrances are caused by name and thing, just as the germ grows
to the stem and leaf; name and thing are born from knowledge
(vi*gñ*ana), as the seed which germinates and brings forth leaves. <span
class="margnote">. 1156</span>

Knowledge, in turn, proceeds from name and thing, the two are
intervolved leaving no remnant; by some concurrent cause knowledge
engenders name and thing, whilst by some other cause concurrent, name
and thing engender knowledge; <span class="margnote">. 1157</span>

Just as a man and ship advance together, the water and the land mutually
involved <span id="fr_414"></span>[2](#fn_414); thus knowledge brings
forth name and thing; name and thing produce the roots (âyatanas); <span
class="margnote">. 1158</span>

The roots engender contact; contact again brings forth sensation;
sensation brings forth longing desire; longing desire produces upâdâna;
<span class="margnote">. 1159</span>

Upâdâna is the cause of deeds; and these again engender birth; birth
again produces age and death; so does this one incessant round <span
class="margnote">. 1160</span>

Cause the existence of all living things. Rightly illumined, thoroughly
perceiving this, firmly established, thus was he enlightened; destroy
birth, old age and death will cease; <span class="margnote">.
1161</span>

Destroy bhava then will birth cease; destroy 'cleaving' (upâdâna) then
will bhava end; destroy t*ri*sh*n*â (desire) then will cleaving end;
destroy sensation then will t*ri*sh*n*â end; <span class="margnote">.
1162</span>

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Destroy contact then will end sensation; destroy the six entrances, then
will contact cease; the six entrances all destroyed, from this,
moreover, names and things will cease; <span class="margnote">.
1163</span>

Knowledge destroyed, names and things <span
id="fr_415"></span>[1](#fn_415) will cease; sa*m*skâra (names and,
things) destroyed, then knowledge perishes; ignorance destroyed, then
the sa*m*skâra <span id="fr_416"></span>[2](#fn_416) will die; the great
*Ri*shi was thus perfected in wisdom (sambodhi). <span
class="margnote">. 1164</span>

Thus perfected, Buddha then devised for the world's benefit the
eightfold path, right sight, and so on, the only true path for the world
to tread. <span class="margnote">. 1165</span>

Thus did he complete the end (destruction) of 'self,' as fire goes out
for want of grass; thus he had done what he would have men do; he first
had found the way of perfect knowledge; <span class="margnote">.
1166</span>

He finished thus the first great lesson (paramârtha); entering the great
*Ri*shi's house <span id="fr_417"></span>[3](#fn_417), the darkness
disappeared; light coming on, perfectly silent, all at rest, <span
class="margnote">. 1167</span>

He reached at last the exhaustless source of truth (dharma); lustrous
with all wisdom the great *Ri*shi sat, perfect in gifts, whilst one
convulsive throe shook the wide earth. <span class="margnote">.
1168</span>

And now the world was calm again and bright, when Devas, Nâgas, spirits,
all assembled, amidst the void raise heavenly music, and make their
offerings as the law <span id="fr_418"></span>[4](#fn_418) directs;
<span class="margnote">. 1169</span>

A gentle cooling breeze sprang up around, and

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

from the sky a fragrant rain distilled; exquisite flowers, not
seasonable <span id="fr_419"></span>[1](#fn_419), bloomed; sweet fruits
before their time were ripened; <span class="margnote">. 1170</span>

Great Mandâras <span id="fr_420"></span>[2](#fn_420), and every sort of
heavenly precious flower, from space in rich confusion fell, as
tribute <span id="fr_421"></span>[3](#fn_421) to the illustrious monk.
<span class="margnote">. 1171</span>

Creatures of every different kind were moved one towards the other
lovingly; fear and terror altogether put away, none entertained a
hateful thought; <span class="margnote">. 1172</span>

And all things living in the world with faultless men <span
id="fr_422"></span>[4](#fn_422) consorted freely; the Devas giving up
their heavenly joys, sought rather to alleviate the sinner's sufferings;
<span class="margnote">. 1173</span>

Pain and distress grew less and less, the moon of wisdom waxed apace;
whilst all the *Ri*shis of the Ikshvâku clan who had received a heavenly
birth, 1174.

Beholding Buddha thus benefitting men, were filled with joy and
satisfaction; and whilst throughout the heavenly mansions religious
offerings fell as raining flowers, <span class="margnote">. 1175</span>

The Devas and the Nâga spirits <span id="fr_423"></span>[5](#fn_423),
with one voice, praised the Buddha's virtues; men seeing the religious
offerings, hearing, too, the joyous hymn of praise, <span
class="margnote">. 1176</span>

Were all rejoiced in turn; they leapt for unrestrained

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

joy; Mâra, the Devarâ*g*a, only, felt in his heart great anguish. <span
class="margnote">. 1177</span>

Buddha for those seven days, in contemplation lost, his heart at peace,
beheld and pondered on the Bodhi tree, with gaze unmoved and never
wearying: <span class="margnote">. 1178</span>

'Now resting here, in this condition, I have obtained,' he said, 'my
ever-shifting <span id="fr_424"></span>[1](#fn_424)heart's desire, and
now at rest I stand, escaped from self <span
id="fr_425"></span>[2](#fn_425).' The eyes of Buddha <span
id="fr_426"></span>[3](#fn_426) then considered 'all that lives,' <span
class="margnote">. 1179</span>

And forthwith rose there in him deep compassion; much he desired to
bring about their welfare (purity), but how to gain for them that most
excellent deliverance, <span class="margnote">. 1180</span>

From covetous desire, hatred, ignorance, and false. teaching (this was
the question); how to suppress this sinful heart by right direction; not
by anxious use . of outward means, but by resting quietly in thoughtful
silence. <span class="margnote">. 1181</span>

Now looking back and thinking of his mighty vow, there rose once more
within his mind a wish to preach the law; and looking carefully
throughout the world, he saw how pain and sorrow ripened and increased
everywhere. <span class="margnote">. 1182</span>

Then Brahma-deva knowing his thoughts, and considering <span
id="fr_427"></span>[4](#fn_427) it right to request him to advance
religion for the wider spread of the Brahma-glory, in the deliverance of
all flesh from sorrow, <span class="margnote">. 1183</span>

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Coming, beheld upon the person of the reverend monk all the
distinguishing marks of a great preacher, visible in an excellent
degree; fixed and unmoved (he sat) in the possession of truth and
wisdom, <span class="margnote">. 1184</span>

Free from all evil impediments, with a heart cleansed from all
insincerity or falsehood. Then with reverent and a joyful heart, (great
Brahma stood and) with hands joined, thus made known his request: <span
class="margnote">. 1185</span>

'What happiness in all the world so great as when a loving master meets
the unwise <span id="fr_428"></span>[1](#fn_428); the world with all its
occupants, filled with impurity and dire confusion <span
id="fr_429"></span>[2](#fn_429), <span class="margnote">. 1186</span>

'With heavy grief oppressed, or, in some cases, lighter sorrows, (waits
deliverance); the lord of men, having escaped by crossing the wide and
mournful sea of birth and death, <span class="margnote">. 1187</span>

'We now entreat to rescue others--those struggling creatures all
engulphed therein; as the just worldly man, when he gets profit, gives
some rebate withal <span id="fr_430"></span>[3](#fn_430), <span
class="margnote">. 1188</span>

'So the lord of men enjoying such religious gain, should <span
id="fr_431"></span>[4](#fn_431) also give somewhat to living things. The
world indeed is bent on large personal gain, and hard it is to share
one's own with others; <span class="margnote">. 1189</span>

'O! let your loving heart be moved with pity towards the world
burthened <span id="fr_432"></span>[5](#fn_432) with vexing cares.'

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus having spoken
by way of exhortation, with reverent mien he turned back to the Brahma
heaven. <span class="margnote">. 1190</span>

Buddha regarding the invitation of Brahma-deva rejoiced at heart, and
his design was strengthened; greatly was his heart of pity nourished,
and purposed was his mind to preach. <span class="margnote">.
1191</span>

Thinking he ought to beg some food, each of the four kings offered him a
Pâtra; Tathâgata <span id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_433), in fealty to
religion, received the four and joined them all in one. <span
class="margnote">. 1192</span>

And now some merchant men were passing by, to whom 'a virtuous
friend <span id="fr_434"></span>[2](#fn_434),' a heavenly spirit, said:
'The great *Ri*shi, the venerable monk, is dwelling in this mountain
grove, <span class="margnote">. 1193</span>

'(Affording) in the world a noble field for merit <span
id="fr_435"></span>[3](#fn_435); go then and offer him a sacrifice!'
Hearing the summons, joyfully they went, and offered the first meal
religiously. <span class="margnote">. 1194</span>

Having partaken of it, then he deeply pondered, who first should hear
the law <span id="fr_436"></span>[4](#fn_436); he thought at once of
Arâ*d*a Kâlâma and Udraka Râmaputra, <span class="margnote">.
1195</span>

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

As being fit to accept the righteous law; but now they both were dead.
Then next he thought of the five men, that they were fit to hear the
first sermon. <span class="margnote">. 1196</span>

Bent then on this design to preach Nirvâ*n*a <span
id="fr_437"></span>[1](#fn_437), as the sun's glory bursts thro’ the
darkness, so went he on towards Benares, the place where dwelt the
ancient *Ri*shis; <span class="margnote">. 1197</span>

With eyes as gentle as the ox king's, his pace as firm and even as the
lion's, because he would convert the world he went on towards the
Kâ*s*i <span id="fr_438"></span>[2](#fn_438) city; <span
class="margnote">. 1198</span>

Step by step, like the king of beasts, did he advance watchfully through
the grove of wisdom (Uruvilva wood). <span class="margnote">.
1199</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_402"></span>[156:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_402) The condition that
looks wisdom face to face.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[156:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_403) 'Eternally
exhausting the highest truth' (paramartha).

<span id="fn_404"></span>[156:3](sbe1916.htm#fr_404) The word for
'perception' is vedanâ (sheu).

<span id="fn_405"></span>[156:4](sbe1916.htm#fr_405) The six modes of
birth (transmigration).

<span id="fn_406"></span>[157:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_406) Deva sight.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[158:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_407) That is, some born
as beasts, whose hides are of value, and for which they are killed.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[159:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_408) The five signs are
the indications of a Deva's life in heaven coming to an end.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[160:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_409) <span
id="img_16000"></span> ![](img/16000.jpg) for <span
id="img_16001"></span> ![](img/16001.jpg).

<span id="fn_410"></span>[160:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_410) That is, the deep
apprehension of truth.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[160:3](sbe1916.htm#fr_411) Sorrow
self-natured.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[161:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_412) The six organs of
sense.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[162:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_413) This clause is
obscure, it may mean, 'blind to darkness therefore he sees.'

<span id="fn_414"></span>[162:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_414) It is difficult to
catch the meaning here; literally translated the passage runs thus:
'Water and dry land cause mutual involution.'

<span id="fn_415"></span>[163:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_415) Here evidently
equivalent to sa*m*skâra.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[163:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_416) Sa*m*skâra, i.e.
the five skandhas, or constituents of individual life.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[163:3](sbe1916.htm#fr_417) I. e. attained
Nirvâ*n*a.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[163:4](sbe1916.htm#fr_418) 'As the law
directs;' that is, 'religious offerings' (dharma dâna).

<span id="fn_419"></span>[164:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_419) 'Not seasonable;'
that is, out of season; or, before their season.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[164:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_420) The Mahâ Mandâra,
or Mandârava; one of the five trees of the paradise of Indra (Wilson);
the Erythrina fulgens. See Burnout, Lotus, p. 306.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[164:3](sbe1916.htm#fr_421) As a religious
offering to the Muni-lord.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[164:4](sbe1916.htm#fr_422) Wou lau *g*in,
leakless men. It means that all things living consorted freely with the
good.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[164:5](sbe1916.htm#fr_423) The Devas, Nâgas,
and heavenly spirits (kwei shin).

<span id="fn_424"></span>[165:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_424) My heart which has
experienced constant and differing birth-changes.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[165:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_425) Wou-ngo, in a
condition without personal (ngo) limitations. The sense seems to be,
that, by casting away the limitations of the finite, he had apprehended
the idea of the infinite.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[165:3](sbe1916.htm#fr_426) The eye of Buddha;
the last of the pa*ñk*a*k*akkhus, for which see Childers, Pâli Dict. sub
voce.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[165:4](sbe1916.htm#fr_427) The sense may be,
'thinking that he ought to be requested to preach.'

<span id="fn_428"></span>[166:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_428) In the sense of
'the uninstructed.'

<span id="fn_429"></span>[166:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_429) With
sense-pollution and distracted heart, oppressed with heavy grief, or,
may be, with lighter and less grievous sorrow.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[166:3](sbe1916.htm#fr_430) These lines are
obscure; the sense, however, is plainly that given in the text.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[166:4](sbe1916.htm#fr_431) In the way of
request, 'would that the lord of men,' &c.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[166:5](sbe1916.htm#fr_432) Oppressed amidst
oppressions (calamities).

<span id="fn_433"></span>[167:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_433) Here the Buddha is
called Tathâgata. It is a point to be observed that this title is only
used after the Bodhisattva's enlightenment.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[167:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_434) There is a great
deal said in Buddhist books about this expression 'virtuous,' or, 'good
friend.' In general it means Bodhi or wisdom. It is used also in Zend
literature to denote the sun (mithra); see Haug (Parsis), p. 209.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[167:3](sbe1916.htm#fr_435) That is, giving the
world a noble opportunity of obtaining religious merit. The expression
'field for merit' is a common one, as we say, 'field for work,' 'field
for usefulness,' and so on.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[167:4](sbe1916.htm#fr_436) Who ought to be
first instructed in religion; or, who should hear the first religious
instruction (sermon). The first sermon is that which is sometimes called
'the foundation of the kingdom of righteousness.' It is given further
on.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[168:1](sbe1916.htm#fr_437) To preach the law
of perfect quietude (quiet extinction; that is, quietness or rest,
resulting from the extinction of sorrow).

<span id="fn_438"></span>[168:2](sbe1916.htm#fr_438) That is, Benares.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 15. Turning The Law-Wheel](sbe1917)
