[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1912)  [Next](sbe1914.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 11. THE REPLY TO BIMBASÂRA RÂ*G*A.

Bimbasâra Râ*g*a having, in a decorous manner, and with soothing speech,
made his request, the prince on his part respectfully replied, in the
following words, deep and heart-stirring: <span class="margnote">.
827</span>

'Illustrious and world renowned! Your words are

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

not opposed to reason, descendant of a distinguished family--an
Aryan <span id="fr_334"></span>[1](#fn_334.md)--amongst men <span
id="fr_335"></span>[2](#fn_335.md) a true friend indeed, <span
class="margnote">. 828</span>

'Righteous and sincere to the bottom of your heart, it is proper for
religion's sake to speak thus <span id="fr_336"></span>[3](#fn_336.md). In
all the world, in its different sections, there is no chartered
place <span id="fr_337"></span>[4](#fn_337.md) for solid virtue (right
principles), <span class="margnote">. 829</span>

'For if virtue flags and folly rules, what reverence can there be, or
honour paid, to a high name or boast of prowess, inherited from former
generations! <span class="margnote">. 830</span>

'And so there may be in the midst of great distress, large goodness,
these are not mutually opposed. This then is so with the world in the
connection of true worth and friendship. <span class="margnote">.
831</span>

'A true friend who makes good (free) use of wealth--is rightly called a
fast and firm treasure, but he who guards and stints the profit he has
made, his wealth will soon be spent and lost; <span class="margnote">.
832</span>

'The wealth of a country is no constant treasure, but that which is
given in charity is rich in returns, therefore charity is a true friend,
altho' it scatters, yet it brings no repentance; <span
class="margnote">. 833</span>

'You indeed are known as liberal and kind, I make no reply in opposition
to you, but simply as we meet, so with agreeable purpose we talk. <span
class="margnote">. 834</span>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

'I fear birth, old age, disease, and death, and so I seek to find a sure
mode of deliverance; I have put away thought of relatives and family
affection, how is it possible then for me to return to the world (five
desires) <span class="margnote">. 835</span>

'And not to fear to revive the poisonous snake, (and after) <span
id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_338.md) the hail to be burned in the fierce
fire; indeed I fear the objects of these several desires, this whirling
in the stream (of life) troubles my heart, <span class="margnote">.
836</span>

'These five desires, the inconstant thieves <span
id="fr_339"></span>[2](#fn_339.md)--stealing from men their choicest
treasures, making them unreal, false, and fickle--are like the man
called up as an apparition <span id="fr_340"></span>[3](#fn_340.md); <span
class="margnote">. 837</span>

'For a time the beholders are affected (by it), but it has no lasting
hold upon the mind; so these five desires are the great obstacles, for
ever disarranging the way of peace; <span class="margnote">. 838</span>

'If the joys of heaven are not worth having, how much less the desires
common to men, begetting the thirst of wild love, and then lost in the
enjoyment, <span class="margnote">. 839</span>

'As the fierce wind fans the fire, till the fuel be spent and the fire
expires; of all unrighteous things in the world, there is nothing worse
than the domain of the five desires; <span class="margnote">. 840</span>

'For all men maddened by the power of lust, giving themselves to
pleasure, are dead to reason. The wise man fears these desires, he fears
to fall. into the way of unrighteousness; <span class="margnote">.
841</span>

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

'For like a king who rules all within the four seas, yet still seeks
beyond for something more, (so is lust); like the unbounded ocean, it
knows not when and where to stop. <span class="margnote">. 842</span>

'Mandha, the *K*akravartin, when the heavens rained yellow gold, and he
ruled all within the seas, yet sighed after the domain of the
thirty-three heavens; <span class="margnote">. 843</span>

'Dividing with *S*akra his seat, and so thro’ the power of this lust he
died; Nung-Sha (Nyâsa?), whilst practising austerities, got power to
rule the thirty-three heavenly abodes, <span class="margnote">.
844</span>

'But from lust he became proud and supercilious, the *Ri*shi whilst
stepping into his chariot, through carelessness in his gait, fell down
into the midst of the serpent pit. <span class="margnote">. 845</span>

'Yen-lo (Yama?) the universal monarch (*K*akravartin) wandering abroad
thro’ the Trayastri*m*sas heaven, took a heavenly woman (Apsara) for a
queen, and unjustly extorted <span id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_341.md) the
gold of a *Ri*shi; <span class="margnote">. 846</span>

'The *Ri*shi, in anger, added a charm, by which the country was ruined,
and his life ended. Po-lo, and *S*akra king of Devas <span
id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_342.md), *S*akra king of Devas, and Nung-sha
(Nyâsa), <span class="margnote">. 847</span>

'Nung-sha returning (or, restoring) to *S*akra; what certainty
(constancy) is there, even for the lord of heaven? Neither is any
country safe, though kept by the mighty strength of those dwelling in
it. <span class="margnote">. 848</span>

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

'But when one's clothing consists of grass, the berries one's food, the
rivulets one's drink, with long hair flowing to the ground, silent as a
Muni, seeking nothing, <span class="margnote">. 849</span>

'In this way practising austerities, in the end lust shall be destroyed.
Know then, that the province (indulgence) of the five desires is
avowedly an enemy of the religious man. <span class="margnote">.
850</span>

'Even the one-thousand-armed invincible king, strong in his might, finds
it hard to conquer this. The *Ri*shi Râma perished because of lust,
<span class="margnote">. 851</span>

'How much more ought I, the son of a Kshatriya, to restrain lustful
desire; but indulge in lust a little, and like the child it grows apace,
<span class="margnote">. 852</span>

'The wise man hates it therefore; who would take poison for food? every
sorrow is increased and cherished by the offices of lust. <span
class="margnote">. 853</span>

'If there is no lustful desire, the risings of sorrow are not produced,
the wise man seeing the bitterness of sorrow, stamps out and destroys
the risings of desire; <span class="margnote">. 854</span>

'That which the world calls virtue, is but another form of this baneful
law <span id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_343.md); worldly men enjoying the
pleasure of covetous desire then every form of careless conduct results;
<span class="margnote">. 855</span>

'These careless ways producing hurt, at death, the subject of them reaps
perdition (falls into one of the evil ways). But by the diligent use of
means, and careful continuance therein, <span class="margnote">.
856</span>

The consequences of negligence are avoided, we should therefore dread
the non-use of means; recollecting

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

that all things are illusory, the wise man covets them not; <span
class="margnote">. 857</span>

'He who desires such things, desires sorrow, and then goes on again
ensnared in love, with no certainty of ultimate freedom; he advances
still and ever adds grief to grief, <span class="margnote">. 858</span>

Like one holding a lighted torch burns his hand, and therefore the wise
man enters on no such things. The foolish man and the one who doubts,
still encouraging the covetous and burning heart, <span
class="margnote">. 859</span>

'In the end receives accumulated sorrow, not to be remedied by any
prospect of rest; covetousness and anger are as the serpent's poison;
the wise man casts away <span class="margnote">. 860</span>

'The approach of sorrow as a rotten bone; he tastes it not nor touches
it, lest it should corrupt his teeth, that which the wise man will not
take, <span class="margnote">. 861</span>

'The king will go through fire and water to obtain, the wicked
sons <span id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_344.md) labour for wealth as for a
piece of putrid flesh, o’er which the hungry flocks of birds contend.
<span class="margnote">. 862</span>

'So should we regard riches; the wise man is ill pleased at having
wealth stored up, the mind wild with anxious thoughts, <span
class="margnote">. 863</span>

'Guarding himself by night and day, as .a man who fears some powerful
enemy, like as a man's feelings revolt with disgust at the (sights seen)
beneath the slaughter post of the East Market, <span class="margnote">.
864</span>

'So the high post which marks the presence of lust, and anger, and
ignorance, the wise man always avoids; as those who enter the mountains
or the seas have much to contend with and little rest, <span
class="margnote">. 865</span>

'As the fruit which grows on a high tree, and is

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

grasped at by the covetous at the risk of life, so is the region
(matter) of covetous desire, tho’ they see the difficulty of getting it,
<span class="margnote">. 866</span>

'Yet how painfully do men scheme after wealth, difficult to acquire,
easy to dissipate, as that which is got in a dream, how can the wise man
hoard up (such trash)! <span class="margnote">. 867</span>

'Like covering over with a false surface a hole full of fire, slipping
thro’ which the body is burnt, so is the fire of covetous desire. The
wise man meddles not with it. <span class="margnote">. 868</span>

'Like that Kaurava \[Kau-to-po\], or Pih-se-ni Nanda, or Ni-*k*’*h*e-lai
Danta, as some *k*andala's (butcher's) appearance <span
id="fr_345"></span>[1](#fn_345.md), <span class="margnote">. 869</span>

'Such also is the appearance of lustful desire; the wise man will have
nothing to do with it, he would rather throw his body into the water or
fire, or cast himself down over a steep precipice. <span
class="margnote">. 870</span>

'Seeking to obtain heavenly pleasures, what is this but to remove the
place of sorrow, without profit. Sün-tau, Po-sun-tau (Sundara and
Vasundara), brothers of Asura, <span class="margnote">. 871</span>

'Lived together in great affection, but on account of lustful desire
slew one another, and their name perished; all this then comes from
lust; <span class="margnote">. 872</span>

'It is this which makes a man vile, and lashes and goads him with
piercing sorrow; lust debases a man, robs him of all hope, whilst
through the long night his body and soul are worn out; <span
class="margnote">. 873</span>

'Like the stag <span id="fr_346"></span>[2](#fn_346.md) that covets the
power of speech

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

and dies, or the winged bird that covets <span
id="fr_347"></span>[1](#fn_347) sensual pleasure (the net.md), or the fish
that covets the baited hook, such are the calamities that lust brings;
<span class="margnote">. 874</span>

'Considering what are the requirements of life, none of these possess
permanency; we eat to appease the pain of hunger, to do away with thirst
we drink, <span class="margnote">. 875</span>

'We clothe ourselves to keep out the cold and wind, we lie down to rest
to get sleep, to procure locomotion we seek a carriage, when we would
halt we seek a seat, <span class="margnote">. 876</span>

'We wash to cleanse ourselves from dirt, all these things are done to
avoid inconvenience; we may gather therefore that these five desires
have no permanent character; <span class="margnote">. 877</span>

'For as a man suffering from fever seeks and asks for some cooling
medicine, so covetousness seeks for something to satisfy its longings;
foolish men regard these things as permanent, <span class="margnote">.
878</span>

'And as the necessary requirements of life, but, in sooth, there is no
permanent cessation of sorrow; for by coveting to appease these desires
we really increase them, there is no character of permanency therefore
about them. <span class="margnote">. 879</span>

'To be filled and clothed are no lasting pleasures, time passes, and the
sorrow recurs; summer is cool during the moon-tide shining; winter comes
and cold increases; <span class="margnote">. 880</span>

'And so through all the eightfold laws of the world they possess no
marks of permanence, sorrow and joy cannot agree together, as a person
slave-governed loses his renown. <span class="margnote">. 881</span>

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

'But religion causes all things to be of service, as a king reigning in
his sovereignty; so religion controls sorrow, as one fits on a burthen
according to power of endurance. <span class="margnote">. 882</span>

'Whatever our condition in the world, still sorrows accumulate around
us. Even in the condition of a king, how does pain multiply, though
bound to others by love, yet this is a cause of grief; <span
class="margnote">. 883</span>

'Without friends and living alone, what joy can there be in this? Though
a man rules over the four kingdoms, yet only one part can be enjoyed;
<span class="margnote">. 884</span>

'To be concerned in ten thousand matters, what profit is there in this,
for we only accumulate anxieties. Put an end to sorrow, then, by
appeasing desire, refrain from busy work, this is rest. <span
class="margnote">. 885</span>

'A king enjoys his sensual pleasures; deprived of kingship there is the
joy of rest; in both cases there are pleasures (but of different kinds);
why then be a king! <span class="margnote">. 886</span>

'Make then no plan or crafty expedient, to lead me back to the five
desires; what my heart prays for, is some quiet place and freedom (a
free road); <span class="margnote">. 887</span>

'But you desire to entangle me in relationships and duties, and destroy
the completion of what I seek; I am in no fear of a hated house (family
hatred), nor do I seek the joys of heaven; <span class="margnote">.
888</span>

'My heart hankers after no vulgar profit, so I have put away my royal
diadem; and contrary to your way of thinking, I prefer, henceforth, no
more to rule. <span class="margnote">. 889</span>

'A hare rescued from the serpent's mouth, would it go back again to be
devoured? holding a torch and burning himself, would not a man let it
go? 89c

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

'A man blind. and recovering his sight, would he again seek to be in
darkness? the rich, does he sigh for poverty? the wise, does he long to
be ignorant? <span class="margnote">. 891</span>

'Has the world such men as these? then will I again enjoy my country.
(But) I desire to get rid of birth, old age, and death, with body
restrained, to beg my food; <span class="margnote">. 892</span>

'With appetites moderated, to keep in my retreat; and then to avoid the
evil modes of a future life, this is to find peace in two worlds: now
then I pray you pity me not. <span class="margnote">. 893</span>

'Pity, rather, those who rule as kings! their souls ever vacant and
athirst, in the present world no repose, hereafter receiving pain as
their meed. <span class="margnote">. 894</span>

'You, who possess a distinguished family name, and the reverence due to
a great master, would generously share your dignity with me, your
worldly pleasures and amusements; <span class="margnote">. 895</span>

'I, too, in return, for your sake, beseech you to share my reward with
me; he who indulges in (practises) the threefold kinds of pleasure, this
man the world calls "Lord," <span class="margnote">. 896</span>

'But this is not according to reason either, because these things cannot
be retained, but where there is no birth, or life, or death, he who
exercises himself in this way, is Lord indeed! <span class="margnote">.
897</span>

'You say that while young a man should be gay, and when old then
religious (a recluse), but I regard the feebleness of age as bringing
with it loss of power (to be religious), <span class="margnote">.
898</span>

'Unlike the firmness and power of youth, the will determined and the
heart established; but death

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

as a robber with a drawn sword follows us all, desiring to catch his
prey; <span class="margnote">. 899</span>

'How then should we wait for old age, ere we bring our mind to a
religious life? Inconstancy is the great hunter, age his bow, disease
his arrows, <span class="margnote">. 900</span>

'In the fields of life and death he hunts for living things as for the
deer; when he can get his opportunity, he takes our life; who then would
wait for age? <span class="margnote">. 901</span>

'And what the teachers say and do, with reference to matters connected
with life and death, exhorting the young, mature, or middle-aged, all to
contrive by any means, <span class="margnote">. 902</span>

'To prepare vast meetings for sacrifices, this they do indeed of their
own ignorance; better far to reverence the true law (religion), and put
an end to sacrifice to appease the gods! <span class="margnote">.
903</span>

'Destroying life to gain religious merit, what love can such a man
possess? even if the reward of such sacrifices were lasting, even for
this, slaughter would be unseemly; <span class="margnote">. 904</span>

'How much more, when the reward is transient! Shall we (in search of
this) slay that which lives, in worship? this is like those who practise
wisdom, and the way of religious abstraction, but neglect the rules of
moral conduct. <span class="margnote">. 905</span>

'It ill behoves us then to follow with the world, and attend these
sacrificial assemblies, and seek some present good in killing that which
lives; the wise avoid destroying life! <span class="margnote">.
906</span>

'Much less do they engage in general sacrifices, for the purpose of
gaining future reward! the fruit (reward) promised in the three worlds
is none of mine to choose for happiness! <span class="margnote">.
907</span>

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

'All these are governed by transient, fickle laws, like the wind, or the
drop that is blown from the grass; such things therefore I put away from
me, and I seek for true escape. <span class="margnote">. 908</span>

'I hear there is one O-lo-lam (Arâ*d*a Kâlâma) who eloquently (well)
discourses on the way of escape, I must go to the place where he dwells,
that great *Ri*shi and hermit. <span class="margnote">. 909</span>

'But in truth, sorrow must be banished; I regret indeed leaving you; may
your country have repose and quiet! safely defended (by you) as (by) the
divine *S*akra-râ*g*a! <span class="margnote">. 910</span>

'May wisdom be shed abroad as light upon your empire, like the
brightness of the meridian sun! may you be exceedingly victorious as
lord of the great earth, with a perfect heart ruling over its destiny!
<span class="margnote">. 911</span>

'May you direct and defend its sons! ruling your empire in
righteousness! Water and snow and fire are opposed to one another, but
the fire by its influence causes vapour, <span class="margnote">.
912</span>

'The vapour causes the floating clouds, the floating clouds drop down
rain; there are birds in space, who drink the rain, with rainless
bodies <span id="fr_348"></span>[1](#fn_348)(?.md) <span class="margnote">.
913</span>

'Slaughter and peaceful homes are enemies! those who would have peace
hate slaughter, and if those who slaughter are so hateful, then put an
end, O king, to those who practise it! <span class="margnote">.
914</span>

'And bid these find release, as those who drink

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

and yet are parched with thirst.' Then the king clasping together his
hands, with greatest reverence and joyful heart, <span
class="margnote">. 915</span>

(Said), 'That which you now seek, may you obtain quickly the fruit
thereof; having obtained the perfect fruit, return I pray and graciously
receive me!' <span class="margnote">. 916</span>

Bodhisattva, his heart inwardly acquiescing, purposing to accomplish his
prayer, departing, pursued his road, going to the place where Arâ*d*a
Kâlâma dwelt, <span class="margnote">. 917</span>

Whilst the king with all his retinue, their hands clasped, themselves
followed a little space, then with thoughtful and mindful heart,
returned once more to Râ*g*ag*ri*ha! <span class="margnote">. 918</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_334"></span>[120:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_334.md) The symbols are
'ho-lai;' the translation may be simply 'descendant of a noble (ariya)
and renowned family.'

<span id="fn_335"></span>[120:2](sbe1913.htm#fr_335.md) Or, for men's sake.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[120:3](sbe1913.htm#fr_336.md) This line literally
translated is, 'Religion requires (me) thus to speak,' or, if the
expression 'gm shi' refers to what has been said (as it generally does),
then the line will run thus,' Religion justifies you in speaking as you
have.'

<span id="fn_337"></span>[120:4](sbe1913.htm#fr_337.md) We cannot place
(i.e. fix the place) where religion (or, virtue and right principle)
must dwell.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[121:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_338.md) Like frozen hail
and fierce burning fire.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[121:2](sbe1913.htm#fr_339.md) Robbers of
impermanency.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[121:3](sbe1913.htm#fr_340.md) That is, are as
unreal as an apparition.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[122:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_341.md) The literal
translation of this line would be, 'Taxing the gold of Lim the *Ri*shi;'
or, 'of the harvest ingathered by the *Ri*shi.'

<span id="fn_342"></span>[122:2](sbe1913.htm#fr_342.md) These lines refer
to the transfer of heavenly power from *S*akra to others, but the myth
is not known to me; and there is confusion in the text, which is
probably corrupt.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[123:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_343.md) The sense of this
passage seems to be that what is called by men a virtuous life, is but a
form of regulated vice.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[124:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_344.md) The foolish world.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[125:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_345.md) This line may be
translated, 'as the appearance of the shambles.'

<span id="fn_346"></span>[125:2](sbe1913.htm#fr_346.md) I do not know to
what this refers; the symbol 'shing' may not only mean 'the power of
speech,' but also 'musical power' or 'music;' or it may mean 'celebrity.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[126:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_347.md) Or, 'that follows
after form-covetousness.'

<span id="fn_348"></span>[130:1](sbe1913.htm#fr_348.md) This line literally
translated is,' Who drink rain, not rain-body;' there may be a misprint,
but I cannot see how to correct the text. The sense of the text and
context appears to be this, that as there are those who drink the
rain-clouds and yet are parched with thirst, so there are those who
constantly practise religious duties and yet are still unblest. Compare
Epistle by Jude, ver. 12 'Clouds without water.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 12. Visit To Arâ*d*a Udrarâma](sbe1914.md)
