[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1904)  [Next](sbe1906.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 3. DISGUST AT SORROW <span id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111.md).

Without are pleasant garden glades, flowing fountains, pure refreshing
lakes, with every kind of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

flower, and trees with fruit, arranged in rows, deep shade beneath.
<span class="margnote">. 188</span>

There, too, are various kinds of wondrous birds, flying and sporting in
the midst, and on the surface of the water the four kinds of flowers,
bright colour’d, giving out their floating scent; <span
class="margnote">. 189</span>

Minstrel maidens <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md) cause their
songs, and chorded music, to invite the prince. He, hearing the sounds
of singing, sighs for the pleasures of the garden shades, <span
class="margnote">. 190</span>

And cherishing within these happy thoughts <span
id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113.md), he dwelt upon the joys of an outside
excursion; even as the chained elephant ever longs for the free desert
wilds. <span class="margnote">. 191</span>

The royal father, hearing that the prince would enjoy to wander through
the gardens, first ordered all his attendant officers to adorn and
arrange them, after their several offices: <span class="margnote">.
192</span>

To make level and smooth the king's highway, to remove from the path all
offensive matter, all old persons, diseased or deformed, all those
suffering through poverty or great grief, <span class="margnote">.
193</span>

So that his son in his present humour might see nothing likely to
afflict his heart. The adornments being duly made, the prince was
invited to an audience; <span class="margnote">. 194</span>

The king seeing his son approach, patted his head and looking at the
colour of his face, feelings of sorrow and joy intermingled, bound him.
His mouth willing to speak, his heart restrained. <span
class="margnote">. 195</span>

(Now see) the jewel-fronted gaudy chariot; the four equally-pacing,
stately horses; good-tempered

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

and well-trained; young and of graceful appearance; <span
class="margnote">. 196</span>

Perfectly pure and white, and draped with flowery coverings. In the same
chariot stands the (stately) driver; the streets were scattered over
with flowers; precious drapery fixed on either side of the way, <span
class="margnote">. 197</span>

With dwarfed trees lining the road, costly vessels employed for
decoration, hanging canopies and variegated banners, silken curtains,
moved by the rustling breeze, <span class="margnote">. 198</span>

Spectators arranged on either side of the path. With bodies bent and
glistening eyes, eagerly gazing, but not rudely staring, as the blue
lotus flower (they bent) drooping in the air, <span class="margnote">.
199</span>

Ministers and attendants flocking round him, as stars following the
chief of the constellation <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md); all
uttering the same suppressed whisper of admiration, at a sight so seldom
seen in the world; <span class="margnote">. 200</span>

Rich and poor, humble and exalted, old and young and middle-aged, all
paid the greatest respect, and invoked blessings on the occasion: <span
class="margnote">. 201</span>

So the country-folk and the town-folk, hearing that the prince was
coming forth, the well-to-do not waiting for their servants, those
asleep and awake not mutually calling to one another, <span
class="margnote">. 202</span>

The six kinds of creatures not gathered together and penned, the money
not collected and locked up, the doors and gates not fastened, all went
pouring along the way on foot; <span class="margnote">. 203</span>

The towers were filled and the mounds by the trees, the windows and the
terraces along the streets; with bent body fearing to lift their eyes,
carefully

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

seeing that there was nothing about them to offend, <span
class="margnote">. 204</span>

Those seated on high addressing those seated on the ground, those going
on the road addressing those passing on high, the mind intent on one
object alone; so that if a heavenly form had flown past, <span
class="margnote">. 205</span>

Or a form entitled to highest respect, there would have been no
distraction visible, so intent was the body and so immovable the limbs.
And now beautiful as the opening lily, <span class="margnote">.
206</span>

He advances towards the garden glades, wishing to accomplish the words
of the holy prophet (*Ri*shi). The prince seeing the ways prepared and
watered, and the joyous holiday appearance of the people, <span
class="margnote">. 207</span>

(Seeing too) the drapery and the chariot pure, bright, shining, his
heart exulted greatly and rejoiced. The people (on their part) gazed at
the prince, so beautifully adorned, with all his retinue, <span
class="margnote">. 208</span>

Like an assembled company of kings (gathered) to see a heaven-born
prince. And now a Deva-râ*g*a of the Pure abode, suddenly appears by the
side of the road; <span class="margnote">. 209</span>

His form changed into that of an old man, struggling for life, his heart
weak and oppressed. The prince seeing the old man, filled with
apprehension, asked his charioteer, <span class="margnote">. 210</span>

'What kind of man is this? his head white and his shoulders bent, his
eyes bleared and his body withered, holding a stick to support him along
the way. <span class="margnote">. 211</span>

'Is his body suddenly dried up by the heat, or has he been born in this
way?' The charioteer, his heart much embarrassed, scarcely dared to
answer truly, <span class="margnote">. 212</span>

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

Till the pure-born (Deva) added his spiritual power, and caused him to
frame a reply in true words: 'His appearance changed, his vital powers
decayed, filled with sorrow, with little pleasure, <span
class="margnote">. 213</span>

'His spirits gone, his members nerveless, these are the indications of
what is called "old age." This man was once a sucking child, brought up
and nourished at his mother's breast, <span class="margnote">.
214</span>

'And as a youth full of sportive life, handsome, and in enjoyment of the
five pleasures; as years passed on, his frame decaying, he is brought
now to the waste of age.' <span class="margnote">. 215</span>

The prince greatly agitated and moved, asked his charioteer another
question and said, 'Is yonder man the only one afflicted with age, or
shall I, and others also, be such as he?' <span class="margnote">.
216</span>

The charioteer again replied and said, 'Your highness also inherits this
lot, as time goes on, the form itself is changed, and this must
doubtless come, beyond all hindrance: <span class="margnote">.
217</span>

'The youthful form must wear the garb of age, throughout the world, this
is the common lot.' Bodhisattva, who had long prepared the foundation of
pure and spotless wisdom, <span class="margnote">. 218</span>

Broadly setting the root of every high quality, with a view to gather
large fruit in his present life, hearing these words respecting the
sorrow of age, was afflicted in mind, and his hair stood up-right. <span
class="margnote">. 219</span>

Just as the roll of the thunder and the storm alarm and put to flight
the cattle; so was Bodhisattva affected by the words; shaking with
apprehension, he deeply sighed; <span class="margnote">. 220</span>

Constrained at heart because of the pain of 'age;'

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

with shaking head and constant gaze, he thought upon this misery of
decay; what joy or pleasure can men take (he thought), <span
class="margnote">. 221</span>

In that which soon must wither, stricken by the marks of age; affecting
all without exception; though gifted now with youth and strength, yet
not one but soon must change and pine away. <span class="margnote">.
222</span>

The eye beholding such signs as these before it, how can it not be
oppressed by a desire to escape <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115.md)?
Bodhisattva then addressed his charioteer, \`Quickly turn your chariot
and go back, <span class="margnote">. 223</span>

'Ever thinking on this subject of old age approaching, what pleasures
now can these gardens afford, the years of my life like the fast-flying
wind; turn your chariot, and with speedy wheels take me to my palace.'
<span class="margnote">. 224</span>

And so his heart keeping in the same sad tone, (he was) as one who
returns to a place of entombment; unaffected by any engagement or
employment, so he found no rest in anything within his home. <span
class="margnote">. 225</span>

The king hearing of his son's sadness urged (his companions) to induce
him again to go abroad, and forthwith incited his ministers and
attendants to decorate the gardens even more than before. <span
class="margnote">. 226</span>

The Deva then caused himself to appear as a sick man; struggling for
life, he stood by the wayside, his body swollen and disfigured, sighing
with deep-drawn groans, <span class="margnote">. 227</span>

His hands and knees contracted and sore with disease, his tears flowing
as he piteously muttered (his petition). The prince asked his
charioteer, 'What sort of man, again, is this?' <span class="margnote">.
228</span>

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

Replying he said, 'This is a sick man. The four elements all confused
and disordered, worn and feeble, with no remaining strength, bent down
with weakness, looking to his fellow-men for help.' <span
class="margnote">. 229</span>

The prince hearing the words thus spoken, immediately became sad and
depressed in heart, and asked, 'Is this the only man afflicted thus, or
are others liable to the same (calamity)?' <span class="margnote">.
230</span>

In reply he said, 'Through all the world, men are subject to the same
condition; those who have bodies must endure affliction, the poor and
ignorant, as well as the rich and great.' <span class="margnote">.
231</span>

The prince, when these words met his ears, was oppressed with anxious
thought and grief; his body and his mind were moved throughout, just as
the moon upon the ruffled tide. <span class="margnote">. 232</span>

'Placed thus in the great furnace of affliction, say! what rest or quiet
can there be! Alas! that worldly men, (blinded by) ignorance and
oppressed with dark delusion, <span class="margnote">. 233</span>

'Though the robber sickness may appear at any time, yet live with blithe
and joyous hearts!' On this, turning his chariot back again, he grieved
to think upon the pain of sickness. <span class="margnote">. 234</span>

As a man beaten and wounded sore, with body weakened, leans upon his
staff, so dwelt he in the seclusion of his palace, lone-seeking, hating
worldly pleasures. <span class="margnote">. 235</span>

The king hearing once more of his son's return, asked anxiously the
reason why, and in reply was told--'he saw the pain of sickness.' The
king in fear like one beside himself, <span class="margnote">.
236</span>

Roundly blamed the keepers of the way; his heart constrained, his lips
spoke not; again he

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

increased the crowd of music women, the sounds of merriment twice louder
than aforetime, <span class="margnote">. 237</span>

If by these sounds and sights (the prince) might be gratified; and
indulging worldly feelings, might not hate his home. Night and day the
charm of melody increased, but his heart was still unmoved by it. <span
class="margnote">. 238</span>

The king himself then went forth to observe everything successively, and
to make the gardens even yet more attractive, selecting with care the
attendant women, that they might excel in every point of personal
beauty; <span class="margnote">. 239</span>

Quick in wit and able to arrange matters well, fit to ensnare men by
their winning looks; he placed additional keepers along the king's way,
he strictly ordered every offensive sight to be removed, <span
class="margnote">. 240</span>

And earnestly exhorted the illustrious coachman, to look well and pick
out the road as he went. And now that Deva of the pure abode, again
caused the appearance of a dead man; <span class="margnote">. 241</span>

Four persons carrying the corpse lifted it on high, and appeared (to be
going on) in front of Bodhisattva; the surrounding people saw it not,
but only Bodhisattva and the charioteer; <span class="margnote">.
242</span>

(Once more) he asked, 'What is this they carry? with streamers and
flowers of every choice description, whilst the followers are
overwhelmed with grief, tearing their hair and wailing piteously.' <span
class="margnote">. 243</span>

And now the gods instructing the coachman, he replied and said, 'This is
a "dead man," all his powers of body destroyed, life departed; his heart
without thought, his intellect dispersed; <span class="margnote">.
244</span>

'His spirit gone, his form withered and decayed; stretched out as a dead
log; family ties broken

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --all his friends
who once loved him, clad in white cerements, <span class="margnote">.
245</span>

'Now no longer delighting to behold him, remove him to lie in some
hollow ditch (tomb).' The prince hearing the name of DEATH, his heart
constrained by painful thoughts, <span class="margnote">. 246</span>

He asked, 'Is this the only dead man, or does the world contain like
instances?' Replying thus he said, 'All, everywhere, the same; he who
begins his life must end it likewise; <span class="margnote">.
247</span>

'The strong and lusty and the middle-aged, having a body, cannot but
decay (and die).' The prince now harassed and perplexed in mind; his
body bent upon the chariot leaning-board, <span class="margnote">.
248</span>

With bated breath and struggling accents, stammered thus, 'Oh worldly
men! how fatally deluded! beholding everywhere the body brought to dust,
yet everywhere the more carelessly living; <span class="margnote">.
249</span>

'The heart is neither lifeless wood nor stone, and yet it thinks not
"all is vanishing!"' Then turning, he directed his chariot to go back,
and no longer waste his time in wandering. <span class="margnote">.
250</span>

How could he, whilst in fear of instant death, go wandering here and
there with lightened heart! The charioteer remembering the king's
exhortation feared much nor dared go back; <span class="margnote">.
251</span>

Straightforward then he pressed his panting steeds, passed onward to the
gardens, (came to) the groves and babbling streams of crystal water, the
pleasant trees, spread out with gaudy verdure, <span class="margnote">.
252</span>

The noble living things and varied beasts so wonderful, the flying
creatures and their notes melodious, all charming and delightful td the
eye and ear, even as the heavenly Nandavana. <span class="margnote">.
253</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[29:2](sbe1905.htm#fr_111.md) In this section we
have an account of the excursion of the royal prince without the
precincts of the palace, and the sights which affected his mind with a
desire to leave the world.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[30:1](sbe1905.htm#fr_112.md) Otherwise,
singing-women.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[30:2](sbe1905.htm#fr_113.md) Or, thoughts of
happiness.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[31:1](sbe1905.htm#fr_114.md) As stars following
the constellation-king.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[34:1](sbe1905.htm#fr_115.md) How can a man. not
(desire) to remove it (i.e. old age) as a hateful thing?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 4. Putting Away Desire](sbe1906.md)
