[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1901)  [Next](sbe1903) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

HAVING been asked by the Editor of 'the Sacred Books of the East' to
contribute to the series a volume from the Buddhist literature of China,
I undertook, with some distrust, to translate from that language the
Phû-yau-king, which is the second version of the Lalita Vistara, known
in China, and dated A.D. 308.

After some months of rather disappointing work I found the text so
corrupt and imperfect, and the style of the composition so inflated,
that I gave up my task, having completed the translation of six chapters
(kiouen) of the text, out of eight.

The editor being still desirous to have one book at least from the
Chinese Tripi*t*aka in his collection of translations (and more
especially a translation of some Life of Buddha, the date of which could
be fixed), kindly renewed his request, and proposed that the
Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king, which professed to be a translation of
A*s*vaghosha's Buddha*k*arita, made by an Indian priest called
Dharmaraksha (or Dharmâkshara), about the year 420 A.D., should be
substituted for the work first selected.

This is the work here translated. The difficulties have been many, and
the result can only be regarded as tentative. The text itself, and I
have had only one Chinese text to work on, is in many places corrupt,
and the style of the composition, especially in the metaphysical
portions of it, is abstruse and technical. The original Sanskrit, I am
told, differs considerably from the Chinese translation, and except in
the restoration of proper names, in which the editor of these books has
most readily helped me, the assistance derived from it has been very
little. I offer the

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

result of my work, therefore, with some mistrust, and yet with this
confidence, that due allowance will be made for imperfections in the
preparation of a first translation of a text comprising nearly 10,000
lines of poetry, printed in the original without stops or notes of any
sort, and in a difficult style of Chinese composition.

### NORTHERN BUDDHISM.

This term is now well recognised. It is used to denote the Buddhism of
Nepal, Thibet, China, Japan, and Mongolia, as distinguished from the
Buddhism of Ceylon, Burmah, and Siam. The radical difference between the
two schools is this, that Northern Buddhism is the system developed
after contact with Northern tribes settled on the Indus, while the
Southern school, on the contrary, represents the primitive form of the
Buddhist faith as it came (presumably) from the hands of its founder and
his immediate successors. We might, without being far wrong, denote the
developed school as the Buddhism of the valley of the Indus, whilst the
earlier school is the Buddhism of the valley of the Ganges. In China
there is a curious mixture of the teaching of both schools. The books of
the contemplative sect in Southern China are translations or
accommodations from the teaching of men belonging to the South of India,
whilst in the North we find the books principally followed are those
brought by priests from the countries bordering on the Indus, and
therefore representing the developed school of the later complex system.

Northern Buddhism, again, may be divided into two, if not three,
distinct periods of development, or epochs. The earliest includes in it
the period during which the teaching of the immediate followers of
Buddha, who brought their books or traditions northward and there
disseminated them, generally prevailed; this is called the teaching of
the 'little vehicle' (Hinayâna), or 'imperfect means of conveyance'
(across the sea of sense). The second period is that during which the
expanded form of belief denoted as the 'great

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

vehicle' (Mahâyâna) was accepted; here the radical idea is that the
teaching of Buddha provides 'universal salvation' for the world.
Thirdly, the 'indefinitely expanded' form, known as Vaipulya, which is
founded on the idea of a universal nature, to which all living things
belong, and which, by recovering itself in each case, secures for the
subject complete restoration to the one nature from which all living
things have wandered. This is evidently a form of pure Pantheism, and
denotes the period when the distinctive belief of Buddhism merged into
later Brahmanism, if indeed it did not originate it.

We cannot lay down any sharp line of division (either as to time or
minute difference of doctrine) between these forms of thought as they
are found in the books; but they may be traced back, through the
teaching of the sects into which the system became separated, to the
great schism of the primitive Buddhist church at Vai*s*âlî, too years
after the Nirvâ*n*a.

With respect to this schism the statement made in the Dîpava*m*sa <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) is this: 'The wicked Bhikkus, the
Va*gg*iputtakas (i.e. the Vai*s*âlî Buddhists), who had been
excommunicated by the Theras, gained another party; and many people,
holding a wrong doctrine, ten thousand, assembled and (also) held a
council. Therefore this Dhamma Council is called the Great Council
(Mahâsaṅgîti),' (Oldenberg's translation, p. 140.) Turning now to the
Mahâsaṅghika version of the Vinaya, which was translated into Chinese by
Fa-hien (circ. 420 A.D.), who brought it from Pâ*t*aliputra (chap.
XXXVI), we read (K. 40, fol. 23 b), 'After the Nirvâ*n*a (Ni-pan, i.e.
Nibbâna) of Buddha the Great Kâ*s*yapa, collecting the Vinaya Pi*t*aka,
was the (first) Great Master (Mahâsthavira), and his collection of the
Dharmapi*t*aka was in 80,000 divisions. After the death (mih to,
destruction) of the great Kâ*s*yapa the next master (lord) was Ânanda,
who also held the Dharmapi*t*aka in 80,000 (divisions). After him the
honourable (lord) Mo-yan-tin (Madhyântika) was chief, and he also held
the Dharmapi*t*aka in 80,000 (divisions). After him came

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *S*anavâsa
(she-na-po-sa), who also held the Dharmapi*t*aka in 80,000 (divisions).
After him came Upagupta, of whom the lord of the world (Buddha)
predicted that as "a Buddha without marks" (alaksha*n*ako Buddha*h*; see
Burnouf, Introd. p. 378, note 1) he should overcome Mâra, which is
related in the Avadânas (yin ün). This (master) could not hold the
80,000 divisions of the Dharmapi*t*aka. After him there were five
schools (the school of the Great Assembly" being the first of the five)
to which the following names were given: (1) Dharmaguptas, (2)
Mahî*s*âsakas, (3) Kâ*s*yapîyas, (4) Sarvâstivâdas. This last is also
called the school "that holds the existence of all," because it
maintains the distinct nature of (things existing in) past, present, and
future time. Each of these schools had its own president and distinctive
doctrine. Because of this in the time of A*s*okarâ*g*a, when the king
was in doubt what was right and what was wrong, he consulted the priests
as to what should be done to settle the matter. They replied, "The law
(dharma) ought to be settled by the majority." The king said, "If it be
so, let the matter be put to the vote (by lots or tokens of wood), and
so let it be seen who is right (in the majority)." On this they cast
lots, and our sect (i.e. the Mahâsaṅghikas) was in great preponderance.
Therefore it is called the Mahâsaṅgîti or Great Assembly.'

From this it appears that the Mahâsaṅghikas, on their part, claimed to
be the original portion of the Buddhist church, and that they regarded
the four sects, whose names are given, to be heretical. The same
colophon has a further notice respecting this subject. It states that
'There was in former times in Mid-India a wicked king who ruled the
world. From him all the *S*rama*n*as fled, and the sacred books were
scattered far and wide. This wicked king having died, there was a good
king who in his turn requested the *S*rama*n*as to Come back to their
country to receive his protection (nurture). At this time in
Pâ*t*aliputra there were 500 priests who wished to decide (matters of
faith), but there was no copy of the Vinaya, or teacher who knew the
Vinaya, to be found. They therefore sent forthwith to the *G*etavana
Vihâra to copy out the Vinaya in its original character, as

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

it had been handed down to that period. Fa-hien, when he was in the
country of Magadha, in the town of Pâ*t*aliputra, in the temple of
A*s*okarâ*g*a, in the Vihâra of the Southern Devarâ*g*a (Virûdhaka),
copied out the Sanskrit (Fan) original and brought it back with him to
P’ing *k*au, and in the twelfth year of the title I-hi (417 A.D.) \[416
according to the cyclical characters\] and the tenth month, he
translated it.' Here we seem to have an obscure allusion to a first and
second A*s*oka. Is it possible that the reference is to an actual
council held at Pâ*t*aliputra in opposition to the orthodox assembly
under Moggaliputta? The 500 priests who were sent to the *G*etavana
might have represented the popular party, and being without a copy of
their version of the Vinaya, they procured one from *S*râvastî. This may
or may not be so, and in the absence of further details we cannot give
it much weight.

On examining the copy of the Vinaya alluded to by Fa-hien, viz. that
belonging to the Mahâsaṅghikas, we find ample reason for adhering to the
statement of the Dîpava*m*sa, viz. 'that the members of the great
congregation proclaimed a doctrine against the faith' (p. 139 op. cit.)
The sections illustrating the Parâ*g*ika and other rules are of a gross
and offensive character. The rules are illustrated by an abundance of
tales or *g*âtakas introduced in the text (this seems to favour the
presence of a Northern element in the redaction). The account of the two
councils differs from that found in the other copies of the Vinaya, and
in the history of the second council at Vai*s*âlî there is mention made
only of one of the sins of the 'Va*gg*iputtakas,' viz. receiving money;
but the council itself is called, according to this account, for the
purpose of revising the canon. Now this seems to show that the
Mahâsaṅghika school took its rise at this time, and that a redaction of
the canon was prepared by that school distinct from that in common use.
According to the statement found in the Dîpava*m*sa, 'they composed
other Suttas and another Vinaya' (p. 141, § 36). This is confirmed by an
account which we have given us in a work belonging to the Vinaya class
in the Chinese Tripi*t*aka, called 'The Questions of *S*âriputra'

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Catalogue, case
48, miscellaneous). I thought this might be the work referred to in the
edict of A*s*oka as the Questions of Upatissa,' but on examination it
appears to be a production of the Mahâsaṅghika school, and not
exclusively bearing on questions of the Vinaya. Perhaps it was written
and named in opposition to the orthodox text alluded to in the edict. To
exhibit the teaching of the school to which it belongs I will briefly
allude to the earlier portion of this Sûtra. The scene is laid in
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, the question proposed by *S*âriputra is, 'Who is the true
disciple of Buddha, and who not?' Buddha replies, 'The true disciple is
one who attends to and obeys the precepts, as the Bhikshu Pao-sse, i.e.
precious thing (Yasa), who hearing the statement of Buddha that all
things (sa*m*skârâ) were impermanent, immediately perceived the whole
truth. The disciple who attends to the tradition of the church is also a
true one, as the Bhikshu who attended to *S*âriputra's statement
respecting Kâludâyi's drinking wine. Those, on the other hand, who
neglect either the direct instruction of Buddha, or that of his
successors--these are not true disciples.' *S*âriputra then proceeds to
ask what are the permissions and what the prohibitions made by Buddha in
the rules of the Vinaya, especially in respect of food, as, for example,
where Buddha forbids an early meal at the invitation of a villager, or
where he permits the use of fish and other condiments. Buddha replies
that these things must depend on circumstances, and that the rule of the
true disciple is to follow the directions of the president of the
church. For instance, after my Nirvâ*n*a (he proceeds) the great
Kâ*s*yapa will have authority equal to mine; after Kâ*s*yapa, Ânanda;
after Amanda, Madhyântika; after Madhyântika, *S*anakavâsa; after
*S*anakavâsa, Upagupta; after Upagupta there will be a Maurya (king)
*K*u-ko (A*s*oka), who will rule the world and extend the Scriptures
(Dharmavinaya). His grandson will be called Pushyamitra
(Fu-sha-mih-to-lo), who will succeed to the empire of the righteous king
(or who will succeed directly to the empire of the king, or the royal
estate). This one will ask his ministers what he must

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

do to gain an undying fame; and being told he must either patronise
religion as his predecessor or persecute it, he will adopt the latter
course, overthrow the pagodas (dâgobas), destroy the Scriptures, murder
the people. Five hundred Arhats, however, will escape the persecution.
Meantime the Scriptures being taken up to Maitreya, he will preserve
them. At last the king and his army being destroyed (by a mountain cast
on them), this line of kings will perish. Afterwards a righteous king
will succeed, and Maitreya will send down 300 youths, born
apparitionally among men, who will recover the law from the 500 Arhats,
and go amongst men instructing them, so that once more the Scriptures,
which had been taken to heaven by Maitreya, will be disseminated in the
world. At this time the king of the country will divide the Dharmavinaya
into many parts; and will build a strong-hold in which to preserve them,
and so make it difficult for those wishing to consult them, to do so.
Then an old Bhikshu of good repute will write a remonstrance, and
selecting such passages of the Vinaya as are in accordance with
Kâ*s*yapa's council, and known as the Vinaya of the 'Great Congregation'
(will make them known); the other party will, on their part, include
with these the false additions that have been since made. Thus will
begin the contention and wrangling. At length the king will order the
two schools to assemble, and the matter to be put to the vote, in this
way,--taking a number of slips of wood, some black, the others white, he
will say, 'let the adherents of the old school take the black slips, and
the new school the white slips.' Then those taking the black slips will
be myriads in number, those taking the white only hundreds. Thus there
will be a separation. The old school will be called 'the Mahâsaṅghikas,'
the new 'the school of the elders,' and hence also named 'the Ta-pi-lo'
(Sthâvira (school)).

This obscure account tends at any rate to show that the original
separation of the church, from which resulted the later schisms, began
at the time of the Great Assembly at Vai*s*âlî. Whether we are to gather
that a second and final separation took place afterwards when the good
king was

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

reigning (Dharma-A*s*oka?) is not certain, but it seems to be implied in
this and the former record, and is in every respect probable. This would
therefore account for the silence of the Northern school respecting the
Council at Pâ*t*aliputra, and would fully explain why the Sthâvira
school insists on that council as the charter, so to speak, of their
orthodoxy.

### LIVES OF BUDDHA.

There is no life of Buddha in the Southern school. Facts connected with
his life are found in the different canonical books, and these being put
together give an out-line of his career, though there is no single work
devoted to the account of his life. But there are many such works in the
Chinese collection of books. Some of them still exist, others have been
lost. The earliest of which we have any record was translated by
*K*u-fa-lan (Gobhara*n*a) between A.D. 68 and A.D. 70. It was called the

#### (1) Fo-pen-hing-king

<span id="img__01600"></span> ![](img/_01600.jpg)

in five chapters. It is lost, but there are quotations from it found in
Chinese Buddhist books which indicate its character. In the commentary,
for example, of Taou-shih, who edited a life of Buddha by Wong pûh,
there is frequent reference to a work, Pen-hing-king, which in all
probability is the book under our present consideration. This we gather
from a comparison of these quotations with the text of other works that
bear a similar title. For instance, there is a book called
Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king, which is stated to be a Chinese version of the
Abhinishkrama*n*a Sûtra, that is sometimes quoted as the Pen-ping-king,
but the passages given by Taou-shih are not to be found in this work.
Neither are they taken from the Pen-hing-king, written by Paou-Yun, nor
are they to be found in the Pen-hing-king by A*s*vaghosha. We may justly
argue therefore that the commentator, Taou-shih, in quoting from the
Pen-hing-king, refers to the work translated by *K*u-fa-lan, which is

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

now lost. If so, the book can have differed in no material point from
the common legendary account of Buddha's early career. In § 8 the
Pen-ping is quoted in reference to the selection of Buddha's
birth-place; in § 11 the dream of Mâyâ at the conception of the child is
referred to. In § 23 there is the history of Asita and his horoscope. In
§ 27 the trial in athletic sports. In § 29 the enjoyment of the prince
in his palace for ten years. In § 31 the account of the excursion beyond
the walls and the sights of suffering. In § 33 the interview with his
father before his flight from the palace. In § 38 the act of cutting his
hair with his sword and the intervention of *S*akra. In § 39 his
exchange of garments with the hunter. In § 40 his visit to the *Ri*shis
in the snowy mountains. In § 41 the account of his six years' fast at
Gayâ. In § 44 there is allusion to the Nâgas Kalika and Mu*k*ilinda. In
§ 46 the rice milk given by the two daughters of Su*g*âta. Here the
quotations from the Pen-hing conic to an end. We can scarcely doubt
therefore that this work ended with the account of the supreme
enlightenment of Buddha. It is said that the Fo-pen-hing was in five
kiouen; it could not therefore have been a short abstract, but must have
been a complete history of Buddha from his birth to the period of his
victory over Mâra. It would thus correspond with what is termed the
'intermediate epoch,' in the Southern records. We may conclude therefore
that such a life of Buddha was in circulation in India in a written form
at or before the beginning of our era. It was brought thence by
*K*u-fa-lan, and translated into Chinese A.D. 67-70. M. Stanislas
Julien, in the well-known communication found on p. xvii n. of the
translation of the Lalita Vistara from Tibetan by M. Foucaux, speaks of
this work as the first version of the Lalita Vistara into Chinese.

We have next to consider a work translated into Chinese by two
*S*rama*n*as from India in the year A.D. 194, and named

#### (2) Siu-hing-pen-k’i-king.

<span id="img__01700"></span> ![](img/_01700.jpg)

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This work belongs
to case lxviii in my Catalogue of the Buddhist Tripi*t*aka, and is
numbered 664 by Mr. Bunyiu Nanjio. It was translated by *K*u-ta-lih
(Mahâbâla) and Kong-mang-tsiang. As the title indicates, it is a brief
memoir of Buddha's preparatory career (i.e. preparatory to his
enlightenment), in two parts <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) and seven
vargas. It is stated in the work, Kao-săng-fu, K. i, fol. 8/1, that this
book was brought from Kapilavastu by the *S*rama*n*a Dharmaphala
(Tan-kwo). This is also repeated in the work Lai-tai-san-pao, K. iv,
fol. 18. The opening scene therefore lies in Kapilavastu. Its language
is sufficiently exaggerated, but not to that wearisome degree found in
the later Sûtras. It begins with the nomination of Buddha by Dîpaṅkara,
and ends with the defeat of Mâra under the tree of knowledge. It
therefore includes both the distant and the intermediate epochs. I shall
give the headings of the seven vargas, with some remarks on the
character of the narrative.

Varga 1 (pp. 1-9). 'Exhibiting change.' The scene is laid in
Kapilavastu, in the Nyagrodha Vihâra. Surrounded by a vast assembly of
disciples, Buddha enquires of Maudgalyâyana, 'Can you for the sake of
all living things <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) declare the origin
of my career (pen k’i)?' On this Maudgalyâyana, addressing Buddha in the
usual orthodox way, asks him to recite the history in virtue of his own
inherent spiritual power. On this Buddha declares how he had been born
during innumerable kalpas in every character of life for the sake of
stemming the tide of lust and covetousness which engulphed the world,
and by a life of continual progress through the exercise of the virtues
of wisdom, patience, charity, &c. had arrived at the final condition of
enlightenment. He then gives the history of his nomination when
Dîpaṅkara was Buddha, and of his successive births until finally, after
having been born as Vessantara, he occupied the Tushita heaven, and
thence descended to be

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

born in Kapilavastu as the Bodhisattva about to accomplish his career as
Buddha.

Varga 2. Bodhisattva descends as a spirit. In this section we find an
account of Bodhisattva's conception. He descends under the form <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) of a white elephant, and is seen by Mâyâ in
a dream: 'She beholds in the middle of heaven a white elephant
resplendent with glory, and lighting up the world, accompanied by music
and sounds of rejoicing, and whilst accompanying Devas scatter flowers
and incense, the elephant approaches her, and for a moment hovers above
the spot and disappears.' The dream is interpreted by the soothsayers as
an exceedingly fortunate one, because 'it indicated the descent of a
holy spirit (Shing-shin) into the womb.' The child born therefore would
be either a wheel-turning flying-as-he-goes (fi-hing), universal
monarch, or a Buddha 'born to save the world.' The queen from that
moment leads a pure, uncontaminate life.

'Now on account of this conception,  
Bearing as I do a Mahâsattva,  
I give up all false, polluting ways,  
And both in heart and body rest in purity.'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The kings of
neighbouring countries bring their presents of gold, silver, jewels, and
robes, and on the eighth day of the fourth month the child is born under
an A*s*oka tree. The angels sing for joy, and thirty-two supernatural
events indicate the nativity. We need not enumerate all these events;
the first, however, is that the earth was greatly shaken, and all rough
and hilly places became smooth. The fifteenth is, the star Pushya came
down and appeared waiting on the prince. The last is that the tree
spirit (i.e. the spirit residing in the tree under which the Bodhisattva
was born) appearing from it as a man bowed his head in worship <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4). We then have an account of Asita's visit
and prediction. The

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

varga concludes with the account of his superiority over his teachers.

Varga 3. The athletic contest. This section contains an account of the
prince's marriage with Ku-i (Gopî) after the exhibition of his strength
in fighting, wrestling, and archery. The prince in this account restores
the elephant to life which Devadatta had killed, and is charged by
Devadatta and his followers as being strengthened by Mâra (the devil) in
doing the wonders he did. He marries Gopî, and with 60,000 attendant
women dwells in his palace. But his heart is not at rest.

Varga 4. The excursion for observation. This is the usual account of the
prince's visit to the garden and the sights he beheld. The charioteer is
accompanied by 1000 other chariots and 10,000 cavalry. A *S*uddha Deva
called Nandahara assumes the form of an old man, a sick man, a corpse,
and a *S*rama*n*a successively, and thus determines the prince to leave
the world (worldly life) and become an ascetic. In order to distract his
mind the king requests the prince to attend a ploughing festival. Whilst
thus engaged he beholds the suffering of the oxen, and the heat and toil
of the men, and the countless insects being destroyed and devoured by
the birds. Retiring under the shadow of a *G*ambu tree <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) he enters Dhyâna (profound meditation). The
king hearing where he was proceeds to the spot, and observes the
branches of the trees bent down <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) over
the prince, and on approaching the horses bend their knees in reverence.
The king and his retinue then return to the city. On entering the gate
he is met by countless thousands of people with flowers and incense,
whilst the soothsayers shout with joy, 'O king! live for ever!' The king
enquiring the reason, the Brahmans tell him that to-morrow the seven
treasures would appear, and the king would become a 'holy ruler' (a
*K*akravartin).

Varga 5. Leaving his home. The prince without ceasing

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

meditated on the joy of a contemplative life in the desert. Being now
nineteen years old, he vowed on the seventh day of the fourth month to
leave his home. In the middle of the night he was addressed by Ku-i his
wife, who had been troubled by five dreams. Having appeased her, the
gods determined, ere he composed himself again, to induce him to leave
his home. They sent Ou-suh-man \[is this Wésamuna? (Manual of Buddhism,
p. 51)\] to lull the people to sleep, whilst the Deva Nandahara causes
all the women of the palace to appear in loathsome attitudes, &c. The
prince beholding the sight, and regarding all things that exist 'as a
phantom, a vision, a dream, an echo,' called his coachman to bring his
horse, and accompanied by countless divine beings left the city. Leaving
the city they fled on their way, till at morning light they had gone 480
lis, and arrived at the A-nu-ma country (the river Anavamâ or Anomâ; a
Chinese note explains it as the 'ever-full'). Here he dismisses his
attendant and sends him back with the horse and his jewels to
Kapilavastu. Having cut off his hair, he proceeded to the Magadha
country, and there has an interview with Bimbisâra râ*g*a. To the
enquiry whence he came and what his title was, he replies, 'I come from
Ka-wei (Kapila or Kavila) to the east of the fragrant mountains and
north of the snowy mountains.' On this Bimbisâra asks him in haste,
'Surely you are not that celebrated Siddhârtha?' On his replying in the
affirmative, the king bows down at his feet, and asks why one so richly
endowed and so distinguished in his person was not a universal monarch,
and why he had left his home. The prince replies that he had gone forth
to seek deliverance from old age, disease, and death. On this follows a
long series of lines (geyas), beginning, 'Suppose we could.' Finally
Bodhisattva leaves the king and encounters Arâta and Kâlâma (i.e. Arâla
Kâlâma), but not satisfied with their teaching he again departs.

Varga 6. Six years' austerities. Bodhisattva goes forward and arrives at
the valley (river-valley (*k*uen)) of Se-na. This valley was level and
full of fruit trees, with no noxious insects or snakes. Here dwelt the
*Ri*shi (Tao-sse) Se-na, with 500 followers. Here Bodhisattva took his

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

residence under a *S*âla tree. The gods offer him nectar (sweet dew),
but he receives it not, but vows to take one grain of millet (hemp) a
day. When he had continued thus for six years, and reduced himself to
the verge of death, the two daughters of Se-na have a dream, in which
they see a lily having seven colours wither away; there comes a man who
waters it, and it revives, whilst other buds spring up on the face of
the water. Awaking they ask their father to explain the dream, but
neither he nor his followers can do so. On this *S*akra descends under
the form of a Brahma*k*ârin, who explains the dream. The girls having
prepared a dish of cream convey it to Bodhisattva; he receives it, and
his strength revives. Having washed his hands and flung the dish into
the river, whence it is carried by a golden-winged bird to heaven, he
proceeds to the Bodhi tree.

Varga 7. Defeats Mâra. Seated under the tree he causes a stream of light
to proceed from between his eyes and to enter the dwelling of Mâra.
Mâra, greatly disconcerted, knowing that the Bodhisattva if he fulfils
his purpose will overthrow his power, resolves to oppose him. His son
Sumati warns him against such an attempt, but Mâra, summoning his three
daughters, acquaints them with his design. They robe themselves in their
choicest attire, and with 500 attendants go to the spot where
Bodhisattva was. They proceed to tempt him with lascivious offers.
Bodhisattva with a word changes their appearance into that of old women.
On this Mâra, enraged, summons the king of the demon spirits (kwei-shin)
to assemble with eighteen myriads of others. They surround the tree for
a distance of thirty-six yo*g*anas, and assuming every shape (lions,
bears, tigers, elephants, oxen, horses, dogs, monkeys, &c.) they belch
forth smoke and fire. Bodhisattva sits unmoved. Mâra then advances and
endeavours to induce him to give up his purpose. Bodhisattva replies in
loving words, and finally the entire host is dispersed. Buddha then
arrives at perfect wisdom, the condition which neither Brahma nor any
other being had yet attained, and so completes his purpose.

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

The following life of Buddha, although named in the\_ catalogues, has
not come under my notice:

#### (3) Siau-pen-k’i-king

<span id="img__02300"></span> ![](img/_02300.jpg)

in two kiouen; translated by the *S*rama*n*a *K*i-yau, A.D. 196.

The next history of Buddha in point of the date of its translation is
the

#### (4) Ta-tseu-sui-ying-pen-k’i-king.

<span id="img__02301"></span> ![](img/_02301.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is the work
of an Upâsaka belonging to the Wu dynasty (222-264 A.D.), who came to
China towards the end of the After-Han dynasty, and was a diligent
translator. The work before us is a brief one, divided into two parts,
without any subdivision into sections. The first part, which resembles
the translation last noticed, takes us to the defeat of Mâra. The second
includes in it a description of Buddha's condition as the 'fully
enlightened,' and also the conversion of the fire-worshipping
Kâ*s*yapas. With respect to his work of preaching, this book has the
peculiarity of excluding all mention of the journey to Benares after the
enlightenment. It makes the conversion of the five men take place near
the Bodhi tree in Magadha, and omits all mention of Yasa, *S*âriputra,
or Maudgalyâyana. The account of the conversion of the Kâ*s*yapas is
full and circumstantial. It agrees in a marked way with the particulars
given in the Manual of Buddhism (Spence Hardy, pp. 188-191 ). The
illustrations of this event, given in the Sanchi Sculptures (plates
xxiv, xxxi, xxxii, 1st ed.), show that it was a popular episode in the
history of Buddha at the time of the completion of the Sanchi Stûpa. It
is also given in the following pages in A*s*vaghosha's work, so that we
cannot doubt this event formed part of the recognised work of Buddha as
a teacher. This short life therefore includes in it the three portions
known in the South as the distant, intermediate, and proximate epochs.
The last named, however, differs materially from the more expanded
account found in other books, and is in fact

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

confined to the labour of the conversion of the five men and the three
Kâ*s*yapa brothers.

We now come to the consideration of the life of Buddha known as the

#### (5) *K*ung-pen-k’i-king.

<span id="img__02400"></span> ![](img/_02400.jpg)

This translation was made by the *S*rama*n*a Dharmaphala in conjunction
with Kong-mang-tsiang, about the year 208 A.D. It was brought by
Dharmaphala from Kapilavastu, and it is said to be extracted from the
Dîrghâgama (the long Âgama), which is undoubtedly a primitive and, as we
should say, a canonical work. This translation is in two parts, divided
into 15 vargas.

Varga 1. Turning the wheel of the law. This section begins with Buddha's
interview with Upaka, after he had attained enlightenment, and gives an
account of the conversion of the five men.

Varga 2. Indicating changes. Contains the history of Yasa, and the
conversion of his four friends (Fu-nai, Pu*n*ya-*g*it; Vimala;
Kiu-yen-pih, Gavâmpati; Su-to, Subâhu).

Varga 3. The conversion of Kâ*s*yapa.

Varga 4. Converts Bimbisâra râ*g*a.

Varga 5. Conversion of *S*âriputra and Maudgalyâyana.

Varga 6. returns to his own country.

Varga 7. The history of Su-ta (i.e. Sudatta or Anâthapi*nd*ada).

Varga 8. The history of the queen of Udyâna, king of Kau*s*âmbî. She
would not comply with the king's wishes, because it was a fast day.

Varga 9. Gautamî becomes a Bhikshu*n*î.

Varga 10. Inconstancy. Contains the history of Prasena*g*it's interview
with Buddha, and of the minister who had lost his child.

Varga 11. Self love. Contains the history of an interview with
Prasena*g*it, and a sermon preached by Buddha on self-love.

Varga 12. Conversion of Mahâkâ*s*yapa (Agnidatta).

Varga 13. Conversion of Ambapâlî.

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

Varga 14. Discussion with the Nirgranthas.

Varga 15. Buddha eats the food fit for horses <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7).

It will be seen from the above summary, that so early at least as the
end of the second century A D. a life of Buddha, with the details above
named, was in circulation in Kapilavastu.

The next life of Buddha, in point of date, is the second version of the
Lalita Vistara, known in China as the

#### (6) Phû-yau-king.

<span id="img__02500"></span> ![](img/_02500.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This was
translated by the Indian priest Dharmaraksha, during the Western Tsin
dynasty, about A.D. 300. It is in eight chapters, and belongs to the
expanded class of Buddhist literature. The story of Buddha's life is
here told from his birth to his death, but in the exaggerated and
wearisome form peculiar to the works of this (expanded) school. It would
seem as if the idea of merit attaching to the reproduction of every word
of the sacred books had led the later writers, not only to reproduce the
original, but to introduce, by an easy but tiresome method, the
repetition of a simple idea under a multitude of verbal forms, and so
secure additional merit <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8).

There is another life of Buddha named in the Chinese Catalogues,
translated A.D. 420 by Buddhabhadra, who was a descendant of
Am*ri*todana, the uncle of Buddha. This life is named

#### (7) Kwo-hu-yin-ko-king.

<span id="img__02501"></span> ![](img/_02501.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is in four
kiouen. It has not come under my notice; but another translation of the
same text, likewise in four kiouen, and made shortly after Buddhabhadra
by a native of Mid-India called Gu*n*abhadra (A.D. 436), is before me.
This work is called

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

#### (8) Kwo-hu-hien-tsai-yin-ko-king.

<span id="img__02600"></span> ![](img/_02600.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is not divided
into sections, but each kiouen embraces a distinct portion of the
history.

Kiouen I contains an account of Sumedhas and his nomination by Dîpaṅkara
Buddha. It then proceeds to narrate the events attending the conception,
incarnation, and early years of the Bodhisattva until his tenth year,
and his superiority at school (p. 26).

Kiouen II begins with the martial contest and victory of Bodhisattva
over his compeers, and ends with the flight from his palace at nineteen
years of age (p. 27).

Kiouen III begins with Bodhisattva's interview with the different
*Ri*shis, and concludes with the conversion of the five men after
Buddha's enlightenment (p. 34).

Kiouen IV begins with the conversion of Yasa and his father, and
afterwards his fifty friends. It then gives in great detail the history
of the Kâ*s*yapas, and ends with an account of the gift of the
*G*etavana. This life of Buddha is of a circumstantial character, and is
full of interesting episodes.

The next memoir in point of time of translation is the history of Buddha
as it occurs in the Vinaya Pi*t*aka. I shall take as my example the
Vinaya according to the Mahî*s*âsaka school. In the 15th and 16th
chapters of this work is a brief life of Buddha. This copy of the Vinaya
was brought from Ceylon by Fa-hien at the beginning of the fifth century
(A.D. 414); it was not translated by him, but by Buddha*g*iva, a native
of Cophene, A.D. 423 (see Abstract of Four Lectures, p. 21), with the
assistance of Tao-sing (*K*u-tao-sing), a *S*rama*n*a of Khoten.

In this life the order of events (and the precise words occasionally)
agree with the Pâli of the Mahâvagga, as published by Oldenberg. It
begins, however, with the history of the origin of the *S*âkyas, and in
this it resembles the account in the Manual of Buddhism <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9), except that in the Chinese the

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

description of *G*anta, the son of Ambâ, is that he was contemptible and
ugly, whilst in the Singhalese account he is described as lovely and
well-favoured. After the complete enlightenment, Buddha sits in
contemplation at the foot of different trees. Here there occurs a
divergence from the Pâli, as it is in the interval of his remaining thus
in contemplation that he visits the village of Senâpati, and gives to
his daughter Su*g*âtâ the two refuges in Buddha and the law. This is a
curious statement, as it seems to imply that at that time the triple
refuge was not known; in other words, that there was no Saṅgha, or
Church.

The interview with Upaka is identical with the Pâli. The sermon at
Benares and the conversion of the five men, the visit to and conversion
of Bimbisâra, the conversion of Yasa and his friends, the visit to
Uruvilva and the Kâ*s*yapas, the conversion of Upatishya and Kolita--all
this is as in the Southern account. The narrative then breaks off
suddenly, and the rules of the Vinaya with respect to teacher and pupil
&c. are introduced. This notice of Buddha's life, although not
translated in China before the fifth century, must date back from the
time when the Southern copy of the Vinaya, which Fa-hien brought from
China, was first put together. The Mahî*s*âsika school was an offshoot
from the Âryasthâvira branch of the Buddhist church, and in all
probability was regarded in Ceylon as orthodox, in opposition to the
Mahâsaṅghikas. It is curious that in the Mahâsaṅghika copy of the Vinaya
which Fa-hien brought from Patna, and which he himself translated into
Chinese, there is no section corresponding to the one just adduced, that
is, this copy of the Vinaya contains no record of Buddha's life. This
may be accounted for on the ground that the two redactions were made at
different times and at places far apart. But yet it is curious that a
copy of the Vinaya brought from Patna, and said to have been copied from
an authentic original, should differ so widely from a copy found by the
same person at the same time in Ceylon <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10). This circumstance at any rate will

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

show the mixed character of Buddhist books in China, and the difficulty
of classifying them in any distinct order.

We come now to notice a life of Buddha translated by a native Chinese
priest. It is called the

#### (9) Fo-pen-hing-king

<span id="img__02800"></span> ![](img/_02800.jpg)

and was translated by Pao-yun, a companion of Fa-hien in his travels in
India, about A.D. 420. It is in seven chapters, and composed in varying
measures or verses of 4, 5 or 7 symbols to the line. We have no means of
deter-mining the name of the original work from which Pao-yun translated
his book, but it evidently was not the Buddha*k*arita-kâvya of
A*s*vaghosha. It resembles it in no particular, except that it is in
verse. The contents of this work I have already given elsewhere
(Abstract of Four Lectures, p. 100); so that there is no need to allude
to it here at any length.

Nor need I refer, except to name it, to the Chinese version of the
Lalita Vistara. This translation was made by the *S*rama*n*a Divâkara
during the Tang dynasty. He was a native of Mid-India, and flourished in
China A.D. 676. It is in 12 chapters and 27 sections. The headings of
these chapters have been given elsewhere (Catalogue, gyp. 18, 19). The
contents of the Chinese version agree in the main with the Tibetan. It
is named

#### (10) Fang-kwang-tai-*k*wang-yan-king.

<span id="img__02801"></span> ![](img/_02801.jpg)

There is a life of Buddha translated. by an Indian priest of Cophene,
about A.D. 445, which is called

\(II\) Săng-kia-lo-c’ha-sho-tsih-fo-hing-king.

<span id="img__02802"></span> ![](img/_02802.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This appears to
have been written by a priest called Saṅgharaksha, who was born in the
kingdom of Su-lai, and came to Gandhara when Kanishka flourished. This
monarch is called in the text Kien-to-ki-ni-wang. The

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

symbols Kien-to correspond with the family title given elsewhere to
Kanishka, viz. *K*an-tan, i.e. *K*andana or sandal-wood (see the work
Tsah-pao-tsang-king in the Indian Office Collection of Buddhist Books,
kiouen vi, fol. 12 \[Catalogue, case lxvi\]). This Chinese title may
probably correspond with the tribal name of Gushan, or perhaps
(according to Oldenberg) with the title Koiranos, of the coins. But, in
any case Saṅgharaksha is said to have lived during the time of this
monarch, and to have written the life of Buddha, which was afterwards
translated into Chinese by Saṅghabhadanta (?). This work is in 5 kiouen;
it comprises the usual stories from the birth of Buddha to the
distribution of his relics after his death. There is at the end a
curious story about A*s*oka, who reigned too years after the Nirvâ*n*a.
He is said to have had a dream which induced him to assemble the
Bhikshus in a convocation. He was told by them that there was in
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha a casket on which there was a record enshrined, or a gold
plate, which had been delivered by Buddha. On opening the casket a
prophecy was found stating that in Magadha, in the city of
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, there were two householders whose two sons were called
Vi*g*ayamitra and Vasudatta; of these the former, in consequence of his
merit in giving a ball of earth to Buddha, should be born 100 years
after as A*s*oka râ*g*a of the Maurya family. In consequence of this
prophecy A*s*oka built 84,000 shrines for the relics of Buddha, obeying
in this the direction of his dream, that he should cause the *s*arîras
of the holy one to be everywhere diffused.

Another life of Buddha is one I have partly translated in the Romantic
History of Buddha. It is called

#### (12) Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king

<span id="img__02900"></span> ![](img/_02900.jpg)

and was translated by *Gñ*ânagupta or *Gñ*ânakûta of the Tsui dynasty
(circ. A.D. 588). It is said to be the same as the Abhinishkrama*n*a
Sûtra, but of this there is no positive evidence. It is in 60 kiouen,
and embraces Buddha's history from the beginning to the time of the
conversion of the Kâ*s*yapas and others.

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

The following is the title of a life of Buddha, translated by Fă-khin of
the Sung dynasty (began 960 A.D.), and named

\(13\) Fo-shwo-*k*ung-hu-mo-ho-ti-king

<span id="img__03000"></span> ![](img/_03000.jpg)

which is, as it appears, a work of the Sammatiya school of Buddhism,
corresponding with the Mahâvastu. The phrase <span
id="img__03001"></span> ![](img/_03001.jpg) is used in the introductory
chapter to denote Sammata, who was 'chosen by all' to be the first king;
and <span id="img__03002"></span> ![](img/_03002.jpg) is the Chinese
form of Mahâvastu, 'the great (thing).' This memoir is in 2 vols. and 13
kiouen; it is very complete, agreeing in its details with the notices
found in the Manual of Buddhism, and in Bigandet's Life of Godama. It
was probably in the original a Pâli work.

The last version of the Lalita Vistara, known as the

\(14\) Shin-t’ung-yaou-hi-king,

<span id="img__03003"></span> ![](img/_03003.jpg)

has not come under my notice.

### A*S*VAGHOSHA.

The most reliable of the lives of Buddha known in China is that
translated in the present volume, the Buddha*k*arita-kâvya. It was no
doubt written by the Bodhisattva A*s*vaghosha, who was the twelfth
Buddhist patriarch, and a contemporary of Kanishka <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11). Translators in China attribute both this
book and the work which I have called the 'Sermons of A*s*vaghosha' (ta
*k*wang yăn king lun) to him, and there is no reason to question it
Kumâra*g*îva, who translated the latter work, was too familiar with
Indian subjects to be mistaken in this particular, and Dharmaraksha (we
will employ this restoration of his name) was also a native of
Mid-India, and deeply versed in Buddhist

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

literature (he became a disciple at six years of age). Both these
translators lived about A.D. 400.

I am told, however, by Mr. Rockhill, that Târânâtha, the Tibetan author,
mentions three writers of the name of A*s*vaghosha, the 'great one,' the
younger, and one who lived in the eighth century A.D. This latter, who
was also called Çura, could not be the A*s*vaghosha of our text, as the
translation of the work dates from the fifth century. And as of the
other two, one was called 'the great' and the other 'the younger,' it
admits of little question that the Bodhisattva would be the former. But
in the Chinese Catalogues, so far-as I have searched, there is no
mention made of more than one writer called by this name, and he is ever
affirmed to have been a contemporary of Kanishka. In the book
Tsah-pao-tsang-king, for instance (kiouen vi), there are several tales
told of the *K*andan 'Kanika' or 'Kanishka,' in one of which (fol. 13)
A*s*vaghosha is distinctly named as his religious adviser, and he is
there called 'the Bodhisattva;' so that, according to evidence derived
from Chinese sources, there seems no reason to doubt that the author of
the book I have here translated was living at and before the time of the
Scythian invasion of Magadha under the Kandan king Kanishka. With
respect to the date of this monarch we have no positive evidence; the
weight of authority sides with those who place him at the beginning of
the *S*aka period, i.e. A.D. 78. It is therefore possible that the
emissaries who left China A.D. 64 and returned A.D. 67 may have brought
back with them some knowledge of the work of A*s*vaghosha called
Fo-pen-hing, or of the original then circulating in India, on which
A*s*vaghosha founded his poem. It is singular at least that the work of
A*s*vaghosha is in five chapters as well as that translated by
*K*u-fa-lan. In any case we may conclude that as early as about A.D. 70,
if, not before, there was in India a work known as Buddha*k*arita
(Fo-pen-hing).

As to the origin of such a work, it seems likely to have sprung from an
enlargement of the Mahâparinirvâ*n*a Sûtra. We know that the record of
the history of Buddha's last

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

days was extant under this title from early times, and nothing would be
simpler than the gradual enlargement of such a record, so as to include
in it not only his last days, but his work throughout his life. Each
district in which Buddha taught had probably its own recollections on
this point, and to any zealous writer the task of connecting these
several histories would be an easy one. Such a man was A*s*vaghosha.
Brought up in Central India, travelling throughout his life as a
preacher and musician, and finally a follower of Kanishka through his
Northern campaigns; such a man would naturally be led to put together
the various tales or traditions he had gathered as to the birth and life
of his great master, and connect them with the already recognised
account of his end or last days on earth. The detailed account of
Buddha's death, recorded in the Mahâparinirvâ*n*a Sûtra, finds a place
at the end of the present work; this account being well known to
A*s*vaghosha, there can be no difficulty in understanding how he came to
write an entire poem on the subject of the master's life and death.

I am told by Professor Max Müller that the Sanskrit versions of the
Buddha*k*arita break off at the end of varga 17, that is, after the
account of the conversion of the great Kâ*s*yapa. Whether this is
accidental, or whether it indicates the original extent of the poem, I
have no means of judging. One thing is certain, that at the time when
the translation was made by Dharmaraksha (viz. about A.D. 420), the work
was of the size of the present volume. There is no à priori reason for
supposing the later portion to have been added by a writer subsequent to
A*s*vaghosha. A poem does not easily admit of 'a continuation' by
another author; nor can we think that a distinguished writer like
A*s*vaghosha would omit in his biography the account of the death of his
hero, especially as the materials were at hand, and the dramatic effect
of the poem would be undoubtedly increased by the addition of such a
popular record. It seems therefore more natural to suppose that the
Sanskrit MSS. are incomplete copies of the original, and that the
Chinese version before us is in

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

fact a translation of the entire poem as it came from its author's
hands.

There is little to add, with respect to the history of A*s*vaghosha, to
the few notices I have given elsewhere (Abstract, &c., p. 95 sqq.) One
or two allusions to him will be found in the work of Wong pûh (Shing tau
ki, §§ 186 and 190). These only confirm the general tradition that he
was originally a distinguished Brahman and became a convert to
Buddhism <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12). The Buddha*k*arita
contains sufficient proof of his acquaintance with and hostility to
Brahmanical teaching, and the frequent discussions found therein
relative to the non-existence of 'I' (an individual self) illustrate the
record contained in § 190 of the work (Shing tau) named above, \`that
Vîra, a writer of *S*âstras (Lun-sse), a disciple of A*s*vaghosha
Bodhisattva, wrote a treatise in 100 gâthâs on the subject of
"non-individuality" (wou ’ngo lun), which the heretics were unable to
gainsay.' With reference to this doctrine of the non-existence of the
individual subject, it is not possible in such a work as this to say
much. I shall be glad to place on record, however, my belief that in
Buddhism this question is much more than a speculative question of
philosophy. It touches the skirt of the highest moral truth. For the
individual self in Buddhism is the evil or carnal self, the origin of
sorrow. This, the Buddhist says (at least as I read his confession of
faith), does not exist; the evil self is not a separate reality, it is
the delusion of 'sense;' it is 'nothing.' Destroy this idea of self and
there will be light. If we regard the question thus, it assumes a form
more interesting and vital than that of any philosophical enquiry. As I
said above, it touches the skirt of the highest truth; and in this
approach to truth lies the power of the Buddhist doctrine.

### THE FAITHFULNESS OF CHINESE TRANSLATIONS.

It is wonderful to look through the large collection of Buddhist books
translated into Chinese from the dialects

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

of India, principally by Indian or Indo-Scythian priests. I use this
last expression to indicate the nationality of those translators who
came to China from Cabul and regions north of the Indus. For 600 years
and more a succession of Buddhist teachers and preachers followed one
another from India and Central Asia towards China with little
interruption. The result is, that the Buddhist Tripi*t*aka (canon) as we
have it in that. country is a collection of translations without
connection of parts, denoting the Buddhism of India and neighbouring
countries, in every period of its development. Hence side by side with
the early teaching of the faith found in such books as the Dharmapada
(Tan poh), we have the gross form of Tantra worship contained in the
'Dhâra*n*i of *K*a*nd*â,' *K*a*nd*â being in fact the same as Kâlî or
Durgâ or *G*agatmât*ri*. Nevertheless this collection of translations is
a most important one. Its importance has yet to be realised. To the
student of Buddhism it is an inexhaustible mine of wealth. And to the
student of history some knowledge of it is indispensable.

The question presents itself, therefore, can we rely on the truthfulness
of the work done by these men in China? To this question only a
qualified answer can be given; we may rely on the work of men of known
ability. And in other cases we may test the work done by comparison with
the originals. We should have no reluctance, I think, in accepting the
translations of men like Kumâra*g*îva, to whom both Chinese and Sanskrit
must have been familiar, and whose work may be tested by comparison with
Sanskrit texts. And if he may be trusted, so may others also who worked
with him or in his time. Amongst these was Dharmaraksha, the translator
of the Buddha*k*arita of this volume. He was a man of Mid-India, and
became a disciple at six years of age, and daily recited 10,000 words of
Scripture. At first he belonged to the school of the lesser development,
and was well acquainted with the discourses of the five Vidyâs.
Afterwards he became a follower of the greater development. He arrived
in China in the year 412 A.D. and worked at translations till A.D. 454.
Now

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

we can hardly suppose that a man of such natural gifts as Dharmaraksha
could have laboured for forty-two years at translations, without being
worthy of trust. Moreover we find that Kumâra*g*îva was working at this
period in China, and that he translated the work of A*s*vaghosha called
Ta-*k*wang-yan-king-lun, which appears to be related to the
Ta-*k*wang-yan-king, another name for the Life of Buddha (Lalita
Vistara). Is it likely that the two translators were unknown to one
another?

It is true, indeed, that I have not been able to test the translation of
Dharmaraksha by comparison with the Sanskrit. As I understand Professor
Max Müller, the Sanskrit text is not always easy to interpret, and
differs in many places from the Chinese version. Sometimes it is
possible to see how it happened that the Chinese translator
misunderstood the text before him. Sometimes it would seem that he
omitted intentionally whole passages which would be either
unintelligible or uninteresting to Chinese readers. As there is some
prospect of the Sanskrit text of A*s*vaghosha's work being published, we
may hope to arrive in time at something like certainty on the point
under consideration.

But with respect to the trustworthiness of Chinese translations in
general, it depends, as I said before, on the character of the
individual scholar. There is no reason at all why a Brahman should not
have become familiar with Chinese, and when we add to this the
extraordinary facilities afforded the Buddhist missionaries in China for
executing their work, in the way I mean of royal patronage and able
coadjutors, there is no reason to suspect the result of their labours.
Yet doubtless there are many unreliable versions of sacred texts to be
found. Every zealous Upâsaka who came to China was not thereby duly
qualified for the work of translation; and as a rule we should be
cautious in attaching entire credence to the literary labours of such
persons.

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

### A*S*VAGHOSHA'S STYLE.

The Chinese priest I-tsing says that the hymns used in the Buddhist
church during his visit to India were composed and arranged by
A*s*vaghosha (Nan-hae, § 32). There can. be little doubt that he was a
musician as well as poet. He travelled about, we are told, with a body
of musicians, and was the means of converting many persons of
distinction by his skill (Abstract, &c., p. 97). The work before us
gives proof of his poetical talent. In translating his verses, even from
the Chinese, an impulse to follow in his poetical vein has been felt.
But the requirements of a literal translation forbad any such diversion.
Nevertheless the reader will observe many passages that would have
easily allowed a more 'flowery diction.' The passage in verse 629 and
following verses is very touching--the consuming grief of Ya*s*odharâ
until 'her breath grew less and sinking thus, she fell upon the dusty
ground.' The account of Buddha's enlightenment in verse 1166 and
following is also striking: 'Thus did he complete the end of self, as
fire goes out for want of grass; thus he had done what he would have men
do; he first had found the way of perfect knowledge. He finished thus
the first great lesson; entering the great *Ri*shi's house, the darkness
disappeared, light burst upon him; perfectly silent and at rest, he
reached the last exhaustless source of truth; lustrous with all wisdom
the great *Ri*shi sat, perfect in gifts, whilst one convulsive throe
shook the wide earth.'

There are many passages throughout the poem of great beauty; there is
much also that is dry and abstruse, yet we cannot doubt that in that day
and among these people the 'great poem' of A*s*vaghosha must have had
considerable popularity. Hence the translations of it are numerous; it
must have tested Dharmaraksha's powers to have turned it into Chinese.
There is also a Tibetan copy of it; and whether it was originally
composed in Sanskrit or not, we know that there are now various
editions. of it in that language. I do not pretend to have

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

found the author's meaning in all cases; the Chinese is not easy; but in
the main drift of the poem I have followed my text as faithfully and
literally as possible. The concluding portion of the last section, as it
seems to sup-port the idea of only one A*s*oka, first fierce and then
gentle, or religious, is, to say the least, a curious passage. But we
may not attach too much weight to an isolated statement of this sort;
there may have been reasons more than we know of why the orthodox
tradition of the Dharma-A*s*oka, the patron of the Theravâdi school,
should have been ignored by a friend of Kanishka. But in any case the
evidence is too slight to build upon; we can only say that in
A*s*vaghosha's time it had become usual to put the Council of
Pâ*t*aliputra out of sight, and to regard the Theravâdi school as one
opposed to the generally received traditions of the North.

I cannot conclude this Introduction without expressing my thanks to Mr.
Bunyiu Nanjio, who kindly suggested emendations of my translation of
some passages at the beginning of the work, and also to Professor Max
Müller, to whom I am indebted for the restoration of many of the proper
names that occur throughout the text.

S. BEAL.

THE RECTORY, WARK,  
    NORTHUMBERLAND,  
        Feb. 4, 1883.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xi:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_0) The Dîpava*m*sa, an
early historical record of Buddhism compiled in Ceylon between the
beginning of the fourth and the first third of the fifth century A.D.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xviii:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_1) Abstract of Four
Lectures, p. 10.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xviii:2](sbe1902.htm#fr_2) This is given in
Chinese Ta-sa-ho-kie, which can only be restored to Tasâ. See Childers,
sub voce.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xix:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_3) Or, riding on a white
elephant. The phrase in the Chinese is ambiguous. There is reason to
suppose that the original thought was that the Bodhisattva was riding on
an elephant, but was invisible as a spirit.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xix:2](sbe1902.htm#fr_4) Tree and Serpent
Worship, plate xci, fig. 4.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xx:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_5) Tree and Serpent
Worship, plate xxv, fig. 1, where the three buildings represent the
three palaces built for the prince.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xx:2](sbe1902.htm#fr_6) The leaves are bent down
in the plate (op. cit.)

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxv:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_7) See Abstract of Four
Lectures, p. 52.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxv:2](sbe1902.htm#fr_8) To show the character
of this style of composition we give at the end (Note II) a section from
this Sûtra relating to the birth of Bodhisattva.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxvi:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_9) Spence Hardy, p. 130.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxvii:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_10) Fa-hien, p. 144.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxx:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_11) There is no absolute
certainty about the date of Kanishka; it may probably be referred to the
beginning of the latter half of the first century A.D. (see next page).

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxxiii:1](sbe1902.htm#fr_12) Mr. Rockhill has
kindly given me an extract from a Tibetan work, Ma*ñg*u*s*rîmûlatantra,
in which A*s*vaghosha is identified with Mât*rig*âta or Mât*rig*ita,
concerning whom, see Abstract, &c., p. 141.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 1. The Birth](sbe1903)
