[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1914)  [Next](sbe1916) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 13. DEFEATS MÂRA.

The great *Ri*shi, of the royal tribe of *Ri*shis, beneath the Bodhi
tree firmly established, resolved by oath to perfect the way of complete
deliverance. <span class="margnote">. 1036</span>

The spirits, Nâgas, and the heavenly multitude <span
id="fr_389"></span>[1](#fn_389), all were filled with joy; but Mâra
Devarâ*g*a, enemy of religion, alone was grieved, and rejoiced not;
<span class="margnote">. 1037</span>

Lord of the five desires <span id="fr_390"></span>[2](#fn_390), skilled
in all the arts of warfare, the foe of those who seek deliverance,
therefore his name is rightly given Pi*s*una <span
id="fr_391"></span>[3](#fn_391). <span class="margnote">. 1038</span>

Now this Mâra râ*g*a had three daughters, mincingly beautiful and of a
pleasant countenance, in every way fit by artful ways to enflame a man
with love, highest in this respect among the Devîs. <span
class="margnote">. 1039</span>

The first was named Yuh-yen (lust-pollution), the second Neng-yueh-*g*in
(able to delight a man),

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

the third Ngai-loh <span id="fr_392"></span>[1](#fn_392) (love joy).
These three, at this time, advanced together, <span class="margnote">.
1040</span>

And addressed their father Pi*s*una and said: 'May we not know the
trouble that afflicts you?' The father calming his feelings, addressed
his daughters thus: <span class="margnote">. 1041</span>

'The world has now a great Muni, he has taken a strong oath as a helmet,
he holds a mighty bow in his hand, wisdom is the diamond shaft he uses,
<span class="margnote">. 1042</span>

'His object is to get the mastery in the world, to ruin and destroy my
territory (domain); I am myself unequal to him, for all men will believe
in him, <span class="margnote">. 1043</span>

'And all find refuge in the way of his salvation; then will my land be
desert and unoccupied. But as when a man transgresses the laws of
morality, his body (or, he himself) is then empty (i.e. unprotected),
<span class="margnote">. 1044</span>

'So now, the eye of wisdom, not yet opened (in this man), whilst my
empire still has peace (quiet), I will go and overturn his purpose, and
break down and divide the ridge-pole (of his house) <span
id="fr_393"></span>[2](#fn_393).' <span class="margnote">. 1045</span>

Seizing then his bow and his five arrows, with all his retinue of male
and female attendants, he went to that grove of 'fortunate rest' with
the vow that the world (all flesh) should not find peace <span
id="fr_394"></span>[3](#fn_394). <span class="margnote">. 1046</span>

Then seeing the Muni, quiet and still (silent), preparing to cross the
sea of the three worlds, in his left hand grasping his bow, with his
right hand pointing his arrow, <span class="margnote">. 1047</span>

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

He addressed Bodhisattva and said: 'Kshatriya! rise up quickly! for you
may well fear! your death is at hand; you may practise your own
religious system <span id="fr_395"></span>[1](#fn_395), <span
class="margnote">. 1048</span>

'But let go this effort after the law of deliverance (for others); wage
warfare in the field of charity <span id="fr_396"></span>[2](#fn_396) as
a cause of merit, appease the tumultuous world, and so in the end reach
your reward in heaven; <span class="margnote">. 1049</span>

'This is a way renowned and well established, in which former saints
(victors) have walked, *Ri*shis and kings and men of eminence; but this
system of penury and alms-begging is unworthy of you. <span
class="margnote">. 1050</span>

'Now then if you rise not, you had best consider with yourself, that if
you give not up your vow, and tempt me to let fly an
[arrow](errata.htm#1), <span class="margnote">. 1051</span>

'How that Aila, grandchild of Soma <span
id="fr_397"></span>[3](#fn_397), by one of these arrows just touched, as
by a fanning of the wind, lost his reason and became a madman; <span
class="margnote">. 1052</span>

'And how the *Ri*shi Vimala, practising austerities, hearing the sound
of one of these darts, his heart possessed by great fear, bewildered and
darkened he lost his true nature; <span class="margnote">. 1053</span>

'How much less can you--a late-born one--hope to escape this dart of
mine. Quickly arise then! if hardly you may get away! <span
class="margnote">. 1054</span>

'This arrow full of rankling poison, fearfully insidious where it
strikes a foe! See now! with all my force, I point it! and are you
resting in the face of such calamity? <span class="margnote">.
1055</span>

'How is it that you fear not this dread arrow? say! why do you not
tremble?' Mâra uttered such fear-inspiring threats, bent on overawing
Bodhisattva. <span class="margnote">. 1056</span>

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

But Bodhisattva's heart remained unmoved; no doubt, no fear was present.
Then Mâra instantly discharged his arrow, whilst the three women came in
front; <span class="margnote">. 1057</span>

Bodhisattva regarded not the arrow, nor considered ought the women
three. Mâra râ*g*a now was troubled much with doubt, and muttered thus
'twixt heart and mouth: <span class="margnote">. 1058</span>

'Long since the maiden of the snowy mountains, shooting at Mahe*s*vara,
constrained him to change his mind; and yet Bodhisattva is unmoved,
<span class="margnote">. 1059</span>

'And heeds not even this dart of mine, nor the three heavenly women!
nought prevails to move his heart or raise one spark of love within him.
<span class="margnote">. 1060</span>

'Now must I assemble my army-host, and press him sore by force;' having
thought thus awhile, Mâra's army suddenly assembled round; <span
class="margnote">. 1061</span>

Each (severally) assumed his own peculiar form; some were holding
spears, others grasping swords, others snatching up trees, others
wielding diamond maces; (thus were they) armed with every sort of
weapon; <span class="margnote">. 1062</span>

Some had heads like hogs, others like fishes, others like asses, others
like horses; some with forms like snakes or like the ox or savage tiger;
lion-headed, dragon-headed, (and like) every other kind of beast; <span
class="margnote">. 1063</span>

Some had many heads on one body-trunk, with faces having but a single
eye, and then again with many eyes; some with great-bellied mighty
bodies, <span class="margnote">. 1064</span>

And others thin and skinny, bellyless; others long-legged,
mighty-knee’d; others big-shanked

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

and fat-calved; some with long and claw-like nails; <span
class="margnote">. 1065</span>

Some were headless, breastless, faceless; some with two feet and many
bodies; some with big faces looking every way; some pale and
ashy-coloured, <span class="margnote">. 1066</span>

Others colour’d like the bright star rising, others steaming fiery
vapour, some with ears like elephants, with humps like mountains, some
with naked forms covered with hair, <span class="margnote">. 1067</span>

Some with leather skins for clothing, their faces party-coloured,
crimson and white; some with tiger skins as robes, some with snake skins
over them, <span class="margnote">. 1068</span>

Some with tinkling bells around their waists, others with twisted
screw-like hair, others with hair dishevelled covering the body, some
breath-suckers, <span class="margnote">. 1069</span>

Others body-snatchers, some dancing and shrieking awhile, some jumping
onwards with their feet together, some striking one another as they
went, <span class="margnote">. 1070</span>

Others waving (wheeling round) in the air, others flying and leaping
between the trees, others howling, or hooting, or screaming, or whining,
with their evil noises shaking the great earth; <span class="margnote">.
1071</span>

Thus this wicked goblin troop encircled on its four sides the Bodhi
tree; some bent on tearing his body to pieces, others on devouring it
whole; <span class="margnote">. 1072</span>

From the four sides flames belched forth, and fiery steam ascended up to
heaven; tempestuous winds arose on every side <span
id="fr_398"></span>[1](#fn_398); the mountain forests shook and quaked;
<span class="margnote">. 1073</span>

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

Wind, fire, and steam, with dust combined, (produced) a pitchy darkness,
rendering all invisible. And now the Devas well affected to the law, and
all the Nâgas and the spirits (kwei-shin), <span class="margnote">.
1074</span>

All incensed at this host of Mâra, with anger fired, wept tears of
blood; the great company of *S*uddhavâsa gods, beholding Mâra
tempting <span id="fr_399"></span>[1](#fn_399) Bodhisattva, <span
class="margnote">. 1075</span>

Free from low-feeling, with hearts undisturbed by passion, moved by pity
towards him and commiseration, came in a body to behold the Bodhisattva,
so calmly seated and so undisturbed, <span class="margnote">.
1076</span>

Surrounded with an uncounted host of devils, shaking the heaven and
earth with sounds ill-omened. Bodhisattva silent and quiet in the midst
remained, his countenance as bright as heretofore, unchanged; <span
class="margnote">. 1077</span>

Like the great lion-king placed amongst all the beasts howling and
growling round him (so he sat), a sight unseen before, so strange and
wonderful! <span class="margnote">. 1078</span>

The host of Mâra hastening, as arranged, each one exerting his utmost
force, taking each other's place in turns, threatening every moment to
destroy him, <span class="margnote">. 1079</span>

Fiercely staring, grinning with their teeth, flying tumultuously,
bounding here and there; but Bodhisattva, silently beholding them,
(watched them) as one would watch the games of children; <span
class="margnote">. 1080</span>

And now the demon host waxed fiercer and more angry, and added force to
force, in further conflict; grasping at stones they could not lift, or
lifting them, they could not let them go; <span class="margnote">.
1081</span>

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

Their flying spears, lances, and javelins, stuck fast in space, refusing
to descend; the angry thunder-drops and mighty hail, with these, were
changed into five-colour’d lotus flowers, <span class="margnote">.
1082</span>

Whilst the foul poison of the dragon snakes was turned to
spicy-breathing air. Thus all these countless sorts of creatures,
wishing to destroy the Bodhisattva, <span class="margnote">. 1083</span>

Unable to remove him from the spot, were with their own weapons wounded.
Now Mâra had an aunt-attendant whose name was Ma-kia-ka-li (Mâha Kâlî?),
<span class="margnote">. 1084</span>

Who held a skull-dish in her hands, and stood in front of Bodhisattva,
and with every kind of winsome gesture, tempted to lust the Bodhisattva.
<span class="margnote">. 1085</span>

So all these followers of Mâra, possessed of every demon-body form,
united in discordant uproar, hoping to terrify Bodhisattva; <span
class="margnote">. 1086</span>

But not a hair of his was moved, and Mâra's host was filled with sorrow.
Then in the air the crowd of angels (spirits), their forms invisible,
raised their voices, saying: <span class="margnote">. 1087</span>

'Behold the great Muni; his mind unmoved by any feeling of resentment,
whilst all that wicked Mâra race, besotted, are vainly bent on his
destruction; <span class="margnote">. 1088</span>

'Let go your foul and murderous thoughts against that silent Muni,
calmly seated! You cannot with a breath move the Sumeru mountain; <span
class="margnote">. 1089</span>

'Fire may freeze, water may burn, the roughened earth may grow soft and
pliant, but ye cannot hurt the Bodhisattva! Thro’ ages past disciplined
by suffering, <span class="margnote">. 1090</span>

Bodhisattva rightly trained in thought, ever

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

advancing in the use of "means," pure and illustrious for wisdom, loving
and merciful to all, <span class="margnote">. 1091</span>

'These four conspicuous (excellent) virtues cannot with him be rent
asunder, so as to make it hard or doubtful whether he gain the highest
wisdom. <span class="margnote">. 1092</span>

'For as the thousand rays of yonder sun must drown the darkness of the
world, or as the boring wood must kindle fire, or as the earth deep-dug
gives water, <span class="margnote">. 1093</span>

'So he who perseveres in the "right means," by seeking thus, will find.
The world without instruction, poisoned by lust and hate and ignorance,
<span class="margnote">. 1094</span>

'Because he pitied "flesh," so circumstanced, he sought on their account
the joy of wisdom. Why then would you molest and hinder one who seeks to
banish sorrow from the world? <span class="margnote">. 1095</span>

'The ignorance that everywhere prevails is due to false pernicious books
(sûtras), and therefore Bodhisattva, walking uprightly, would lead and
draw men after him. <span class="margnote">. 1096</span>

'To obscure and blind the great world-leader, this undertaking is
impossible <span id="fr_400"></span>[1](#fn_400), for ’tis as though in
the Great Desert a man would purposely mislead the merchant-guide; <span
class="margnote">. 1097</span>

'So "all flesh" having fallen into darkness, ignorant of where they are
going, for their sakes he would light the lamp of wisdom; say then! why
would you extinguish it? <span class="margnote">. 1098</span>

'All flesh engulphed and overwhelmed in the great sea of birth and
death, this one prepares the boat of wisdom; say then! why destroy and
sink it? <span class="margnote">. 1099</span>

'Patience is the sprouting of religion, firmness

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

its root, good conduct is the flower, the enlightened heart the boughs
and branches, <span class="margnote">. 1100</span>

'Wisdom supreme the entire tree, the "transcendent law <span
id="fr_401"></span>[1](#fn_401)" the fruit, its shade protects all
living things; say then! why would you cut it down? <span
class="margnote">. 1101</span>

'Lust, hate, and ignorance, (these are) the rack and bolt, the yoke
placed on the shoulder of the world; through ages long he has practised
austerities to rescue men from these their fetters, <span
class="margnote">. 1102</span>

'He now shall certainly attain his end, sitting on this
right-established throne; (seated) as all the previous Buddhas, firm and
compact like a diamond; <span class="margnote">. 1103</span>

'Though all the earth were moved and shaken, yet would this place be
fixed and stable; him, thus fixed and well assured, think not that you
can overturn. <span class="margnote">. 1104</span>

'Bring down and moderate your mind's desire, banish these high and
envious thoughts, prepare yourselves for right reflection, be patient in
your services.' <span class="margnote">. 1105</span>

Mâra hearing these sounds in space, and seeing Bodhisattva still
unmoved, filled with fear and banishing his high and supercilious
thoughts, again took up his way to heaven above; <span
class="margnote">. 1106</span>

Whilst all his host (were scattered), o’erwhelmed with grief and
disappointment, fallen from their high estate, ’reft of their warrior
pride, their warlike weapons and accoutrements thrown heedlessly and
cast away 'mid woods and deserts. <span class="margnote">. 1107</span>

Like as when some cruel chieftain slain, the hateful

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

band is all dispersed and scattered, so the host of Mâra disconcerted,
fled away. The mind of Bodhisattva (now reposed) peaceful and quiet.
<span class="margnote">. 1108</span>

The morning sun-beams brighten with the dawn, the dust-like mist
dispersing, disappears; the moon and stars pale their faint light, the
barriers of the night are all removed, <span class="margnote">.
1109</span>

Whilst from above a fall of heavenly flowers pay their sweet tribute to
the Bodhisattva. 1110.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_389"></span>[147:1](sbe1915.htm#fr_389) <span
id="img_14700"></span> ![](img/14700.jpg).

<span id="fn_390"></span>[147:2](sbe1915.htm#fr_390) I. e. king of
sensuality.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[147:3](sbe1915.htm#fr_391) The wicked one.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[148:1](sbe1915.htm#fr_392) See Childers, sub
Mâro, for the name of the daughters. In Sanskrit, Rati, Prîti, and
T*ri*sh*n*â.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[148:2](sbe1915.htm#fr_393) 'I will return to
the house . . . . , he findeth it swept and garnished, but empty.'

<span id="fn_394"></span>[148:3](sbe1915.htm#fr_394) Should not find
'rest.' There is a play on the word.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[149:1](sbe1915.htm#fr_395) Or, a system of
religion for yourself.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[149:2](sbe1915.htm#fr_396) Religious
almsgiving.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[149:3](sbe1915.htm#fr_397) Ai*d*a, the
grandson of Soma (i.e. Purûravas, the lover of Urva*s*î?).

<span id="fn_398"></span>[151:1](sbe1915.htm#fr_398) Kik for pien?

<span id="fn_399"></span>[152:1](sbe1915.htm#fr_399) Confusing.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[154:1](sbe1915.htm#fr_400) In the sense of
'not commendable.'

<span id="fn_401"></span>[155:1](sbe1915.htm#fr_401) Anuttara-dharma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 14. O-Wei-San-Pou-Ti (Abhisambodhi)](sbe1916)
