[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1916)  [Next](sbe1918) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 15. TURNING THE LAW-WHEEL <span id="fr_439"></span>[3](#fn_439).

Tathâgata piously composed and silent, radiant with glory, shedding
light around, with unmatched dignity advanced alone, as if surrounded by
a crowd of followers. <span class="margnote">. 1200</span>

Beside the way he encountered a young Brahman <span
id="fr_440"></span>[4](#fn_440), whose name was Upaka <span
id="fr_441"></span>[5](#fn_441); struck <span
id="fr_442"></span>[6](#fn_442) with the

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

deportment of the Bhikshu, he stood with reverent mien on the road side;
<span class="margnote">. 1201</span>

Joyously he gazed at such an unprecedented sight, and then, with closed
hands, he spake <span id="fr_443"></span>[1](#fn_443) as follows: 'The
crowds who live around are stained with sin, without a pleasing feature,
void of grace, <span class="margnote">. 1202</span>

'And the great world's heart is everywhere disturbed; but you alone,
your senses all composed, with visage shining as the moon when full,
seem to have quaffed the water of the immortals' stream; <span
class="margnote">. 1203</span>

'The marks of beauty yours, as the great man's (Mahâpurusha); the
strength of wisdom, as an all-sufficient (independent) king's
(samrâ*g*); what you have done must have been wisely done, what then
your noble tribe and who your master?' <span class="margnote">.
1204</span>

Answering he said, 'I have no master; no honourable tribe; no point of
excellence <span id="fr_444"></span>[2](#fn_444); self-taught in this
profoundest doctrine, I have arrived at superhuman wisdom <span
id="fr_445"></span>[3](#fn_445). <span class="margnote">. 1205</span>

'That which behoves the world to learn, but through the world no learner
found, I now myself

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

and by myself <span id="fr_446"></span>[1](#fn_446) have learned
throughout; ’tis rightly called Sambodhi (*k*ing kioh); <span
class="margnote">. 1206</span>

'That hateful family of griefs the sword of wisdom has destroyed; this
then is what the world has named, and rightly named, the "chiefest
victory." <span class="margnote">. 1207</span>

'Through all Benares soon will sound the drum of life, no stay is
possible--I have no name <span id="fr_447"></span>[2](#fn_447)--nor do I
seek profit or pleasure, <span class="margnote">. 1208</span>

'But simply to declare the truth; to save men (living things) from pain,
and to fulfil my ancient oath, to rescue all not yet delivered. <span
class="margnote">. 1209</span>

'The fruit of this my oath is ripened now, and I will follow out my
ancient vow. Wealth, riches, self all given up, unnamed, I still am
named "Righteous Master <span id="fr_448"></span>[3](#fn_448)." <span
class="margnote">. 1210</span>

'And bringing profit to the world (empire), I also have the name "Great
Teacher <span id="fr_449"></span>[4](#fn_449);" facing sorrows, not
swallowed up by them, am I not rightly called Courageous Warrior? <span
class="margnote">. 1211</span>

'If not a healer of diseases, what means the name of Good Physician?
seeing the wanderer, not showing him the way, why then should I be
called "Good Master-guide?" <span class="margnote">. 1212</span>

'Like as the lamp shines in the dark, without a

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

purpose of its own, self-radiant, so burns the lamp of the Tathâgata,
without the shadow of a personal feeling. <span class="margnote">.
1213</span>

'Bore wood in wood, there must be fire; the wind blows of its own free
self in space; dig deep and you will come to water; this is the rule of
self-causation. <span class="margnote">. 1214</span>

'All the Munis who perfect wisdom, must do so at Gayâ; and in the Kâ*s*i
country they must first turn the Wheel of Righteousness.' <span
class="margnote">. 1215</span>

The young Brahman Upâka, astonished, breathed the praise of such strange
doctrine <span id="fr_450"></span>[1](#fn_450), and called to mind like
thoughts he had before experienced <span
id="fr_451"></span>[2](#fn_451); lost in thought at the wonderful
occurrence, <span class="margnote">. 1216</span>

At every turning of the road he stopped to think; embarrassed in every
step he took. Tathâgata proceeding slowly onwards, came to the city of
Kâ*s*i, <span class="margnote">. 1217</span>

The land so excellently adorned as the palace of *S*akradevendra; the
Ganges and Bara*n*â <span id="fr_452"></span>[3](#fn_452), two twin
rivers flowed amidst; <span class="margnote">. 1218</span>

The woods and flowers and fruits so verdant, the peaceful cattle
wandering together, the calm retreats

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

free from vulgar noise, such was the place where the old *Ri*shis dwelt.
<span class="margnote">. 1219</span>

Tathâgata glorious and radiant, redoubled the brightness of the place;
the son of the Kau*nd*inya tribe (Kau*nd*inya-kulaputra), and next
Da*s*abalakâ*s*yapa, <span class="margnote">. 1220</span>

And the third Vâshpa, the fourth A*s*va*g*it, the fifth called Bhadra,
practising austerities as hermits, <span class="margnote">. 1221</span>

Seeing from far Tathâgata approaching, sitting together all engaged in
conversation, (said), 'This Gautama, defiled by worldly indulgence,
leaving the practice of austerities, <span class="margnote">.
1222</span>

'Now comes again to find us here, let us be careful not to rise in
salutation, nor let us greet him when he comes, nor offer him the
customary refreshments; <span class="margnote">. 1223</span>

'Because he has broken his first vow, he has no claim to hospitality;'
\[for men on seeing an approaching guest by rights prepare things for
his present and his after wants, <span class="margnote">. 1224</span>

They arrange a proper resting-couch, and take on themselves care for his
comfort.\] <span id="fr_453"></span>[1](#fn_453) Having spoken thus and
so agreed, each kept his seat, resolved and fixed. <span
class="margnote">. 1225</span>

And now Tathâgata slowly approached, when, to! these men unconsciously,
against their vow, rose and invited him to take a seat; offering to take
his, robe and Pâtra, <span class="margnote">. 1226</span>

They begged to wash and rub his feet, and asked him what he required
more; thus in everything attentive, they honour’d him and offered all to
him as teacher. <span class="margnote">. 1227</span>

They did not not cease however to address him

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

still as Gautama, after his family <span
id="fr_454"></span>[1](#fn_454). Then spake the Lord to them and said:
'Call me not after my private name, <span class="margnote">. 1228</span>

'For it is a rude and careless way of speaking to one who has obtained
Arhatship <span id="fr_455"></span>[2](#fn_455); but whether men respect
or disrespect me, my mind is undisturbed and wholly quiet; <span
class="margnote">. 1229</span>

'But you <span id="fr_456"></span>[3](#fn_456)--your way is not so
courteous, let go, I pray, and cast away your fault. Buddha can save the
world; they call him, therefore, Buddha; <span class="margnote">.
1230</span>

'Towards all living things, with equal heart he looks as children, to
call him then by his familiar name is to despise a father; this is
sin <span id="fr_457"></span>[4](#fn_457).' <span class="margnote">.
1231</span>

Thus Buddha, by exercise of mighty love, in deep compassion spoke to
them; but they, from ignorance and pride, despised the only wise <span
id="fr_458"></span>[5](#fn_458) and true one's words. <span
class="margnote">. 1232</span>

They said that first he practised self-denial, but having reached
thereby no profit, now giving rein to body, word, and thought <span
id="fr_459"></span>[6](#fn_459), how by these means (they asked) has he
become a Buddha? <span class="margnote">. 1233</span>

Thus equally entangled by doubts, they would not credit that he had
attained the way. Thoroughly versed in highest truth, full of
all-embracing wisdom, <span class="margnote">. 1234</span>

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

Tathâgata on their account briefly declared to them the one true way;
the foolish masters practising austerities, and those who love to
gratify their senses, <span class="margnote">. 1235</span>

He pointed out to them these two distinctive classes <span
id="fr_460"></span>[1](#fn_460), and how both greatly erred. 'Neither of
these (he said) has found the way of highest wisdom, nor are their ways
of life productive of true rescue. 1236.

'The emaciated devotee by suffering produces in himself confused and
sickly thoughts, not conducive even to worldly knowledge, how much less
to triumph over sense! <span class="margnote">. 1237</span>

'For he who tries to light a lamp with water, will not succeed in
scattering the darkness, (and so the man who tries) with worn-out body
to trim the lamp of wisdom shall not succeed, nor yet destroy his
ignorance or folly. <span class="margnote">. 1238</span>

'Who seeks with rotten wood to evoke the fire will waste his labour and
get nothing for it; but boring hard wood into hard, the man of skill
forthwith gets fire for his use; <span class="margnote">. 1239</span>

'In seeking wisdom then it is not by these austerities a man may reach
the law of life. But (likewise) to indulge in pleasure is opposed to
right, this is the fool's barrier against wisdom's light; <span
class="margnote">. 1240</span>

'The sensualist cannot comprehend the Sûtras or the *S*âstras, how much
less the way of overcoming all desire! As some man grievously afflicted
eats food not fit to eat, <span class="margnote">. 1241</span>

'And so in ignorance aggravates his sickness, so

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

how can he get rid of lust who pampers lust? Scatter the fire amid the
desert grass, dried by the sun, fanned by the wind, <span
class="margnote">. 1242</span>

'The raging flames who shall extinguish? Such is the fire of
covetousness and lust (or, hankering lust), I, then, reject both these
extremes, my heart keeps in the middle way. <span class="margnote">.
1243</span>

'All sorrow at an end and finished, I rest at peace, all error put away;
my true sight <span id="fr_461"></span>[1](#fn_461) greater than the
glory of the sun, my equal and unvarying wisdom <span
id="fr_462"></span>[2](#fn_462), vehicle of insight, <span
class="margnote">. 1244</span>

'Right words <span id="fr_463"></span>[3](#fn_463) as it were a
dwelling-place, wandering through the pleasant groves of right
conduct <span id="fr_464"></span>[4](#fn_464), making a right life <span
id="fr_465"></span>[5](#fn_465) my recreation, walking along the right
road of proper means <span id="fr_466"></span>[6](#fn_466), <span
class="margnote">. 1245</span>

'My city of refuge in right recollection <span
id="fr_467"></span>[7](#fn_467), and my sleeping couch right
meditation <span id="fr_468"></span>[8](#fn_468); these are the eight
even and level roads <span id="fr_469"></span>[9](#fn_469) by which to
avoid the sorrows of birth and death; .1246

'Those who come forth by these means from the slough, doing thus, have
attained the end; such shall fall neither on this side or the other,
amidst the sorrow-crowd of the two periods <span
id="fr_470"></span>[10](#fn_470). <span class="margnote">. 1247</span>

'The tangled sorrow-web of the three worlds by this road alone can be
destroyed; this is my own way, unheard of before; by the pure eyes of
the true law, <span class="margnote">. 1248</span>

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

'Impartially seeing the way of escape, I, only I, now first make known
this way; thus I destroy the hateful company of T*ri*sh*n*â's <span
id="fr_471"></span>[1](#fn_471) host, the sorrows of birth and death,
old age, disease, <span class="margnote">. 1249</span>

'And all the unfruitful aims of men, and other springs of suffering.
There are those who warring against desire are still influenced by
desire; who whilst possessed of body, act as tho’ they had none; <span
class="margnote">. 1250</span>

'Who put away from themselves all sources of true merit, briefly will I
recount their sorrowful lot. Like smothering a raging fire, though
carefully put out, yet a spark left, <span class="margnote">.
1251</span>

'So in their abstraction, still the germ of "I <span
id="fr_472"></span>[2](#fn_472)," the source <span
id="fr_473"></span>[3](#fn_473) of great sorrow still surviving,
perpetuates the suffering caused by lust (t*ri*sh*n*â), and the evil
consequences of every kind of deed survive; <span class="margnote">.
1252</span>

'These are the sources of further pain, but let these go and sorrow
dies, even as the seed of corn taken from the earth and deprived of
water dies; <span class="margnote">. 1253</span>

'The concurrent causes not uniting, then the bud and leaf cannot be
born; the intricate bonds of every kind of existence, from the Deva down
to the evil ways of birth, <span class="margnote">. 1254</span>

'Ever revolve and never cease; all this is produced from covetous
desire; falling from a high estate to lower ones, all is the fault of
previous deeds; <span class="margnote">. 1255</span>

'But destroy the seed of covetousness and the rest, then there will be
no intricate binding, but all

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

effect of deeds destroyed, the various degrees of sorrow then will end
for good; <span class="margnote">. 1256</span>

'Having this, then, we must inherit that; destroying this, then that is
ended too; no birth, old age, disease, or death; no earth, or water,
fire, or wind; <span class="margnote">. 1257</span>

'No beginning, end, or middle; and no deceptive systems of philosophy;
this is the standpoint of wise men and sages; the certain and exhausted
termination, (complete Nirvâ*n*a). <span class="margnote">. 1258</span>

'Such do the eight right ways declare; this one expedient has no
remains; that which the world sees not, engrossed by error (I declare),
<span class="margnote">. 1259</span>

'I know the way to sever all these sorrow-sources; the way to end them
is by right reason, meditating on these four highest truths, following
and perfecting this highest wisdom. <span class="margnote">. 1260</span>

'This is what means the "knowing" sorrow; this is to cut off the cause
of all remains of being; these destroyed, then all striving, too, has
ended, the eight right ways have been assayed. <span class="margnote">.
1261</span>

'(Thus, too), the four great truths have been acquired, the eyes of the
pure law completed. In these four truths, the equal (i.e. true or right)
eyes not yet born, <span class="margnote">. 1262</span>

'There is not mention made of gaining true deliverance, it is not said
what must be done is done, nor that all (is finished), nor that the
perfect truth has been acquired. <span class="margnote">. 1263</span>

'But now because the truth is known, then by myself is known
"deliverance gained," by myself is known that "all is done," by myself
is known "the highest wisdom."' <span class="margnote">. 1264</span>

And having spoken thus respecting truth, the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

member of the Kau*nd*inya family, and eighty thou-sand of the Deva host,
were thoroughly imbued with saving knowledge; <span class="margnote">.
1265</span>

They put away defilement from themselves, they got the eyes of the pure
law; Devas and earthly masters thus were sure, that what was to be done
was done. <span class="margnote">. 1266</span>

And now with lion-voice he joyfully enquired, and asked Kau*nd*inya,
'Knowest thou yet?' Kau*nd*inya forthwith answered Buddha, 'I know the
mighty master's law;' <span class="margnote">. 1267</span>

And for this reason, knowing it, his name was Â*gñ*âta Kau*nd*inya
(â*gñ*âta, known). Amongst all the disciples of Buddha, he was the very
first in understanding. <span class="margnote">. 1268</span>

Then as he understood the sounds of the true law, hearing (the words of)
the disciple--all the earth spirits together raised a shout triumphant,
'Well done! deeply seeing (the principles of) the law, <span
class="margnote">. 1269</span>

'Tathâgata, on this auspicious day, has set revolving that which never
yet revolved, and far and wide, for gods and men, has opened the gates
of immortality <span id="fr_474"></span>[1](#fn_474). <span
class="margnote">. 1270</span>

'(Of this wheel) the spokes are the rules of pure conduct; equal
contemplation, their uniformity of length; firm wisdom is the tire;
modesty and thoughtfulness, the rubbers (sockets in the nave in which
the axle is fixed); <span class="margnote">. 1271</span>

'Right reflection is the nave; the wheel itself the law of perfect
truth; the right truth now

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

has gone forth in the world, not to retire before another teacher.'
<span class="margnote">. 1272</span>

Thus the earth spirits shouted, the spirits of the air took up the
strain, the Devas all joined in the hymn of praise, up to the highest
Brahma heaven. <span class="margnote">. 1273</span>

The Devas of the triple world, now hearing what the great *Ri*shi
taught, in intercourse together spoke, 'The widely-honoured Buddha moves
the world! <span class="margnote">. 1274</span>

'Wide-spread, for the sake of all that lives, he turns the wheel of the
law of complete purity'' The stormy winds, the clouds, the mists, all
disappeared; down from space the heavenly flowers descended; <span
class="margnote">. 1275</span>

The Devas revelled in their joys celestial, filled with unutterable
gladness. <span class="margnote">. 1276</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_439"></span>[168:3](sbe1917.htm#fr_439) Concerning this
expression, which means 'establishing the dominion of truth,' see
Childers, Pâli Dict., sub voce pavatteti.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[168:4](sbe1917.htm#fr_440) A Brahma*k*ârin, a
religious student, one who was practising a life of purity.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[168:5](sbe1917.htm#fr_441) Called 'Upagana' by
Burnouf (Introd. p. 389), and in the Lalita Vistara an Âgîvaka (hermit),
(Foucaux, 378). For some useful remarks on this person's character, see
Études Buddhiques (Leon Féer), pp. 15, 16, 17.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[168:6](sbe1917.htm#fr_442) So I construe
'*k*ih *k*i;' it means 'taken by,' or 'attracted by' the demeanour of
the mendicant (Bhikshu). This incident is introduced as the first
instance of Buddha's mendicant life and its influence on others.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[169:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_443) Or, 'he questioned
thus.'

<span id="fn_444"></span>[169:2](sbe1917.htm#fr_444) 'Nothing that has
been conquered.'

<span id="fn_445"></span>[169:3](sbe1917.htm#fr_445) I have attained to
that which man has not attained. That is, I have arrived at superhuman
wisdom. It appears to me that this point in Buddha's history is a key to
the whole system of his religion. He professes to have grasped absolute
truth (the word 'absolute' corresponds with 'unfettered'); and by
letting go the finite, with its limitations and defilements, to have
passed into the free, boundless, unattached infinite.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[170:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_446) This assertion is a
fundamental one (see Mr. Rhys Davids' Dhamma-*k*akka-ppavattana-sutta,
Sacred Books of the East, vol. xi, throughout); so that Buddha disclaims
any revelation in the sense of the result of a higher wisdom than his
own. The cloud, in fact, of sin moved away, the indwelling of light, by
itself, revealed itself.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[170:2](sbe1917.htm#fr_447) 'I am a voice.'

<span id="fn_448"></span>[170:3](sbe1917.htm#fr_448) (Called by the)
not-called name, 'Master of righteousness.'

<span id="fn_449"></span>[170:4](sbe1917.htm#fr_449) Here follow a list
of names applied to Tathâgata in virtue of his office. He gives up his
name Gautama, and claims to be known only by his religious titles.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[171:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_450) Sighed 'oh!' and
praised in under tone the strange behaviour of Tathâgata.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[171:2](sbe1917.htm#fr_451) Or perhaps the
following translation is better: 'following in mind the circumstances
which led to the strange encounter.'

<span id="fn_452"></span>[171:3](sbe1917.htm#fr_452) The account in the
text makes the city of Benares to be between the Ganges and the Bara*n*â
or Vara*n*â; General Cunning-ham (Archæolog. Report, vol. i, p. 104)
says, 'The city of Benares is situated on the left bank, of the Ganges,
between the Barnâ Nadi on the north-east and the Asi Nâla on the
south-west. The Barnâ is a considerable rivulet which rises to the north
of Allahabad, and has a course of about 100 miles. The Asi is a mere
brook of no length.'

<span id="fn_453"></span>[172:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_453) This \[ \] seems to
be parenthetical.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[173:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_454) The address 'Bho
Gotama' or 'Gotama,' according to Childers (Pâli Dict. p. 150), was an
appellation of disrespect used by unconverted Brahmins in addressing
Buddha. The title Gautama Buddha is rarely met with in Northern
translations.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[173:2](sbe1917.htm#fr_455) The Arhat is the
highest grade among the Buddhist saints. See Burnouf, Introd. p. 295.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[173:3](sbe1917.htm#fr_456) Here the appeal is
to them as religious persons.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[173:4](sbe1917.htm#fr_457) Or, is the sin of
dishonouring a father.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[173:5](sbe1917.htm#fr_458) The true words of
the Only Enlightened; that is, of the Buddha.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[173:6](sbe1917.htm#fr_459) <span
id="img_17300"></span> ![](img/17300.jpg) for <span
id="img_17301"></span> ![](img/17301.jpg).

<span id="fn_460"></span>[174:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_460) The two extremes.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[175:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_461) Samyag d*ri*sh*t*i.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[175:2](sbe1917.htm#fr_462) Samyak sa*m*kalpa.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[175:3](sbe1917.htm#fr_463) Samyag vâ*k*.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[175:4](sbe1917.htm#fr_464) Samyak karma.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[175:5](sbe1917.htm#fr_465) Samyag â*g*îva.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[175:6](sbe1917.htm#fr_466) Samyag vyâyâma.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[175:7](sbe1917.htm#fr_467) Samyak sm*ri*ti.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[175:8](sbe1917.htm#fr_468) Samyak samâdhi.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[175:9](sbe1917.htm#fr_469) The right roads
(orthodox ways).

<span id="fn_470"></span>[175:10](sbe1917.htm#fr_470) Or rather, of the
'two ages;' this age and the next.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[176:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_471) For some account of
T*ri*sh*n*â, Pâli Ta*n*ha, see Rhys Davids (op. cit.), p. 149 note.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[176:2](sbe1917.htm#fr_472) The germ of self;
that is, of individual existence.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[176:3](sbe1917.htm#fr_473) Having the nature
of great sorrow.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[178:1](sbe1917.htm#fr_474) The way or gate of
sweet dew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 16. Bimbisâra Râ*g*a Becomes A Disciple](sbe1918)
