[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe1913)  [Next](sbe1915) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VARGA 12. VISIT TO ARÂ*D*A UDRARÂMA <span id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_349).

The child of the glorious sun of the Ikshvâku race, going to that quiet
peaceful grove, reverently stood before the Muni, the great *Ri*shi
Arâ*d*a Râma, <span class="margnote">. 919</span>

The dark-clad (?) followers of the Kalam (Saṅghârâma) seeing afar off
Bodhisattva approaching, with loud voice raised a joyful chant, and with
suppressed breath muttered 'Welcome,' <span class="margnote">.
920</span>

As with clasped hands they reverenced him. Approaching one another, they
made mutual enquiries; and this being done, with the usual apologies,
according to their precedence (in age) <span
id="fr_350"></span>[2](#fn_350) they sat down; <span class="margnote">.
921</span>

The Brahma*k*ârins observing the prince, (beheld) his personal beauty
and carefully considered his

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

appearance; respectfully <span id="fr_351"></span>[1](#fn_351) they
satisfied themselves of his high qualities, like those who, thirsty,
drink the 'pure dew.' <span class="margnote">. 922</span>

(Then) with raised hands they addressed the prince, 'Have you <span
id="fr_352"></span>[2](#fn_352) (or, may we know whether you have) been
long an ascetic, divided from your family and broken from the bonds of
love, like the elephant who has cast off restraint? <span
class="margnote">. 923</span>

'Full of wisdom (your appearance), completely enlightened, (you seem)
well able to escape the poisonous fruit (of this world) <span
id="fr_353"></span>[3](#fn_353). In old time the monarch Ming Shing
 <span id="fr_354"></span>[4](#fn_354) (brightly victorious) gave up his
kingly estate to his son, <span class="margnote">. 924</span>

'As a man who has carried a flowery wreath, when withered casts it away:
but such is not your case, full of youthful vigour, and yet not
enamoured with the condition of a holy king; <span class="margnote">.
925</span>

'We see that your will is strong and fixed, capable of becoming a vessel
of the true law, able to embark in the boat of wisdom, and to cross over
the sea of life and death: <span class="margnote">. 926</span>

'The common class <span id="fr_355"></span>[5](#fn_355), enticed to come
to learn, their talents first are tested, then they are taught; but as I
understand your case, your mind is already fixed and your will firm:
<span class="margnote">. 927</span>

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

'And now you have undertaken the purpose of learning, (I am persuaded)
you will not in the end shrink from it.' The prince hearing this
exhortation, with gladness made reply: <span class="margnote">.
928</span>

'You have with equal intention, illustrious <span
id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_356)! cautioned me with impartial mind; with
humble heart I accept the advice, and pray that it may be so with me,
(as you anticipate); <span class="margnote">. 929</span>

'That I may in my night journey obtain a torch, to guide me safely thro’
treacherous places; a handy boat to cross over the sea;--may it be so
even now with me! <span class="margnote">. 930</span>

'But as I am somewhat in doubt and anxious to learn, I will venture to
make known my doubts, and ask, with respect to old age, disease, and
death, how are these things to be escaped?' <span class="margnote">.
931</span>

At this time O-lo-lam (Arâ*d*a Kâlâma) hearing the question asked by the
prince, briefly from the various Sûtras and *S*âstras, quoted passages
in explanation of a way of deliverance. <span class="margnote">.
932</span>

'But thou (he said) illustrious youth! so highly gifted, and eminent
among the wise! hear what I have to say, as I discourse upon the mode of
ending birth and death; <span class="margnote">. 933</span>

'Nature, and change, birth, old age, and death, these five (attributes)
belong to all <span id="fr_357"></span>[2](#fn_357); "nature" is (in
itself) <span id="fr_358"></span>[3](#fn_358) pure and without fault;
the involution of this with the five elements <span
id="fr_359"></span>[4](#fn_359), <span class="margnote">. 934</span>

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

'Causes an awakening and power of perception, which, according to its
exercise <span id="fr_360"></span>[1](#fn_360), is the cause of
"change;" form, sound, order, taste, touch, these are called the five
objects of sense (dhâtu); <span class="margnote">. 935</span>

'As the hand and foot are called the "two ways" (methods of moving?) so
these are called "the roots" of action (the five skandhas); the eye, the
ear, the nose, the tongue, the body, these are named the "roots"
(instruments) of understanding. <span class="margnote">. 936</span>

'The root of "mind" (manas) <span id="fr_361"></span>[2](#fn_361) is
twofold, being both material, and also intelligent; "nature" by its
involutions is "the cause," the knower of the cause is "I" (the soul);
<span class="margnote">. 937</span>

'Kapila the *Ri*shi and his numerous followers, on this deep principle
of "soul <span id="fr_362"></span>[3](#fn_362)," practising wisdom
(Buddhi), found deliverance. <span class="margnote">. 938</span>

'Kapila and now Vâ*k*aspati <span id="fr_363"></span>[4](#fn_363), by
the power of "Buddhi" perceiving the character of birth, old age, and
death, declare that on this is founded true philosophy <span
id="fr_364"></span>[5](#fn_364); <span class="margnote">. 939</span>

'Whilst all opposed to this, they say, is false. "Ignorance" and
"passion," causing constant "transmigration," <span class="margnote">.
940</span>

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

'Abiding in the midst of these (they say) is the lot of "all that
lives." Doubting the truth of "soul" is called "excessive doubt," and
without distinguishing aright, there can be no method of escape. <span
class="margnote">. 941</span>

'Deep speculation as to the limits of perception is but to involve the
"soul;" thus unbelief leads to confusion, and ends in differences of
thought and conduct. <span class="margnote">. 942</span>

'Again, the various speculations on "soul" (such as) "I say," "I know
and perceive," "I come" and "I go" or "I remain fixed," these are called
the intricacies (windings) of "soul" <span
id="fr_365"></span>[1](#fn_365)' <span class="margnote">. 943</span>

'And then the fancies raised in different natures, some saying "this is
so," others denying it, and this condition of uncertainty is called the
state of "darkness <span id="fr_366"></span>[2](#fn_366)." <span
class="margnote">. 944</span>

'Then there are those who say that outward things (resembling forms) are
one with "soul," who say that the "objective" is the same as "mind," who
confuse "intelligence" with "instruments," who say that "number" is the
"soul." <span class="margnote">. 945</span>

'Thus not distinguishing aright, these are called "excessive quibbles,"
"marks of folly," "nature changes," and so on. <span class="margnote">.
946</span>

'To worship and recite religious books, to slaughter living things in
sacrifice, to render pure by fire and water, and thus awake the thought
of final rescue, <span class="margnote">. 947</span>

'All these ways of thinking are called "without right expedient," the
result of ignorance and doubt, by means of word or thought or deed;
<span class="margnote">. 948</span>

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

'Involving outward relationships, this is called "depending on means;"
making the material world the ground of "soul," this is called
"depending on the senses." <span class="margnote">. 949</span>

'By these eight sorts of speculation are we involved in birth and death.
The foolish masters of the world make their classifications in these
five ways, (viz.) <span class="margnote">. 950</span>

'Darkness, folly, and great folly, angry passion, with timid fear.
Indolent coldness is called "darkness;" birth and death are called
"folly;" <span class="margnote">. 951</span>

'Lustful desire is "great folly;" because of great men subjected to
error <span id="fr_367"></span>[1](#fn_367), cherishing angry feelings,
"passion" results; trepidation of the heart is called "fear." <span
class="margnote">. 952</span>

'Thus these foolish men dilate upon the five desires; but the root of
the great sorrow of birth and death, the life destined to be spent in
the five ways, <span class="margnote">. 953</span>

'The cause of the whirl of life, I clearly perceive, is to be placed in
the existence of "I;" because of the influence of this cause, result the
consequences of repeated birth and death; <span class="margnote">.
954</span>

'This cause is without any nature of its own, and its fruits have no
nature; rightly considering what has been said, there are four matters
which have to do with escape, <span class="margnote">. 955</span>

'Kindling wisdom--opposed to dark ignorance,--making manifest--opposed
to concealment and obscurity,--if these four matters be understood, then
we may escape birth, old age, and death. <span class="margnote">.
956</span>

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

'Birth, old age, and death being over, then we attain a final place; the
Brahmans <span id="fr_368"></span>[1](#fn_368) all depending on this
principle, <span class="margnote">. 957</span>

'Practising themselves in a pure life, have also largely dilated on it,
for the good of the world.' The prince hearing these words again
enquired of Ârâ*d*a: <span class="margnote">. 958</span>

'Tell me what are the expedients you name, and what is the final place
to which they lead, and what is the character of that pure (Brahman)
life; and again what are the stated periods <span class="margnote">.
959</span>

'During which such life must be practised, and during which such life is
lawful; all these are principles to be enquired into; and on them I pray
you discourse for my sake.' <span class="margnote">. 960</span>

Then that Ârâ*d*a, according to the Sûtras and *S*âstras, spoke,
'Yourself using wisdom is the expedient; but I will further dilate on
this a little; <span class="margnote">. 961</span>

'First by removing from the crowd and leading a hermit's life, depending
entirely on alms for food, extensively practising rules of decorum,
religiously adhering to right rules of conduct, <span class="margnote">.
962</span>

'Desiring little and knowing when to abstain, receiving whatever is
given (in food), whether pleasant or otherwise, delighting to practise a
quiet (ascetic) life, diligently studying all the Sûtras and *S*âstras,
<span class="margnote">. 963</span>

'Observing the character of covetous longing and fear, without remnant
of desire to live in purity, to govern well the organs of life, the mind
quieted and silently at rest, <span class="margnote">. 964</span>

'Removing desire, and hating vice, all the sorrows

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

of life (the world of desire) put away, then there is happiness; and we
obtain the enjoyment of the first <span id="fr_369"></span>[1](#fn_369)
dhyâna. <span class="margnote">. 965</span>

'Having obtained this first dhyâna, then with the illumination thus
obtained, by inward meditation is born reliance on thought alone, and
the entanglements of folly are put away; <span class="margnote">.
966</span>

'The mind depending on this, then after death, born in the Brahma
heavens, the enlightened are able to know themselves; by the use of
means is produced further inward illumination; <span class="margnote">.
967</span>

'Diligently persevering, seeking higher advance, accomplishing the
second dhyâna, tasting of that great joy, we are born in the
Kwong-yin <span id="fr_370"></span>[2](#fn_370) heaven (Abhâsvara);
<span class="margnote">. 968</span>

'Then by the use of means putting away this delight, practising the
third dhyâna, resting in such delight and wishing no further excellence,
there is a birth in the *S*ubhak*ri*tsna (hin-tsing) heaven; <span
class="margnote">. 969</span>

'Leaving the thought of such delight, straightway we reach the fourth
dhyâna, all joys and sorrows done away, the thought of escape produced,
<span class="margnote">. 970</span>

'We dwell in this fourth dhyâna, and are born in the V*ri*hat-phala
heaven; because of its long enduring years, it is thus called
V*ri*hat-phala (extensive-fruit); <span class="margnote">. 971</span>

'Whilst in that state of abstraction rising (higher), perceiving there
is a place beyond any bodily condition, adding still and persevering
further in practising wisdom, rejecting this fourth dhyâna, <span
class="margnote">. 972</span>

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

'Firmly resolved to persevere in the search, still contriving to put
away every desire after form, gradually from every pore of the body
there is perceived a feeling of empty release, <span class="margnote">.
973</span>

'And in the end this extends to every solid part, so that the whole is
perfected in an apprehension of emptiness. In brief, perceiving no
limits to. this emptiness, there is opened to the view boundless
knowledge. <span class="margnote">. 974</span>

'Endowed with inward rest and peace, the idea of "I" departs, and the
object of "I:" clearly discriminating the non-existence of matter
(bhava), this is the condition of immaterial life. <span
class="margnote">. 975</span>

'As the Mu*ñg*a (grass) when freed from its horny case, or as the wild
bird which escapes from its prison trap, so, getting away from all
material limitations, we thus find perfect release. <span
class="margnote">. 976</span>

Thus ascending above the Brahmans (Brahmalokas?), deprived of every
vestige of bodily existence, we still endure <span
id="fr_371"></span>[1](#fn_371). Endued with wisdom <span
id="fr_372"></span>[2](#fn_372)! let it be known this is real and true
deliverance. <span class="margnote">. 977</span>

You ask what are the expedients for obtaining this escape; even as I
have before detailed, those who have deep faith will learn. <span
class="margnote">. 978</span>

'The *Ri*shis *G*aigîshavya, *G*anaka, V*ri*ddha Parâ*s*ara <span
id="fr_373"></span>[3](#fn_373), and other searchers after truth, <span
class="margnote">. 979</span>

'All by the way I have explained, have reached true deliverance.' The
prince hearing these words, deeply pondering on the outline of these
principles, <span class="margnote">. 980</span>

And reaching back to the influences produced by

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

our former lives, again asked with further words: 'I have heard your
very excellent system of wisdom, the principles very subtle and
deep-reaching, <span class="margnote">. 981</span>

'From which I learn that because of not "letting go" (by knowledge as a
cause), we do not reach the end of the religious life; but by
understanding nature in its involutions, then, you say, we obtain
deliverance; <span class="margnote">. 982</span>

'I perceive this law of birth has also concealed in it another law as a
germ; you say that the "I" (i.e. "the soul," of Kapila) being rendered
pure <span id="fr_374"></span>[1](#fn_374), forthwith there is true
deliverance; <span class="margnote">. 983</span>

'But if we encounter a union of cause and effect, then there is a return
to the trammels of birth; just as the germ in the seed, when earth,
fire, water, and wind <span class="margnote">. 984</span>

'Seem to have destroyed in it the principle of life, meeting with
favourable concomitant circumstances will yet revive, without any
evident cause, but because of desire; so those who have gained this
supposed release, (likewise) <span class="margnote">. 985</span>

'Keeping the idea of "I" and "living things," have in fact gained no
final deliverance; in every condition, letting go the "three
classes <span id="fr_375"></span>[2](#fn_375)" and again reaching the
three <span id="fr_376"></span>[3](#fn_376) "excellent qualities," <span
class="margnote">. 986</span>

'Because of the eternal existence of soul, by the subtle influences of
that, (influences resulting from the past,) the heart lets go the idea
of expedients, <span class="margnote">. 987</span>

'And obtains an almost endless duration of years. This, you say, is true
release; you say "letting go the ground on which the idea of soul
rests," that this frees us from "limited <span
id="fr_377"></span>[4](#fn_377) existence," <span class="margnote">.
988</span>

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

'And that the mass of people have not yet removed the idea of soul, (and
are therefore still in bondage). But what is this letting go
"gu*n*as <span id="fr_378"></span>[1](#fn_378)" (cords fettering the
soul); if one is fettered by these "gu*n*as," how can there be release?
<span class="margnote">. 989</span>

'For gu*n*î (the object) and "gu*n*a" (the quality) in idea are
different, but in substance one; if you say that you can remove the
properties of a thing (and leave the thing) by arguing it to the end,
this is not so. <span class="margnote">. 990</span>

'If you remove heat from fire, then there is no such thing as fire, or
if you remove surface (front) from body, what body can remain? <span
class="margnote">. 991</span>

'Thus "gu*n*a" is as it were surface, remove this and there can be no
"gu*n*î." So that this deliverance, spoken of before, must leave a body
yet in bonds. <span class="margnote">. 992</span>

'Again, you say that by "clear knowledge" you get rid of body; there is
then such a thing as knowledge or the contrary; if you affirm the
existence of clear knowledge, then there should be some one who
possesses it (i.e. possesses this knowledge); <span class="margnote">.
993</span>

'If there be a possessor, how can there be deliverance (from this
personal "I")? If you say there is no "knower," then who is it that is
spoken of as "knowing?" <span class="margnote">. 994</span>

'If there is knowledge and no person, then the subject of knowledge may
be a stone or a log; moreover, to have clear knowledge of these minute
causes of contamination and reject them thoroughly, <span
class="margnote">. 995</span>

'These being so rejected, there must be an end, then, of the "doer."
What Arâ*d*a has declared cannot satisfy my heart. <span
class="margnote">. 996</span>

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

'This clear knowledge is not "universal wisdom," I must go on and seek a
better explanation.' Going on then to the place of Udra <span
id="fr_379"></span>[1](#fn_379) *Ri*shi, he also expatiated on this
question of 'I.' <span class="margnote">. 997</span>

(But) although he refined the matter to the utmost, laying down a term
of 'thought' and 'no thought' taking the position of removing 'thought'
and 'no thought,' yet even so he came not out of the mire; <span
class="margnote">. 998</span>

For supposing creatures attained that state, still (he said) there is a
possibility of returning to the coil, whilst Bodhisattva sought a method
of getting out of it. So once more leaving Udra *Ri*shi, <span
class="margnote">. 999</span>

He went on in search of a better system, and came at last to Mount
Kia-*k*e <span id="fr_380"></span>[2](#fn_380) \[the forest of
mortification\], where was a town called Pain-suffering forest
(Uravilva?). Here the five Bhikshus had gone before. <span
class="margnote">. 1000</span>

When then he beheld these five, virtuously keeping in check their senses
(passion-members), holding to the rules of moral conduct, practising
mortification, dwelling in that grove of mortification <span
id="fr_381"></span>[3](#fn_381); <span class="margnote">. 1001</span>

Occupying a spot beside the Naira*ñg*ana river, perfectly composed and
filled with contentment, Bodhisattva forthwith by them (selecting) one
spot, quietly gave himself to thought. <span class="margnote">.
1002</span>

The five Bhikshus knowing him with earnest heart to be seeking escape,
offered him their services with devotion, as if reverencing Î*s*vara
Deva. <span class="margnote">. 1003</span>

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

Having finished their attentions and dutiful services, then going on he
took his seat not far off, as one about to enter on a course of
religious practice, composing all his members as he desired. <span
class="margnote">. 1004</span>

Bodhisattva diligently applied himself to 'means,' as one about to cross
over old age, disease, and death. With full purpose of heart (he set
himself) to endure mortification, to restrain every bodily passion, and
give up thought about sustenance, <span class="margnote">. 1005</span>

With purity of heart to observe the fast-rules, which no worldly man
(active man) can bear; silent and still, lost in thoughtful meditation;
and so for six years he continued, <span class="margnote">. 1006</span>

Each day eating one hemp grain, his bodily form shrunken and attenuated,
seeking how to cross (the sea) of birth and death, exercising himself
still deeper and advancing further; <span class="margnote">. 1007</span>

Making his way perfect by the disentanglements of true wisdom, not
eating, and yet not (looking to that as) a cause (of emancipation), his
four members although exceedingly weak, his heart of wisdom increasing
yet more and more in light; <span class="margnote">. 1008</span>

His spirit free, his body light and refined, his name spreading far and
wide, as 'highly gifted,' even as the moon when first produced, or as
the Kumuda flower spreading out its sweetness; <span class="margnote">.
1009</span>

Everywhere thro’ the country his excellent fame extended; the daughters
of the lord of the place both coming to see him, his mortified body like
a withered branch, just completing the period of six years, <span
class="margnote">. 1010</span>

Fearing the sorrow of birth and death, seeking earnestly the method
(cause) of true wisdom, he

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

came to the conviction that these were not the means to extinguish
desire and produce ecstatic contemplation; <span class="margnote">.
1011</span>

Nor yet (the means by which) in former time, seated underneath the
*G*ambu tree <span id="fr_382"></span>[1](#fn_382), he arrived at that
miraculous condition, that surely was the proper way, (he thought),
<span class="margnote">. 1012</span>

The way opposed to this of 'withered body.' I should therefore rather
seek strength of body, by drink and food refresh my members, and with
contentment cause my mind to rest. <span class="margnote">. 1013</span>

My mind at rest, I shall enjoy silent composure; composure is the trap
for getting ecstasy (dhyâna); whilst in ecstasy perceiving the true law
(right law, i.e. truth), then the force of truth (the law) obtained,
disentanglement will follow. <span class="margnote">. 1014</span>

And thus composed, enjoying perfect quiet, old age and death are put
away; and then defilement is escaped by this first means; thus then by
equal steps the excellent law results from life restored by food and
drink. <span class="margnote">. 1015</span>

Having carefully considered this principle, bathing in the Naira*ñg*ana
river, he desired afterwards to leave the water (pool), but owing to
extreme exhaustion was unable to rise; <span class="margnote">.
1016</span>

Then a heavenly spirit holding out (pressing down) a branch, taking this
in his hand he (raised himself and) came forth. At this time on the
opposite side of the grove there was a certain chief herdsman, <span
class="margnote">. 1017</span>

Whose eldest daughter was called Nandâ. One of the *S*uddhavâsa Devas
addressing her said, 'Bodhisattva

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

dwells in the grove, go you then, and present to him a religious
offering.' <span class="margnote">. 1018</span>

Nandâ Balada (or Bala*g*a or Baladhya) with joy came to the spot, above
her hands (i.e. on her wrists) white chalcedony bracelets, her clothing
of a grey (bluish) colour (dye); <span class="margnote">. 1019</span>

The grey and the white together contrasted in the light, as the colours
of the rounded river bubble; with simple heart and quicken’d step she
came, and, bowing down at Bodhisattva's feet, <span class="margnote">.
1020</span>

She reverently offered him perfumed rice milk, begging him of his
condescension to accept it <span id="fr_383"></span>[1](#fn_383).
Bodhisattva taking it, partook of it (at once), whilst she received,
even then, the fruits of her religious act. <span class="margnote">.
1021</span>

Having eaten it, all his members refreshed, he became capable of
receiving Bodhi; his body and limbs glistening with (renewed strength),
and his energies swelling higher still <span
id="fr_384"></span>[2](#fn_384), <span class="margnote">. 1022</span>

As the hundred streams swell the sea, or the first quarter’d moon daily
increases in brightness. The five Bhikshus having witnessed this,
perturbed, were filled with suspicious reflection; <span
class="margnote">. 1023</span>

They supposed (said) that his religious zeal (heart) was flagging, and
that he was leaving and looking for a better abode, as though he had
obtained deliverance, the five elements entirely removed <span
id="fr_385"></span>[3](#fn_385). <span class="margnote">. 1024</span>

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Bodhisattva wandered on alone, directing his course to that
'fortunate <span id="fr_386"></span>[1](#fn_386)' tree, beneath whose
shade he might accomplish his search after complete enlightenment <span
id="fr_387"></span>[2](#fn_387). <span class="margnote">. 1025</span>

(Over) the ground wide and level, producing soft and pliant grass,
easily he advanced with lion step, pace by pace, (whilst) the earth
shook withal; <span class="margnote">. 1026</span>

And as it shook, Kâla nâga aroused, was filled with joy, as his eyes
were opened to the light. Forthwith he exclaimed: 'When formerly I saw
the Buddhas of old, there was the sign of an earthquake as now; <span
class="margnote">. 1027</span>

'The virtues of a Muni are so great in majesty, that the great earth
cannot endure <span id="fr_388"></span>[3](#fn_388) them; as step by
step his foot treads upon the ground, so is there heard the sound of the
rumbling earth-shaking; <span class="margnote">. 1028</span>

'A brilliant light now illumes the world, as the shining of the rising
sun; five hundred bluish tinted birds (I see), wheeling round to the
right, flying through space; <span class="margnote">. 1029</span>

'A gentle, soft, and cooling breeze blows around in an agreeable way;
all these auspicious (miraculous) signs are the same as those of former
Buddhas; <span class="margnote">. 1030</span>

'Wherefore I know that this Bodhisattva will certainly arrive at perfect
wisdom. And now, behold! from yonder man, a grass cutter, he obtains
some pure and pliant grass, <span class="margnote">. 1031</span>

'Which spreading out beneath the tree, with upright body, there he takes
his seat; his feet placed

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

under him, not carelessly arranged (moving to and fro), but like the
firmly fixed and compact body of a Nâga; <span class="margnote">.
1032</span>

'Nor shall he rise again from off his seat till he has completed his
undertaking.' And so he (the Nâga) uttered these words by way of
confirmation. The heavenly Nâgas, filled with joy, <span
class="margnote">. 1033</span>

(Caused a) cool refreshing breeze to rise; the trees and grass were yet
unmoved by it, and all the beasts, quiet and silent, (looked on in
wonderment.) <span class="margnote">. 1034</span>

These are the signs that Bodhisattva will certainly attain
enlightenment. <span class="margnote">. 1035</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_349"></span>[131:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_349) The compound in the
original probably represents Ârâ*d*a Kâlâma and Udra(ka) Râmaputra.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[131:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_350) Tsi’ang tsu may
mean 'after invitation.'

<span id="fn_351"></span>[132:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_351) 'High qualities,'
powers of his mind; probably the same as the tai*g*asa of the *G*ainas
(see Colebrooke, Essays, p. 282). This line may be literally.
translated, 'bathing themselves in a respectful admiration of his high
qualities.'

<span id="fn_352"></span>[132:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_352) The symbol '*k*i'
may possibly mean 'friend,' in which case the line would be, 'O friend!
have you long been a homeless one?'

<span id="fn_353"></span>[132:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_353) Or the poisonous
fruit of that which is low or base.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[132:4](sbe1914.htm#fr_354) I have taken 'Ming
Shing' as a proper name, but it may be also translated 'illustrious
conquering (kings).'

<span id="fn_355"></span>[132:5](sbe1914.htm#fr_355) 'Fan fu,' the
common class of philosophers, or students. The vulgar herd.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[133:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_356) Or, 'illustriously
admonished me without preference or dislike;' or 'against preference or
dislike.'

<span id="fn_357"></span>[133:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_357) The discourse
following is very obscure, being founded on the philosophical
speculations of Kapila and others.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[133:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_358) Or, Nature is that
which is pure and unsullied (tabula rasa).

<span id="fn_359"></span>[133:4](sbe1914.htm#fr_359) The five 'great'
(Mahat).

<span id="fn_360"></span>[134:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_360) That is, as the
power of perception is exercised, 'change' is experienced.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[134:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_361) Refer to
Colebrooke, on the Sâṅkhya philosophy.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[134:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_362) Much of this
discourse might be illustrated from the Chinese version of the seventy
golden *S*astra' (Sâṅkhya Kârikâ) of Kapila; but the subject would
require distinct treatment.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[134:4](sbe1914.htm#fr_363) This verse is
obscure, and the translation doubtful. Literally rendered it runs as
follows: 'That Kapila (or, that which Kapila said) now (is affirmed
respecting) Pra*g*âpatî \[po-*k*e-po-ti; this may be restored to
Vâkpati, or to Pra*g*âpatî; the latter however (as I am told) is the
reading found in the Sanskrit original\] (by the power of) Buddhi,
knowing birth,' &c.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[134:5](sbe1914.htm#fr_364) This, they say, is
called 'to see.'

<span id="fn_365"></span>[135:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_365) The 'soul' is the
'I' (aha*m*kâra) of the Sâṅkhya system, concerning which see Colebrooke
(Essays), p. 153.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[135:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_366) Tamas.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[136:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_367) Literally 'great
men producing error,' or it may be 'because of the birth-error
(delusion) of great men.'

<span id="fn_368"></span>[137:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_368) The Brahmans in the
world.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[138:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_369) The dhyânas are the
conditions of ecstasy, enjoyed by the inhabitants of the Brahmaloka
heavens.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[138:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_370) We have here an
account of the different heavens of the Brahmalokas, concerning which
consult Burnouf, 'Introduction to Indian Buddhism.'

<span id="fn_371"></span>[139:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_371) Literally,
'endurance not exhausted.'

<span id="fn_372"></span>[139:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_372) That is, 'O thou!
endued with wisdom,' or, generally, 'those endued with wisdom.'

<span id="fn_373"></span>[139:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_373) These proper names
were supplied from the Sanskrit text.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[140:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_374) See Colebrooke,
l.c. p. 150.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[140:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_375) Three sorts of
pain.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[140:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_376) Perception,
inference, affirmation.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[140:4](sbe1914.htm#fr_377) Bhava.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[141:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_378) Colebrooke, p. 157.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[142:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_379) Yuh-to.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[142:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_380) Gayâ, or
Gayâ*s*îrsha.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[142:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_381) Or is the word
fu-hing = the name of a plant, such as the uruvu (betel)?

<span id="fn_382"></span>[144:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_382) See above, [p.
48](sbe1907.htm#page_48), ver. 335.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[145:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_383) See Tree and
Serpent Worship, plate I.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[145:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_384) This is a free
translation; the text is probably defective, <span
id="img_14500"></span> ![](img/14500.jpg) being a mistake for <span
id="img_14501"></span> ![](img/14501.jpg) or for <span
id="img_14502"></span> ![](img/14502.jpg).

<span id="fn_385"></span>[145:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_385) 'The five
elements,' in the original 'the five great;' the sense seems to be that
the Bodhisattva was acting as though he had attained his aim, and
overcome the powers of sense. At the same <span id="page_146">p.
146</span> time it is possible that 'the five great' may allude to the
five Bhikshus. But in any case it is better to hold to the literal
sense.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[146:1](sbe1914.htm#fr_386) The 'fortunate
tree,' the tree 'of good omen,' the Bodhi tree.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[146:2](sbe1914.htm#fr_387) Samyak-Sambodhi.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[146:3](sbe1914.htm#fr_388) Cannot excel or
surpass them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Varga 13. Defeats Mâra](sbe1915)
