[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc19007)  [Next](cc19009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 19: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part III*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span> <span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span>Lecture Ninety-Ninth

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 26

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**1.** In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word from the LORD,
saying,

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Principio regni Joakim filii Josiae,
regis Jehudah, fuit sermo hic a Jehova, dicendo,

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span>**2.** Thus saith the LORD; Stand in the
court of the LORD’S house, and speak unto all the cities of Judah, which
come to worship in the LORD’S house, all the words that I command thee
to speak unto them; diminish not a word:

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**2.** Sic dicit Jehova, Sta in atrio templi
Jehovae, et loquere ad omnes urbes Jehudah (*id est,* omnes cives urbium
Jehudah) quae veniunt ad orandum in templum Jehovae hos omnes sermones
quas mandavero tibi ad loquendum ad ipsos (*hoc est,* loquaris ipsis;)
ne diminuas verbum.

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span><span id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>This chapter contains a remarkable history,
to which a very useful doctrine is annexed, for Jeremiah speaks of
repentance, which forms one of the main points of true religion, and he
shews at the same time that the people were rejected by God, because
they perversely despised all warnings, and could by no means be brought
to a right mind. We shall find these two things in this chapter.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>He says that this word came to him at the
*beginning of the reign, of Jehoiakim,* of which king we have spoken in
other places, where Jeremiah related other discourses delivered in his
reign. We hence conclude that this book was not put together in a
regular order, but that the chapters were collected, and from them the
volume was formed.

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>The time, however, is not here repeated in
vain, for we know that the miserable derive some hope from new events.
When men have been long afflicted and well-nigh have rotted in their
evils, they yet think, when a change takes place, that they shall be
happy, and they promise themselves vain hopes. Such was probably the
confidence of the people when Jehoiakim began to reign; for they might
have thought that things would be restored by him to a better state.
There is also another circumstance to be noticed; though their condition
was nigh past hope, they yet hardened themselves against God, so that
they obstinately resisted the prophets. It hence appears that the
reprobate were become more and more exasperated by the scourges of God,
and had never been truly and really humbled. This was the reason why
Jeremiah, according to God’s command, spoke so sharply.

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>I pass by other things and come to the
words, that *the word of Jehovah came* to him. He thus arrogated nothing
to himself; but he testifies how necessary it was, especially among a
people so refractory, that he should bring nothing of his own, but
announce a truth that came from heaven. A general subject might be here
handled, which is, that God alone is to be heard in the Church, and also
that no one ought to assume to himself the name of a prophet or teacher,
except he whom the Lord has formed and appointed, and to whom he has
committed his message; but these things have been treated elsewhere and
often and much at large; and I do not willingly dwell long on general
subjects. It is then enough to bear in mind the purpose for which
Jeremiah says that the word of Jehovah came to him, even that he might
secure authority to himself; he does not boast of his own wisdom nor of
anything human or earthly, but says only that he spoke what the Lord had
commanded him.

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span><span id="ix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>He adds, *Thus saith Jehovah, Stand in the
court of the house* (literally, but house means the Temple) *of Jehovah*
It was not allowed the people to enter into the Temple; hence the
Prophet was bidden to abide in the court where he might be heard by all.
He was, as we have seen, of the priestly order; but it would have been
but of little avail to address the Levites.  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) It was therefore necessary for him to
go forth and to announce to the whole people the commands of God which
are here recited; and he was to do this not only to the citizens of
Jerusalem, but also to all the Jews; and this is expressly required,
*speak to all the cities of Judah;* and then it is added, *who come to
worship in the Temple of Jehovah* God seems to have designedly
anticipated the presumption of those who thought that wrong was done to
them, when they were so severely reproved; “What! we have left our wives
and children, and have come here to worship God; we have laid aside
every attention to our private advantage, and have come here, though
inconveniently; we might have lived quietly at home and enjoyed our
blessings; we have incurred great expenses, undertaken a tedious
journey, brought sacrifices, and denied ourselves as to our daily food,
that God might be worshipped; and yet thou inveighest severely against
us, and we hear nothing from thy mouth but terrors; is this right? Does
God render such a reward to his servants?”

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>Thus then they might have contended with the
Prophet; but he anticipates these objections, and allows what they might
have pleaded, that they came to the Temple to offer sacrifices; but he
intimates that another thing was required by God, and that they did not
discharge their duties in coming to the Temple, except they faithfully
obeyed God and his Law. We now see why the Prophet said, that he was
sent to those who came up to Jerusalem to worship God. The deed itself
could not indeed have been blamed; nay, it was highly worthy of praise,
that they thus frequented the worship of God; but as the Jews regarded
not the end for which God had commanded sacrifices to be offered to him,
and also the end for which he had instituted all these external rites,
it was necessary to remove this error in which they were involved.

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>Speak, he says, *all the words which I have
commanded thee to speak to them* The Prophet again confirms, that he was
not the author of what he taught, but only a minister, who faithfully
announced what God had committed to him; and so the people could not
have objected to him by saying, that he brought forward his own devices,
for he repelled such a calumny. The false prophets might have also
alleged similar things; but Jeremiah had certain evidences as to his
calling, that the Jews, by rejecting him, condemned themselves, for
their own consciences fully convicted them. But from this passage, and
from many like passages, we may draw this conclusion, — that no one,
however he may excel in powers of mind, or knowledge, or wisdom, or
station, ought to be attended to, except he proves that he is God’s
minister.

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou shalt not diminish
a word* Some read, “Thou shall not restrain,” which is harsh. The verb,
<span id="ix.ii-p17.1"></span>ערג, *garo,* properly means to be lessened
and to be consumed. And Moses makes use of the same word in <span
id="ix.ii-p17.2"></span>[De 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#032.md)<span
id="ix.ii-p17.2"></span>, when he says,

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span>“Thou shalt not add, nor diminish,”

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span>in reference to the Law, in which the people
were to acquiesce, without corrupting it with any human devices. To
diminish then was to take away something from the word.  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md) But we ought to consider the reason
why this was said to Jeremiah; it never entered the mind of the holy man
to adulterate God’s word; but God here encourages him to confidence, so
that he might boldly execute his commands. To diminish then something
from the word, was to soften what appeared sharp, or to suppress what
might have offended, or to express indirectly or coldly what could not
produce effect without being forcibly expressed. There is then no doubt
but that God anticipates here this evil, under which even faithful
teachers in a great measure labor; for when they find the ears of men
tender and delicate, they dare not vehemently to reprove, threaten, and
condemn their vices. This is the reason why God added this, *Diminish
not a word;* as though he had said, “Declare thou with closed eyes and
with boldness whatever thou hast heard from my mouth, and disregard
whatever may tend to lessen thy courage.”

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span>We may now easily learn the use of this
doctrine; the Prophet was not sent to profane men, who openly avowed
their impiety, or lived in gross sins; but he was sent to the very
worshippers of God, who highly regarded his external worship, and for
this reason had left wives and children, came to the Temple and spared
neither labor nor expense. As, then, he was sent to them, we must
beware, lest we sleep in our vices and think that we have done our duty
to God, when we have apparently given some evidences of piety; for
except we really and *sincerely obey* God, all other things are esteemed
of no value by him. It then follows —

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**3.** If so be they will hearken, and turn
every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil, which I
purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings.

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Si forte audiant et convertantur
quisque a via sua mala, et poeniteat me mali quod ego cogitans ad
faciendum (*id est,* cogito facere) ipsis propter (a facie, *ad verbum)*
malitiam actionurn ipsorum.

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span><span id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>In this verse God briefly shows for what end
he sent his Prophet. For it would not have been sufficient for him to
announce what he taught, except it was known to have been the will of
God. Here then God asserts that he would not be propitious to the
people, except they complied with what he required, that is, to repent.
Thus he testifies that what was taught would be useful to them, because
it had reference to their safety; and a truth cannot be rendered more
entitled to our love than when we know that it tends to promote our
wellbeing. Therefore God, when he saw the people rushing headlong
through blind despair into all kinds of impiety, designed to make the
trial whether or not some of them were healable; as though he had said,
“What are ye doing, ye miserable beings? It is not yet wholly over with
you; only obey me, and the remedy for all your evils is ready at hand.”
We now see what God’s design was, even that he wished to give those Jews
the hope of mercy who were altogether irreclaimable, so that they might
not reject what he taught on hearing that it would be for their good.

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>But we may hence gather a general doctrine;
that when God is especially displeased with us, it is yet an evidence of
his paternal kindness when he favors us with the prophetic teaching, for
that will not be without its fruit, except it be through our own fault.
But at the same time we are rendered more and more inexcusable, if we
reject that medicine which would certainly give us life. Let us then
understand that the Prophet says here, that he was sent that he might
try whether the Jews would repent; for God was ready to receive them
into favor.

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>By saying <span
id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>ילוא, *auli,* “if peradventure,” he made use of
a common mode of speaking. God indeed has perfect knowledge of all
events, nor had he any doubt respecting what would take place, when the
prophets had discharged their duties; but what is pointed out here, and
also condemned, is the obstinacy of the people; as though he had said,
that it was indeed difficult to heal those who had grown putrid in their
evils, yet he would try to do so. And thus God manifests his unspeakable
goodness, that he does not wholly cast away men who are almost past
remedy, and whose diseases seem to be unhealable. He also strengthens
his Prophet; for he might from long experience have been led to think
that all his labor would be in vain; therefore God adds this, that he
might not cease to proceed in the course of his calling; for what seemed
incredible might yet take place beyond his expectation. We now see why
it was said, *If so be that they will hear*

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span>It is then added, *and turn, etc.* From the
context we learn, that repentance as well as faith proceeds from the
truth taught: for how is it that those alienated from God return,
confess their sins, and change their character, minds, and purposes? It
is the fruit of truth; not that truth in all cases is effectual, but he
treats here of the elect: or were they all healable, yet God shews that
the use and fruit of his truth is to turn men, as it is said also by the
Prophet, (<span id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>[Mal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)<span id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>,.md)
and repeated in the first chapter of Luke,

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span>“He will turn many of the children of
Israel.” (<span id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>[Lu
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006)<span id="ix.iii-p10.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span>What follows is not without its weight,
*every one from his evil way;* for God intimates that it was not enough
that the whole people should ostensibly confess their sins, but that
every one was required to examine himself: for when we seek God in a
troop, and one follows another, it is often done with no right feeling.
Repentance therefore is only true and genuine, when every one comes to
search his own case; for its interior and hidden seat is in the heart.
This is the reason why he says, *If a man,* that is, if every one *turns
from his evil way*

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span>As to God’s *repentance,* of which mention
is made, there is no need of long explanation. No change belongs to God;
but when God is said to turn away his wrath, it is to be understood in a
sense suitable to the comprehension of men: in the same way also we are
to understand the words, that he repents. (<span
id="ix.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ps. 85:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#005.md),
[Ps. 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md)<span
id="ix.iii-p12.1"></span>.) It is at the same time sufficiently evident
what God means here, even that he is reconcilable, as soon as men truly
turn to him: and thus we see that men cannot be called to repent, until
God’s mercy is presented to them. Hence also it follows, that these two
things, repentance and faith, are connected together, and that it is
absurd and an impious sacrilege to separate them; for God cannot be
feared except the sinner perceives that he will be propitious to him:
for as long as we are apprehensive of God’s wrath, we dread his
judgment; and thus we storm against him, and must necessarily be driven
headlong into the lowest abyss, hence under the Papacy they speak not
only foolishly, but also coldly of repentance; for they leave souls
doubtful and perplexed, nay, they take away every kind of certainty. Let
us then understand the reason why the Holy Spirit teaches us, that
repentance cannot be rightly and profitably taught, unless it be added,
that God will be propitious to miserable men whenever they turn to him.

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span>With regard to the word *I think,* I have
already said, that God forms no contrary purposes; but this refers to
those men who deserved his dreadful vengeance; it is the same as though
he had said, — “Their iniquity has already ripened; I am therefore now
ready to take vengeance on them: nevertheless let them return to me, and
they shall find me to be a Father. There is, then, no reason for them to
despair, though I have already manifested tokens of my vengeance.” This
is the meaning; but he repeats the reason of his wrath, On *account of
the wickedness of their doings;* for we know that they were proud and
obstinate; it was therefore necessary to close their mouths, otherwise
they would have raised a clamor, and said, that God was unjustly angry,
or that he exceeded all bounds. Whatever evils then were at hand, God
briefly shews that they came from themselves, that the cause was their
own wickedness,  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md) It follows, —

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**4.** And thou shalt say unto them, Thus
saith the LORD; If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I
have set before you,

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Dices ergo ad eos, Sic dicit Jehova,
Si non audieritis me, ut ambuletis in lege mea, quam posui coram
conspectu vestro,

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span>**5.** To hearken to the words of my servants
the prophets, whom I sent unto you, both rising up early, and sending
*them,* but ye have not hearkened;

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span>**5.** Ad audiendum sermonem *(hoc est,* ut
audiatis sermones) servorum meorum prophetarum, quos ego mitto ad vos,
et mane surgendo et mittendo, neque tamen audistis *(hoc postremum lego
parenthesin;)*

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>**6.** Then will I make this house like
Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>**6.** Et *(id est,* tunc) ponam domum hanc
*(id est,* templum) sicuti Silo, et urbem hanc ponam maledictionem
cunctis gentibus terrae.

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span><span id="ix.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>The Prophet now briefly includes what he had
been teaching, what he had been commanded to declare to the people. No
doubt he spoke to them more at large; but he deemed it enough to shew in
a few words what had been committed to him. And the sum of it was, that
except the Jews so hearkend as to walk in God’s Law, and were submissive
to the prophets, final ruin was nigh the Temple and the city. This is
the meaning: but it may be useful to consider every particular.

<span id="ix.iv-p11"></span>By these words, *Except ye hearken to me, to
walk in my law,* God intimates, that he mainly requires obedience, and
esteems nothing as much, according to what he says, that it is better
than all sacrifices. (<span id="ix.iv-p11.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span id="ix.iv-p11.1"></span>..md)
This subject was largely treated in the seventh chapter, where he said,

<span id="ix.iv-p12"></span>“Did I command your fathers when they came
out of Egypt to offer sacrifices to me? this only I required, even to
hear my voice.” (<span id="ix.iv-p12.1"></span>[Jer.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023)<span id="ix.iv-p12.1"></span>.md)

<span id="ix.iv-p13"></span>We hence see, that the only way of living
piously, justly, holily, and uprightly, is to allow ourselves to be
ruled by the Lord. This is one thing. Then what follows is worthy of
being noticed, *To walk in my law* God here testifies that his will is
not ambiguous or doubtful, for he has prescribed what is right in his
law. Were God then to descend a hundred times from heaven, he would
bring nothing but this message, that he has spoken what is necessary to
be known, and that his Law is the most perfect wisdom. Had he said only,
“Hear me,” men might have still evaded and avowed themselves ready to
learn. God therefore does here silence hypocrites, and says that he
required nothing else but to follow his Law. And for the same purpose he
adds what follows, *which I have set before you:* for this kind of
speaking intimates that the doctrine of the Law was by no means obscure
or doubtful, as Moses said,

<span id="ix.iv-p14"></span>“I this day call heaven and earth to
witness, that I have set life and death before your eyes.” (<span
id="ix.iv-p14.1"></span>[De 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019.md)<span
id="ix.iv-p14.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.iv-p15"></span>And in another place he said,

<span id="ix.iv-p16"></span>“Say not, Who shall ascend above the clouds?
or, Who shall descend into the abyss? or, Who shall pass beyond the sea?
The word is in thy heart and in thy mouth,” (<span
id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>[De
30:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012.md)<span
id="ix.iv-p16.1"></span>; <span id="ix.iv-p16.2"></span>[Ro
10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span id="ix.iv-p16.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ix.iv-p17"></span>as though he had said, “God has deprived you
of every excuse, for there is no reason for doubting, since he has
spoken so familiarly to you, and has explained everything necessary to
be known.”

<span id="ix.iv-p18"></span>And hereby is confuted the impious blasphemy
of the Papists, who impudently assert that not only the Law is obscure,
but also the Gospel. And Paul also loudly declares, that the Gospel is
not obscure except to those who perish, and who have a veil over their
hearts, being visited with judicial blindness. But as to the Law, in
which there is no such plainness as in the Gospel, we see what Jeremiah
affirms here, that it was set before the eyes of all, that they might
learn from it what pleased God, and what was just and right.

<span id="ix.iv-p19"></span><span id="ix.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p20"></span>But what follows in the next verse ought to
be especially observed; for these two things are necessarily connected,
— that God required nothing but obedience to his Law, — and that his
will was that his prophets should be heard, — *To hearken,* he says, *to
the words of my servants, the prophets, whom I send to you,* (it is in
the second person.) Here there seems to be some inconsistency; for if
God’s Law was sufficient, why were the prophets to be heard? But these
two things well agree together: the Law alone was to be attended to, and
also the prophets, for they were its interpreters. For God sent not his
prophets to correct the Law, to change anything in it, to add or to take
away; as it was an unalterable decree, not to add to it nor to diminish
from it. What then was the benefit of sending the prophets? even to make
more manifest the Law, and to apply it to the circumstances of the
people. As then the prophets devised no new doctrine, but were faithful
interpreters of the Law, God joined, not without reason, these two
things together, — that his Law was to be heard and also his prophets;
for the majesty of the Law derogated nothing from the authority of the
prophets; and as the prophets confirmed the Law, it could not have been
that they took away anything from the Law.

<span id="ix.iv-p21"></span>Nay, this passage teaches us, that all those
who repudiate the daily duty of learning, are profane men, and
extinguish as far as they can the grace of the Spirit; many such
fanatics among the Anabaptists have been in our time, who despised
learning of every kind. They boasted that the doctrine of the Law was
the Alphabet; and they also indulged in this dream, that wrong is done
to the Holy Spirit when men attend to learning. And some dare, in a
grosser manner, to vomit forth their blasphemies; they say that
Scripture is enough for us, yea, even these two things, “Fear God and
love thy neighbor.” But as I have already said, we must consider how God
has spoken by his Law; whether he has closed up the way, so as not to
explain his will more clearly by the prophets, nor to apply to present
use what would have otherwise been less effectual? or that he purposed
to draw continually by various channels the doctrine which flows from
that fountain? But now, since God had given his own Law, and had added
to the Law his prophets, every one who rejected the prophets must surely
*ascribe* no authority to the Law. Even so now, they who think it not
their duty at this day to seek knowledge in the school of Christ, and to
avail themselves of the hearing of his word, no doubt despise God in
their hearts, and set no value either on the Law, or on the prophets, or
on the Gospel. Remarkable then is this passage; it shews that the Lord
would have his Law to be our leader and teacher, and yet he adds his own
prophets.

<span id="ix.iv-p22"></span>He says further, *Whom I have sent to you,
rising early and sending* Here he upbraids the Jews with their slowness
and insensibility; for he roused them early, and that not once but
often, and yet he spent his labor in vain. *Rising early,* when applied
to God, means that he called these men in due time, as though he had
said, that it was not his fault that the Jews had departed from the
right way of safety, for he had been sedulously careful of their
well-being, and had in due time warned them. We hence see how the
Prophet condemned their tardiness and indifference, and then their
hardness, by saying, *and sending*; for this intimates a repetition or
assiduity. He had said before, “whom I sent to you, rising early;” now,
when he says *and sending,* he means that he had not sent one prophet,
or many at one time, but one after another continually, and that yet it
had been without any benefit. The end of the verse I read in a
parenthesis, (*but ye have not hearkened.)* Indeed what follows stands
connected with the previous verses.  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md)

<span id="ix.iv-p28"></span><span id="ix.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p29"></span>*Then will I make, etc*.: the copulative is
to be rendered here as an adverb of time. What had been just said, “but
ye have not hearkened,” was by way of anticipation; for the Jews,
swelling with great arrogance, might have immediately said, “Oh! what
new thing dost thou bring? *Except ye hearken to my voice, saith
Jehovah, to walk in my Law, which I have set before you,* as though all
this were not well known even to children among us; and yet thou
pretendest to be the herald of some extraordinary prophecy; certainly
such boasting will be deemed puerile by all wise men.” Thus then they
might have spoken, but the Prophet here briefly checks the insolence of
such a foolish censure, *but ye have not hearkened;* as though he had
said, that he had not been sent in vain to speak of a thing as it were
new and unusual, because the Jews had corrupted the whole Law, had
become disobedient, unteachable, and unbelieving, and had despised both
the Law of God and his Prophets.

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast been
pleased not only to make known thy will once by the Law, but also to add
more light by thy holy prophets, and further to give us perfect light by
thy Gospel, and as thou invitest us daily to learn by means of those
whom thou hast sent, — O grant, that we may not be deaf nor tardy to
hear, but promptly submit ourselves to thee, and so suffer ourselves to
be ruled by thy word, that through our whole life we may testify that
thou art indeed our God, we being thy people, until we shall at length
be gathered into that celestial kingdom, which thine only-begotten Son
our Lord has purchased for us. — Amen.

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundredth

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span>We could not yesterday finish the words of
the Prophet, as time did not allow us to do so. We said that the Prophet
had denounced God’s vengeance on the people in such a manner, that he
softened that severity by some comfort, lest despair should have
rendered more obstinate those whom he wished to turn into obedience; we
said also, that the ministers of the word cannot otherwise speak rightly
or profitably of repentance, except they connect with it the promise of
God’s mercy. But as the Prophet had to do with refractory men and
despisers of God, it behoved him to declare what at length he subjoins,
even that the destruction of the Temple and city was nigh at band,
except they repented.

<span id="ix.vi-p3"></span>And he says that *that house would become
like Shiloh,* in order that by this example he might touch their hearts;
for the ark of God had been long at Shiloh, and that place might have
been deemed venerable for being ancient. Jerusalem was indeed renowned,
but Shiloh was in time before it. This place was now forsaken; nay, it
presented a sad and a degraded spectacle. He thus set before their eyes
an example of God’s vengeance, such as awaited them. We have seen the
same reference in <span id="ix.vi-p3.1"></span>[Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.vi-p3.1"></span>,
where the Prophet says,

<span id="ix.vi-p4"></span>“Go to Shiloh, where the ark of the covenant
was,”

<span id="ix.vi-p5"></span>etc.; but he now speaks more briefly, for he
no doubt repeated often the same things.

<span id="ix.vi-p6"></span>Then he adds, I *will make this city a curse,
or execration, to all the nations of the earth* It was still more
intolerable to the Jews to hear what Jeremiah says here, — that so great
a city, the sanctuary and the royal throne of God, would become a curse
to heathen nations; and yet as God had commanded him to say this, he
boldly performed his duty. Now follows the reward he met with, —

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#007.md)<span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>**7.** So the priests, and the prophets, and
all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the
LORD.

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Et audierunt sacerdotes et prophetae
et totus populus Jeremiam loquentem sermones hos in templo Jehovae.

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span>**8.** Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah
had made an end of speaking all that the LORD had commanded *him* to
speak unto all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the
people took him, saying, Thou shalt surely die.

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span>**8.** Et factum est, cum finesset Jeremias
loqui quaecunque mandaverat Jehova, ut loqueretur toti populo, ut
loqueretur toti populo, comprehenderunt ipsum sacerdotes et prophetae et
totus populus, dicendo, Morte morieris.

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span><span id="ix.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span>Here the Prophet recites what happened to
him, after he had declared God’s message, and faithfully warned the
people by adding threatenings, as God had commanded him. He says first
that he was *heard;* which is not to be deemed as commendatory, as
though the priests and prophets patiently heard what he taught; for
there was no teachable spirit in them, nor did they come prepared to
learn, but they had long indulged themselves in perverseness, so that
Jeremiah was become to them an avowed enemy; and they also audaciously
opposed all his threatenings. But though they were not ashamed to reject
what the Prophet said, they yet observed a certain form, as it is usual
with hypocrites, for they are more exact than necessary, as they say, in
what is formal, but what is really important they neglect. We may hence
observe, that the priests and prophets deserved no praise, because they
restrained themselves, as though they deferred their judgment until the
cause was known, but as the whole people were present, they for a time
shewed themselves moderate; it was yet a reigned moderation, for their
hearts were full of impiety and contempt of God, as it became really
manifest.

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span>But it must be observed that he says that
the *priests* and *prophets hearkened* As to the priests, it is no
wonder that he calls them so, though they were in every way wicked, for
it was an hereditary honor. But it is strange that he mentions the
prophets. At the same time we must know, that Jeremiah thus calls those
who boasted that they were sent from above. In the twenty-third chapter
he at large reproves them; and in many other places he condemns their
impudence in falsely assuming the authority of God. He then allowed them
an honorable title, but esteemed it as nothing; as we may do at this
day, who without harm may call by way of ridicule those prelates,
bishops, or pastors, who under the Papacy seek to be deemed so, provided
we at the same time strip them of their masks. But these lay hold on the
title, and thus seek to suppress the truth of God, as though to be
called a bishop were of more weight than if an angel was to come down
from heaven. And yet were an angel to *descend* from heaven, he ought to
be counted by us as a devil, if he brought forward such filthy and
execrable blasphemies, as we see the world is at this day polluted with
by these unprincipled men. This passage then, and the like, ought to be
borne in mind, for they shew that titles are not sufficient, except
those who bear them really shew that they are such as their calling
imports. Thus, then, Jeremiah was called a Prophet, and also those
impostors were called prophets whose only religion it was to corrupt and
pervert the doctrine of the Law, but they were so called with regard to
the people. It is in the meantime necessary, wisely to distinguish
between prophets or teachers, as also the Apostle reminds us, we ought
to inquire whether their spirit is from God or not. (<span
id="ix.vii-p9.1"></span>[1Jo 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md)<span
id="ix.vii-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.vii-p10"></span><span id="ix.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p11"></span>He says at last, that he was *condemned by
the priests, and the prophets, and the whole people;* he at the same
time introduced these words, that he had *spoken all that the Lord had
commanded* him. Thus he briefly exposed the injustice of those by whom
he was condemned; for they had no regard to what was right, as we shall
presently see. But as they had brought with them a preconceived hatred,
so they vomited out what they could no longer contain. It afterwards
follows, —

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span><span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>**9.** Why hast thou prophesied in the name
of the LORD, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city
shall be desolate without an inhabitant? And all the people were
gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the LORD.

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Quare prophetasti in nomine Jehovae,
dicendo, Tanquam Silo erit domus haec, et urbs haec perdetur, ut non sit
habitator? (congregatus autem totus populus ad Jeremiam in templo
Jehovae.) *(Hoc per parethesin legendum est, et refertur ad sequentem
contextum, ut suo loco dicemus.)*

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span><span id="ix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span>Here is added the cause of Jeremiah’s
condemnation, that he had dared to threaten with so much severity the
holy city and the Temple. They did not inquire whether God had commanded
this to be done, whether he had any just cause for doing so; but they
took this principle as granted, that wrong was done to God when anything
was alleged against the dignity of the Temple, and also that the city
was sacred, and therefore nothing could be said against it without
derogating from many and peculiar promises of God, since he had
testified that it would be ever safe, because he dwelt in the midst of
it. We hence see by what right, and under what pretense the priests and
the prophets condemned Jeremiah.

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span>And by saying, *in the name of Jehovah,*
they no doubt accused him as a cheat, or a false pretender, because he
had said that this had been commanded by God, for they considered such a
thing impossible and preposterous. God had promised that Jerusalem would
be his perpetual habitation; the words of Jeremiah were, “I will make
this city like Shiloh.” God seemed in appearance to be inconsistent with
himself, “This is my rest for ever,” “this shall be a desert.” We hence
see that the priests and the prophets were not without some specious
pretext for condemning Jeremiah. There is therefore some weight in what
they said, “Dost thou not make God contrary to himself? for what thou
denouncest in his name openly and directly conflicts with his promises;
but God is ever consistent with himself; thou art therefore a cheat and
a liar, and thus one of the false prophets, whom God suffers not in his
Church.” And yet what they boasted was wholly frivolous; for God had not
promised that the Temple should be perpetual in order to give license to
the people to indulge in all manner of wickedness. It was not then God’s
purpose to bind himself to ungodly men, that they might expose his name
to open reproach. It is hence evident that the prophets and priests only
dissembled, when they took as granted what ought to have been understood
conditionally, that is, if they worshipped him in sincerity as he had
commanded. For it was not right to separate two things which God had
connected; he required piety and obedience from the people, and he also
promised that he would be the guardian of the city, and that the Temple
would be safe under his protection. But the Jews, having neither faith
nor repentance, boasted of what had been said of the Temple, nay, they
bragged, as we have seen elsewhere, and spoke false things; and hence
the Prophet derided them by repeating three times,

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span>“The Temple of Jehovah, the Temple of
Jehovah, the Temple of Jehovah,” (<span id="ix.viii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="ix.viii-p8.1"></span>.md)

<span id="ix.viii-p9"></span>as though he had said, — “This is your
silly talk, you ever cry boastingly, ‘The Temple of God;’ but all this
will avail you nothing.”

<span id="ix.viii-p10"></span>It then follows, that *the people were
assembled* Here Jeremiah passes to another part of the narrative, for he
reminded the princes and the king’s councillors that they were not
without reason roused to go up to the Temple.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md)

<span id="ix.viii-p14"></span>If the dispute had been between few,
either Jeremiah would have been slain, or in some way intercepted, or it
might have been that the princes would have circumvented the king and
his councillors, and thus the holy man would have been privately
crushed. But here he introduced these words, that the whole people were
assembled against him. Hence it was that the report, reached the king’s
court; and so the princes and councillors were commanded to come. In
short, Jeremiah shews the reason why the princes came unto the Temple;
it was because the city was everywhere in a commotion, when the report
spread that something new and intolerable had been announced. The king
therefore could not neglect this commotion; for it is a dangerous thing
to allow a popular tumult to prevail. And therefore Jeremiah thus adds,
—

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span><span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span>**10.** When the princes of Judah heard these
things, then they came up from the king’s house unto the house of the
LORD, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the LORD’S *house.*

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span>**10**. Et audierunt principes Jehudah
sermones hos, et ascenderunt e domo regis in domum Jehovae (*hoc est, a
palatio regis in Templum,)* et sederunt in foribus portae Templi Jehovae
novae.

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span><span id="ix.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span>We have said that the princes were roused by
a popular clamor; nor is there a doubt but; that the king had sent them
to quell the commotion. It must be especially noticed, that they were
engaged in other matters, as it was seldom the case that courtiers spent
their time in hearing the prophets. It is indeed true, that the
occupations of those are sacred, who have the care of the commonwealth,
who dispense justice, and who have to provide for the public safety; but
it behoves them so to divide their time, that they may be able to
consecrate some portion of it to God. But courtiers think themselves
exempted by a sort of privilege, when yet the truth is more necessary
for them than even for the common people; for not only the duty of the
head of a family lies on each of them, but the Lord has also set them
over a whole people. If, then, private men have need of being daily
taught, that they may faithfully rule and guide themselves and their
families, what ought to be done by those rulers who are as it were the
fathers of the commonwealth? But as I have already said, such men
usually exempt themselves from the yoke of the faithful.

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span>Hence then it was, that none of the princes
were present, when Jeremiah had been commanded to proclaim his message,
not only on the day when few came to the Temple, but when they came from
all the cities of Judah to sacrifice at Jerusalem. It was, indeed, a
very shameful sign of gross contempt, that no one of the king’s
counsellors appeared in the Temple, when there were present, from remote
places, those whom religion and the desire to sacrifice had brought
there. But he says that they came to know the cause of the commotion;
for it is said, that they *sat at the new gate,* which some say was
eastward; and they conjecture that it was called new, because it had
been renewed; the king’s palace was also towards the east, and the
eastern gate was his tribunal. I am disposed to embrace this opinion,
that they sat at the eastern gate.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) It now follows, —

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span><span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>**11.** Then spake the priests and the
prophets unto the princes and to all the people, saying, This man *is*
worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have
heard with your ears.

<span id="ix.x-p3"></span>**11.** Et dixerunt sacerdotes et prophetae
principibus et toti populo, dicendo, judicium mortis est viro huic, uia
prophetavit contra urbem hanc quemadmodum audistis auribus vestris.

<span id="ix.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.x-p5"></span><span id="ix.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p6"></span>We hence conclude, that the people in
assenting to the sentence of the priests and prophets, had done nothing
according to their own judgment, but that all of every rank through a
violent feeling condemned Jeremiah. And as the priests and prophets
directed also their discourse to the people, it appears clear, that they
were guided by them, so that they thoughtlessly and inconsiderately gave
their consent; for it often happens in a mob that the people exclaim,
“Be it so, be it so; amen, amen.” Jeremiah has indeed said, that he was
condemned by the whole people; but it must be observed, that the people
are like the sea, which of itself is calm and tranquil; but as soon as
any wind arises, there is a great commotion, and waves dash one against
another; so also it is with the people, who without being excit*ed* are
quiet and peaceable; but a sedition is easily raised, when any one stirs
up men who are thoughtless and changeable, and who, to retain the same
simile, are fluid like water. This, then, is what Jeremiah now
intimates.

<span id="ix.x-p7"></span>But there is another thing to be noticed, —
that the common people suffer themselves to be drawn in all directions;
but they may also be easily restored, as it has been said, to a right
mind. “When they see,” says Virgil, “a man remarkable for piety and good
works, they become silent and attend with listening ears.” He there
describes (Aeneid, 1) a popular commotion, which he compares to a
tempest; and he rightly speaks of a tempest; but he added this simile
according to common usage. The same thing is now set before us by the
Prophet; the priests and prophets, who thought that they alone could
boast of their power and speak with authority, in a manner constrained
the people apparently to consent. The king’s counsellors being now
present, the people became as it were mute; the priests perceived this,
and we shall see by the issue that what the same poet mentions took
place, “By his words he rules their hearts and softens their breasts.”
For it became easy for the king’s counsellors even by a word to calm
this foolish violence of the people. We shall indeed soon see, that they
unhesitantly said, “There is no judgment of death against this man.” It
is hence evident how easily ignorant men may be made inconsistent with
themselves; but this is to be ascribed to their inconstancy; and noticed
also ought to be what I have said, that there was no real consent,
because there was no judgment exercised. The authority of the priests
overpowered them; and then they servilely confessed what they saw
pleased their princes, like an ass, who nods with his ears.

<span id="ix.x-p8"></span>Now, when the subject is duly considered, it
appears, that the priests and the prophets alone spoke both to the
princes and to the whole people, that Jeremiah was guilty of death,
 <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) because he had prophesied
against the city. We have said that they relied on those promises, which
they absurdly applied for the purpose of confirming their own impiety,
even that God had chosen that city that he might be there worshipped. It
was a false principle, and whence proceeded their error? not from mere
ignorance, but rather from presumption, for hypocrites are never
deceived, except when they determine not to obey God, and as far as they
can to reject his judgments. When, therefore, they are carried away by a
perverse and wicked impulse, they ever find out some plausible pretext;
but it is nothing but a disguise, as we clearly see from this narrative.
It follows, —

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>**12.** Then spake Jeremiah unto all the
princes and to all the people, saying, The LORD sent me to prophesy
against this house and against this city all the words that ye have
heard.

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span>**12.** Et dixit Jeremias cunctis principibus
et toti populo, dicendo, Jehova misit me ad prophetandum contra domum
hanc et contra urbem hanc cunctos sermones quos audistis.

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span><span id="ix.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span>Jeremiah pleads only his own calling and the
command of God; and thus he confutes the preposterous charge which they
most impudently brought against him. There is no doubt but that he might
have spoken at large, but he deemed it enough to include the substance
of his defense. Had he made a long discourse, the main point might have
been more obscure. He now clearly makes known the state of the question
on both sides. The priests by their own authority condemned Jeremiah,
because he reduced to nothing \[as they thought\] God’s promises, for he
had threatened destruction to the city and to the temple; but Jeremiah
on the other side answers, that he had declared nothing but what God had
enjoined. There was need of proof, when the priests held that God was
inconsistent with himself in denouncing destruction on that city, which
he had undertaken to defend and protect. But the confutation of this was
ready at hand, — that God had never bound himself to hypocrites and
ungodly men; nay, the whole glory of the city and the majesty of the
Temple were dependent on his worship; nor is there any doubt but that
Jeremiah had alleged these things. But as it was the main thing, he was
satisfied with stating that he had been sent by God.

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span>Thus he indirectly condemned their vain
boastings, — that God was on their side; but he says, “I come not except
by God’s command.” Now, though he declares briefly and distinctly that
he had been sent by God, he yet presents himself as ready to prove
everything; and as I have already said, there is no doubt but that he
answered and discussed that frivolous question on which the priests so
much insisted.

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span>It is further worthy of being noticed, that
he addressed both the princes and the people; and thus he intimated that
the priests and the prophets were deaf, and not worthy of being spoken
to; for it was their determination proudly to despise God, and to carry
on war, as it were avowedly, with his servants; for he would have
otherwise no doubt gladly endeavored to restore them to the way of
safety. But as he saw that they had closed the door against themselves,
he passed them by. This is the reason why he says, that he spoke to the
princes and to the people, having passed by those, on whom he must have
spent labor in vain. And surely when they said that he was worthy of
death, they proved by such a presumption that they would not be taught
by him; and also their cruelty prevented them from being teachable. But
the Prophet had regard to the very source of evil, because their object
was obstinately to resist God and all his prophets.

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span>By saying, that he was sent to *prophesy* all
that they had *heard,* he made them judges, though he did not address
them together with the princes; for we have seen that the latter were in
the king’s palace, and had been sent for when there was a fear of some
commotion. But there is no doubt but that the address was repeated
again. Jeremiah then made them judges and arbitrators, when he said that
he retracted nothing, but that what they had heard, he had faithfully
declared according to the command of God. It follows, —

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#013.md)<span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>**13.** Therefore now amend your ways and
your doings, and obey the voice of the LORD your God; and the LORD will
repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you.

<span id="ix.xii-p3"></span>**13.** Et nunc bonificate (bonas facite)
vias vestras et studia vestra, et obtemperate voci Jehovae Dei vestri,
et poenitebit Jehovam omnis mali quod pronunciavit contra vos.

<span id="ix.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p6"></span>He not only confirms here what he had
taught, but also reproves the hardness and obstinate wickedness of the
priests and prophets; for though he addressed the princes and the
people, he yet no doubt designed to touch more sharply those ungodly men
who set themselves up against God; and at the same time his discourse
referred to them all, when he said, “How have I sinned? I have
endeavored to promote your safety, must I therefore die?” We hence see
that the Prophet not only confirmed what he had said, but also accused
his adversaries of ingratitude; for nothing could have been more kind,
and ought to have been more acceptable, than to be called to repent,
that they might receive mercy from God: “What was the object of my
doctrine? even that ye might repent; and what does repentance bring?
even salvation; for God is ready to forgive you. Now ye cannot bear to
hear, that God would be merciful to you. What madness is this?” We now
then see the design of the Prophet.

<span id="ix.xii-p7"></span>And this passage deserves to be noticed; for
God will render to all the ungodly their own reward; not only because
they harden themselves against every instruction, but also because they
are manifest and, as it were, sworn enemies to their own salvation,
inasmuch as they refuse the necessary remedy, and do not allow
themselves to be restored to the right way, that they may be forgiven.
Very weighty, then, is what he now says, that no fault could be found in
his doctrine, except that it proved galling to the wicked, but that they
could yet obtain peace, provided they sought reconciliation with God.
 <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md)

<span id="ix.xii-p11"></span>He adds, *Hear ye the voice of Jehovah,* in
order to shew that he required nothing new from the people, that he
imposed on them no hard yoke, but only called them to the duty of
obeying the Law; and he adds to this, *your* *God,* in order to take
away from them every excuse, lest they should object and say that what
Jeremiah alleged was unknown to them. Here, then, he triumphantly
declares that he had taught them nothing that was alien to the Law, and
that the Jews were inexcusable who professed Jehovah to be their God,
and yet hearkened not to his voice, which ought to have been familiar to
them.

<span id="ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
not only called us once to the hope of an eternal inheritance, but
invitest us continually to repentance, while we cease not by our
continual sins to depart from thee, — O grant that we may not with deaf
ears reject thy voice, but be pliable and submissive to thee, and that
we may also so accustom ourselves to bear the yoke, that we may prove,
through our whole life, that we are of thy sheep, and that Christ, thine
only-begotten Son, whom thou hast set over us, is indeed our Shepherd,
until we shall be gathered unto that kingdom which he has obtained for
us by his own blood. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xiii-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and First

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#014.md)<span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span>**14.** As for me, behold, I *am* in your
hand: do with me as seemeth good and meet unto you.

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Et ego, ecce ego in manu vestro,
facite mihi sicuti bonum, vel sicuti rectum erit in oculis vestris.

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span>**15.** But know ye for certain, that if ye
put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves,
and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the
LORD hath sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears.

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span>**15.** Veruntamen sciendo seite, quod si vos
occideritis me, sanguinem purum (*vel,* innoxium) vos ponetis super vos
et super urbem hanc, et super habitatores ejus; quia in veritate misit
me Jehova ad vos, ut loqueror in auribus vestris cunctos istos sermones.

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span><span id="ix.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span>Jeremiah, after having exhorted the princes,
the priests, and the whole people to repent, and having shewn to them
that there was a remedy for their evil, except by their obstinacy they
provoked more and more the wrath of God, now speaks of himself, and
warns them not to indulge their cruelty by following their determination
to kill him; for they had brought in a sentence that he deserved to die.
He then saw that their rage was so violent, that he almost despaired of
his life; but he declares here that God would be an avenger if they
unjustly vented their rage against him. He yet shews that he was not so
solicitous about his life as to neglect his duty, for he surrendered
himself to their will; “Do what ye please,” he says, “with me; yet see
what ye do; for the Lord will not suffer innocent blood to be shed with
impunity.”

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span>By saying that he was in their *hand,* he
does not mean that he was not under the *care* of God. Christ also spoke
thus when he exhorted his disciples not to fear those who could kill the
body. (<span id="ix.xv-p9.1"></span>[Mt
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ix.xv-p9.1"></span>..md)
There is no doubt but that the hairs of our head are numbered before
God; thus it cannot be that tyrants, however they may rage, can touch
us, no, not with their little finger, except a permission be given them.
It is, then, certain that our life can never be in the hand of men, for
God is its faithful keeper; but Jeremiah said, after a human manner,
that his life was in their hand; for God’s providence is hidden from us,
nor can we discover it but by the eyes of faith. When, therefore,
enemies seem to rule so that there is no escape, the Scripture says, by
way of concession, that we are in their hands, that is, as far as we
perceive. We ought yet to understand that we are by no means so exposed
to the will of the wicked that they can do what they please with us; for
God restrains them by a hidden bridle, and rules their hands and their
hearts. This truth ought ever to remain unalterable, that our life is
under the custody and protection of God.

<span id="ix.xv-p10"></span><span id="ix.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p11"></span>We now, then, see in what sense Jeremiah
regarded his life as in the hand of his enemies, not that he thought
himself cast away by God, but that he acknowledged that loosened reins
were given to the wicked to rage against him. But we must at the same
time bear in mind why he said this; after having conceded that his life
was in their hand, he adds, *yet knowing know ye, that if ye kill me, ye
will bring innocent blood upon yourselves.*  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) But he had said before that they might
*do what seemed them good and right*  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) Good and right here is not to be taken
for a judgment formed according to the rule of justice, but for a
sentence formed iniquitously according to their own will. This is a
common mode of speaking in Hebrew. Jeremiah then testifies that he was
not solicitous about his life, for he was prepared to offer himself, as
it were, as a sacrifice, if the rage of his enemies should go so far.
But in warning them to beware of God’s vengeance, his object was not his
own safety, but it was to stimulate them to repentance. He then plainly
says that he did not fear death, for the Lord would presently shew
himself to be his avenger, and that his blood also would be so precious
in the sight of God, that the whole city, together with the people,
would be punished, were they to deal unjustly with him.

<span id="ix.xv-p14"></span>But let us attend to what follows, even that
God had *sent* him. He now takes this principle as granted, that it
could not be that God would forsake his servants, to whom he has
promised aid when oppressed by the ungodly. God, indeed, ever exhorts
his ministers to patience, and he would have them to be prepared for
death whenever there is need; yet he promises to bring them help in
distress. Jeremiah then relied on this promise, and was thus persuaded
that it could not be that God would forsake him; for he cannot
disappoint his people, nor forfeit his faith pledged to them. As, then,
he was fully persuaded of his own calling, and knew that God was the
author of all his preaching, he boldly concluded that his blood could
not be shed with impunity. All faithful teachers ought to encourage
themselves, for the purpose of discharging strenuously the duties of
their office, with this confidence, — that God who has committed to them
their office can never forsake them, but will ever bring them help as
far as it may be necessary. It now follows, —

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span>**16.** Then said the princes and all the
people unto the priests and to the prophets; This man *is* not worthy to
die: for he hath spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God.

<span id="ix.xvi-p3"></span>**16.** Et dixerunt principes et universus
populus sacerdotibus et prophetis, Non est viro huic judicium mortis;
quia in nomine Jehovae Dei nostri loquutus est nobis.

<span id="ix.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvi-p5"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p6"></span>Jeremiah shews here that the sentence
pronounced on him by the priests and false prophets was soon changed.
They had indeed heard him, and had given some appearance of docility, as
it is the case with hypocrites who for a time attend; but they
exasperated themselves against God, and as their minds were previously
malignant, they were rendered much worse by hearing. So it happened to
the priests and false prophets, and in their blind rage they doomed the
holy Prophet to death. He now says that he was acquitted by the princes
and the king’s counsellors, and also by the votes of the people. The
people had, indeed, lately condemned him, but they had been carried away
by the vain pomp and splendor of the priests and prophets; when they saw
these so incensed against Jeremiah, they could not bring themselves to
inquire into the cause. Thus the common people are always blinded by
prejudices, so that they will not examine the matter itself. So it was
when Jeremiah was condemned. We have said that the people were of
themselves quiet and peaceable; but the prophets and priests were the
farmers, and hence it was that the people immediately gave their
consent. But in the presence of the princes they went in a contrary
direction.

<span id="ix.xvi-p7"></span>This passage, in short, teaches us how
mischievous are rulers when there is no regard had for equity or
justice; and it also teaches us how desirable it is to have honest and
temperate rulers, who defend what is good and just, and aid the
miserable and the oppressed. But we see that there is nothing steady or
fixed in the common people; for they are carried here and there like the
wind, which blows now from this quarter and then from that.

<span id="ix.xvi-p8"></span>But we must notice this clause, that
*Jeremiah was not worthy of death,*  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md) *because he had spoken in the name of
Jehovah* They thus confessed, that whatever came from God ought to have
been received, and that men were mad who opposed the servants of God,
for they hurried themselves headlong into their own destruction.

<span id="ix.xvi-p10"></span>We may hence deduce a useful truth, that
whatever God has commanded ought, without exception, to be reverently
received, and that his name is worthy of such a regard, that we ought to
attempt nothing against his servants and prophets. Now, to speak in the
name of Jehovah is no other thing than faithfully to declare what God
has commanded. The false prophets, indeed, assumed the name of God, but
they did so falsely; but the people acknowledge here that Jeremiah was a
true prophet, who did not presumptuously thrust in himself, nor falsely
pretended God’s name, but who in sincerity performed the duties of his
office. It follows, —

<span id="ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#017.md)<span
id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p2"></span>**17.** Then rose up certain of the elders
of the land, and spake to all the assembly of the people, saying,

<span id="ix.xvii-p3"></span>**17.** Et surrexerunt viri ex senioribus
terrae, (ex senibus terrae,) ac dixerunt ad totum coetum populi (vel,
locuuti sunt dicendo; est quidem semper verbum, <span
id="ix.xvii-p3.1"></span>רמא, loquuti sunt erqo ad totum coetum)
dicendo,

<span id="ix.xvii-p4"></span>**18.** Micah the Morasthite prophesied in
the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the people of
Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Zion shall be plowed *like*
a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house
as the high places of a forest.

<span id="ix.xvii-p5"></span>**18.** Micha Morasthites fuit prophetans
diebus Ezechiae regis Jehudah, et dixit ad totum populum Jehudah,
dicendo, Sic dicit Jehova exercituum, Sion ager (sed subaudienda est
particula similitudinis, Sion ut ager) arabitur, et Jerusalem
solitudines (vel, acervi) erit (hoc est, erit in solitudines, vel, in
acervos, vel, in ruinas,) et mons domus (id est templi) in excelsa
sylvae.

<span id="ix.xvii-p6"></span>**19.** Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all
Judah put him at all to death? did he not fear the LORD, and besought
the LORD, and the LORD repented him of the evil which he had pronounced
against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our souls.

<span id="ix.xvii-p7"></span>**19.** An occidendo occidit eum Ezechias
rex Jehudah, et totus Jehudah? an non timuit Jehovam? et deprecatus est
faciem Jehovae, et poenituit Jehovam mali, quod loquutus fuerat contra
eos: et nos facimus malum grande adversus animas nostras.

<span id="ix.xvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvii-p9"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p10"></span>It is uncertain whether what is here
recited was spoken before the acquittal of Jeremiah or not; for the
Scripture does not always exactly preserve order in narrating things. It
is yet probable, that while they were still deliberating and the minds
of the people were not sufficiently pacified, the elders interposed, in
order to calm the multitude and to soften their irritated minds, and to
reconcile those to Jeremiah who had previously become foolishly incensed
against him; for no doubt the priests and the false prophets had
endeavored by every artifice to irritate the silly people against the
Prophet; and hence more than one kind of remedy was necessary. When
therefore the elders saw that wrath was still burning in the people, and
that their minds were not disposed to shew kindness, they made use of
this discourse. They took their argument from example, — that Jeremiah
was not the first witness and herald of dreadful vengeance, for God had
before that time, and in time past, been wont to speak by his other
prophets against the city and the temple.

<span id="ix.xvii-p11"></span>The priests and the prophets had indeed
charged Jeremiah with novelty, and further pretended that they thus
fiercely opposed him on the ground of common justice. Jeremiah had said,
that God would spare neither the holy city nor the Temple. This was
intolerable, for it had been said of the Temple,

<span id="ix.xvii-p12"></span>“This is my rest for ever; here will I
dwell.”  
(<span id="ix.xvii-p12.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="ix.xvii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xvii-p13"></span>We hence see that Jeremiah was overwhelmed
as it were by this one expression, while the priests and the false
prophets objected and said,

<span id="ix.xvii-p14"></span>“Thou then makest void God’s promises;
thou regardest as nothing the sanctity of the Temple.”

<span id="ix.xvii-p15"></span>And they further pretended that not one of
the prophets had ever thus spoken. But what do the elders now answer?
even that there had been other prophets who had denounced ruin on the
city and the Temple, and that, was falsely charged with this disgrace,
that he was the first to announce God’s judgment. We now understand the
state of the case: Jeremiah is defended, because he had not alone
threatened the city and the first, but he had others as the originators,
from whose mouths he had spoken, who were also the acknowledged servants
of God, from whom credit could not be withholden, such as Micah.

<span id="ix.xvii-p16"></span>Now, what is here related is found in
<span id="ix.xvii-p16.1"></span>[Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012.md)<span id="ix.xvii-p16.1"></span>.
The Prophet Micah had the same contest with the priests and prophets as
Jeremiah had; for they said that it was impossible that God should pour
his vengeance on the holy city and the Temple. They said,

<span id="ix.xvii-p17"></span>“Is not Jehovah in the midst of us?”

<span id="ix.xvii-p18"></span>and they said also, “No evil shall come on
us.” They were inebriated with such a security, that they thought
themselves beyond the reach of danger; and they disregarded all the
threatenings of the prophets, because they imagined that God was bound
to them. We indeed know that hypocrites ever relied on that promise,
“Here will I dwell;” and they also took and borrowed words from God’s
mouth and perverted them like cheats: “God resides in the midst of us;
therefore nothing adverse can happen to us.” But the Prophet said, (the
same are the words which we have just repeated,)

<span id="ix.xvii-p19"></span>“For you Sion shall be plowed as a field,
 <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md) and Jerusalem shall become
heaps, and the mountain of this house as the heights of a forest.”

<span id="ix.xvii-p21"></span>But let us now consider each clause. It is
first said, that the *elders from the people of the land rose up*  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) It is probable that they were called
elders, not as in other places on account of their *office,* but of
their age. It is indeed certain that they were men of authority; but yet
I doubt not but that they were far advanced in years, as they were able
to relate to the people what had happened many years before. As it is
added, that they spoke to *the whole assembly of the people,* we may
hence deduce what I have already stated, — that the people were so
violent, that there was need of a calm discourse to mitigate their
ardor; and certainly when once a commotion is raised and rages, it is
not an easy matter immediately to allay it. When, therefore, the kind
elders saw that the minds of the people were still exasperated, they
employed a moderating language, and said, *Micah*  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) *the Morasthite* (they named his
country) *prophesied in the days of Hezekiah, king of Judah, etc*

<span id="ix.xvii-p24"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p25"></span>We ought to notice the time, for it might
seem strange, that when that holy king was anxiously engaged in
promoting the true worship of God, things were in so disordered a state
as to call for so severe a denunciation. If there ever was a king really
and seriously devoted to the cause of religion, doubtless he was the
first and chief exemplar; he spared no labor, he never seemed to shun
any danger or trouble, whenever religion required this; but we find that
however strenuously he labored, he could not by his zeal and
perseverance succeed in making the whole people to follow him as their
leader. What then must happen, when those who ought to shew the right
way to others are indifferent and slothful? In the meantime the good
princes were confirmed by the example of Hezekiah, so that they did not
faint or fail in their minds when they saw that success did not
immediately follow his labors, nor any fruit. For it is a grievous
trial, and what shakes even the most courageous, when they think that
their efforts are vain, that their labors are useless, yea, that they
spend their time to no purpose, and thus it happens that many
retrograde. But this example of Hezekiah ought to be remembered by them,
so that they may still go on, though no hope of a prosperous issue
appears; for Hezekiah did not desist, though Satan in various ways put
many hinderances in the way, and even apparently upset all his labors,
so that they produced no fruit. So much as to the time that is
mentioned.

<span id="ix.xvii-p26"></span>The elders said, that Micah had spoken to
the whole people, saying, *Thus saith Jehovah, Sion, shall be plowed as
a field,* We have already seen on what occasion it was that Micah spoke
with so much severity; it was when hypocrites set up their false
confidence and falsely assumed the name of God, as though they held him
bound to themselves. *For you,* he said, *Sion shall be plowed as a
field* He began with the temple, and then he added, *and Jerusalem shall
be in heaps,* or a solitude; and lastly, he said, *and the mountain, of
the house,* that is, of the temple, etc. He repeated what he had just
said, for what else was the mountain of the temple but Sion? But as this
prediction could have hardly been believed by the Jews, the Prophet, for
the sake of confirmation, said the same thing twice. We hence conclude
that it was not a superfluous repetition, but that he might shake with
terror the hypocrites, who had hardened themselves against God’s
threatenings, and thought themselves safe, though the whole world went
to ruin.

<span id="ix.xvii-p27"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p28"></span>Having now related what Micah had
denounced, they added, *Slaying, did Hezekiah the king of Judah and all
Judah slay him?* By the example of the pious King Hezekiah, they
exhorted the people to shew kindness and docility, and shewed that it
was an honor done both to God and to his prophets, not to be incensed
against his reproofs and threatenings, however sharply they might have
been goaded or however deeply they might have been wounded. But they
further added, *Did he not fear Jehovah? and supplicate the face of
Jehovah? and did not Jehovah repent?* They confirmed what Jeremiah had
previously said, that there was no other remedy but to submit themselves
calmly to prophetic instruction, and at the same time to flee to the
mercy of God; for by the fear of God here is meant true conversion; what
else is God’s fear than that reverence by which we shew that we are
submissive to his will, because he is a Father and a Sovereign?
Whosoever, then, owns God as a Father and a Sovereign, cannot do
otherwise than to submit from the heart, to his good pleasure. Therefore
the elders meant that Hezekiah and the whole people really turned to
God. Now repentance, as it must be well known, contains two parts — the
sinner becomes displeased with himself on account of his vices — and
forsaking all the wicked lusts of the flesh, he desires to form his
whole life and his actions according to the rule of God’s righteousness.

<span id="ix.xvii-p29"></span>But they added, that they *supplicated,*
etc. Though Jeremiah uses the singular number, he yet includes both the
people and the king; he seems however to have used the singular number
designedly, in order to commend the king, whose piety was extraordinary
and almost incomparable. There is no doubt but that he pointed out the
right way to others, that they might repent, and also that he humbly
deprecated that vengeance, which justly filled their minds with terror.
He, indeed, ascribed this especially to the pious king; but the same
concern is also to be extended to the chief men and the whole body of
the people, as we shall presently see; *did he not then supplicate the
face of Jehovah?*

<span id="ix.xvii-p30"></span>This second clause deserves special
notice; for a sinner will never return to God except he has the hope of
pardon and salvation, as we shall ever dread the presence of God, except
the hope of reconciliation be offered to us. Hence the Scripture,
whenever it speaks of repentance, at the same time adds faith. They are
indeed things wholly distinct, and yet not contrary, and ought never to
be separated, as some inconsiderately do. For repentance is a change of
the whole life, and as it were a renovation; and faith teaches the
guilty to flee to the mercy of God. But still we must observe that there
is a difference between repentance and faith; and yet they so unite
together, that he who tears the one from the other, entirely loses both.
This is the order which the Prophet now follows in saying that Hezekiah
*supplicated the face of Jehovah* For whence is the desire to pray,
except from faith? It is not then enough for one to feel hatred and
displeasure as to his sins, and to desire to be conformed to God’s will,
except he thinks of reconciliation and pardon. The elders then pointed
out the remedy, and shewed it as it were by the finger; for if the
people after the example of Hezekiah and of others repented, then they
were to flee to God’s mercy, and to testify their faith by praying God
to be propitious to them.

<span id="ix.xvii-p31"></span>Hence it follows, that Jehovah *repented
of the evil which he had spoken against them* The Prophet now makes use
of the plural number; we hence conclude that under the name of King
Hezekiah alone he before included the whole people. God then *repented
of the evil*  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) As to this mode of
speaking, I shall not now speak at large. We know that no change belongs
to God; for whence comes repentance, except from this, — that many
things happen unexpectedly which compel us to change our purpose? one
had intended something; but he thought that that would be which never
came to pass; it is therefore necessary for him to revoke what he had
determined. Repentance then is the associate of ignorance. Now, as
nothing is hid from God, so it can never be that he repents. How so?
because he has never determined anything but according to his certain
foreknowledge, for all things are before his eyes. But this kind of
speaking, that God repents, that is, does not execute what he has
announced, refers to what appears to men. It is no wonder that God thus
condescendingly speaks to us; but, while this simplicity offends
delicate and tender ears, we on the contrary wonder at God’s indulgence
in thus coming down to us, and speaking according to the comprehension
of our weak capacities. We now perceive how God may be said to repent,
even when he does not execute what he had denounced. His purpose in the
meantime remains fixed, and as James says,

<span id="ix.xvii-p33"></span>“There is in him no shadow of turning.”
(<span id="ix.xvii-p33.1"></span>[Jas
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="ix.xvii-p33.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.xvii-p34"></span>But a question may again be raised, How
did God then repent of the evil which he had threatened both to the king
and to the people? even because he deferred his vengeance; for God did
not abrogate his decree or his proclamation, but spared Hezekiah and the
people then living. Then the deferring of God’s vengeance is called his
repentance; for Hezekiah did not experience what he had feared, inasmuch
as he saw not the ruin of the city nor the sad and dreadful event which
Micah had predicted.

<span id="ix.xvii-p35"></span>Now this also is to be noticed, — that the
pious king is here commended by the Holy Spirit, that he suffered
himself to be severely reproved, though, as I have already said, he was
not himself guilty. He had, indeed, a burning zeal, and was prepared to
undergo any troubles in promoting the true worship of God; and yet he
calmly and quietly bore with the Prophet, when he spoke of the
destruction of the city and Temple, for he saw that he had need of such
a helper. For however wisely may pious princes exert themselves in
promoting the glory of God, yet Satan resists them. Hence they ever
desire, as a matter of no small importance, to have true and faithful
teachers to help, to assist and to strengthen them, and also to oppose
their adversaries; for if teachers are silent or dissemble, a greater
ill-will is entertained towards good princes and magistrates; for when
with the drawn sword they defend the glory of God and his worship, while
the teachers themselves are dumb dogs, all will cry out, “Oh! what does
this severity mean? Our teachers spare our ears, but these do not spare
even our blood.” It is, therefore, ever a desirable thing for good and
pious kings to have bold and earnest teachers, who cry aloud and confirm
the efforts of their princes. Such was the feeling of pious Hezekiah, as
we may conclude from this passage. The rest I must defer.

<span id="ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ix.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
been pleased to gather us as a people to thyself, and to promise that we
should be like a spiritual temple for thee to dwell in, — O grant that
we may consecrate among us a perpetual habitation for time, and so
strive through the whole course of our life to devote ourselves to thee,
that thy grace and blessing may never depart from us, but that we may
experience more and more that those are never destitute of thy
protection who truly and undissemblingly rely on thee, so that thy name
may be more and more glorified in us through thine only-begotten Son. —
Amen.

<span id="ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Second

<span id="ix.xix-p2"></span>We saw yesterday the example which the
elders had alleged to deliver Jeremiah from death, — that he was not the
first who had threatened the city and the Temple with ruin, for Micah
under the reign of Hezekiah had done the same and was not put to death.
They hence concluded that it would be a heinous crime were they to slay
Jeremiah, and that it would not remain unpunished. They then intimated
that the people would commit a most grievous offense, if they killed
Jeremiah; and they also added, that vengeance would follow, for the Lord
would render them their due reward, if they thus cruelly treated the
holy Prophet. It now follows, —

<span id="ix.xx"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p1"></span><span id="ix.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p2"></span>**20.** And there was also a man that
prophesied in the name of the LORD, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of
Kirjathjearim, who prophesied against this city and against this land
according to all the words of Jeremiah:

<span id="ix.xx-p3"></span>**20.** Atque etiam vir fuit prophetans in
nomine Jehovae, Urias, filius Semeah ex Cariath-iarim, et prophetavit
contra urbem hanc et contra terram hanc secundum sermones Jeremiae:

<span id="ix.xx-p4"></span>**21.** And when Jehoiakim the king, with all
his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to
put him to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and
went into Egypt;

<span id="ix.xx-p5"></span>**21.** Et audivit rex Joakim et omnes
magnates ejus et Proceres sermones ejus, et quaesivit rex interficere
ipsum, et audivit Urias et timuit, et fugit et transivit (vel,
concessit) in Egyptum;

<span id="ix.xx-p6"></span>**22.** And Jehoiakim the king sent men into
Egypt, *namely,* Elnathan the son of Achbor, and *certain* men with him
into Egypt.

<span id="ix.xx-p7"></span>**22.** Et misit rex Joakim viros in Egyptum,
Elnathan filium Achobor et viros cure eo in Egyptum:

<span id="ix.xx-p8"></span>**23.** And they fetched forth Urijah out of
Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the
sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.

<span id="ix.xx-p9"></span>**23.** Et eduxerunt Uriam ex Egypto, et
adduxerunt eum ad regem Joakim, qui percussit eum gladio, et projecit
cadaver ejus in sepulchra populi (vel, plebis potius.)

<span id="ix.xx-p10"></span> 

<span id="ix.xx-p11"></span><span id="ix.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p12"></span>Another example is brought forward, partly
different, and partly alike, — different as to the king, the like as to
a Prophet. Uriah, mentioned here, faithfully discharged his office; but
Jehoiakim could not bear his preaching, and therefore slew him. Some
explain the whole in the same manner, as though the elders designed to
shew that the wicked can gain nothing by resisting God’s prophets,
except that by contending they make themselves more and more guilty. But
others think that this part was brought forward by the opposite party,
and the words, “And also,” <span id="ix.xx-p12.1"></span>םגו, *ugam,*
favor this opinion; for they may be taken adversatively, as though they
said, “But there was another Prophet, who did not speak of the ruin of
the city and of the destruction of the Temple with impunity.” And this
opinion seems to be confirmed by what follows in the last verse of the
chapter, *Nevertheless* the hand of Ahikam, etc.; the particle <span
id="ix.xx-p12.2"></span>ךא, *ak,* is properly nevertheless; but it means
sometimes, at least, or only. But in this place, as I shall shew again
presently, it retains, I think, its proper meaning; for the Prophet
declares, that though he was in great danger, yet Ahikam fought so
bravely for him, that at length he gained his cause.

<span id="ix.xx-p13"></span>But as to the present passage, both
expositions may be admitted; that is, either that the malignants adduced
the death of Uriah in order to overwhelm Jeremiah, — or that God’s
faithful followers intended to shew that there was no reason of acting
in this manner, for the state of things had become worse, since King
Jehoiakim had cruelly slain God’s servant.

<span id="ix.xx-p14"></span>But the time ought especially to be noticed.
We have seen that this prophecy was committed to Jeremiah, and also
promulgated at the beginning of Jehoiakim’s reign; but this beginning is
not to be confined either to the first or second year; but as he became
tributary to the king of Babylon, he afterwards endeavored to throw off
the yoke and was at length disgracefully dethroned; hence the beginning
of his reign must be during the time that his power was entire. While
then Jehoiakim retained his dignity, Jeremiah was bidden to proclaim
this message. However this may have been, the King Jehoiakim thus
enjoyed a tranquil reign; he was at Jerusalem. It is not therefore said
here, that Uriah had threatened the city in his days; but the history is
given as of a present thing. One thing then is evident, that this
discourse was delivered, when King Jehoiakim was not afar off. His
palace was nigh the Temple; his counsellors were present who had come
down, as we have seen, on account of the tumult. For the affair could
not be hidden; since the priests and the false prophets everywhere
inflamed the rage of the people. The king’s counsellors therefore came
to quell the disturbances. If this part of the address is to be ascribed
to the defenders of Jeremiah, then they must have been endued with great
courage and firmness, to allege against the king a nefarious murder, and
also to condemn him for a sacrilege, for he had not only done an injury
to a holy Prophet, but had directly opposed God himself. There are on
both sides probable conjectures; for if we follow this opinion, that the
servants of God, who favored Jeremiah and sought to deliver him from
danger, spoke these words, it might be objected and said, that no such
thing is expressed But the narrative goes on continuously, *And there
was also a man,* etc. Now when different persons speak and oppose one
another, it is usual to mark the change. It seems then that the whole is
to be read connectedly, so that they who first adduced the example of
Micah, then added on the other hand, that Uriah indeed suffered
punishment, but that thus a crime was added to a crime, so that
Jehoiakim gained nothing by furiously persecuting God’s Prophet. And
that they did not speak of the consequences, ought not to appear
strange, for the condition of the city and of the people was known to
all, and a more grievous danger was nigh at hand. Hence a simple
narrative might well have been given by them; and as they did not dare
to exasperate the mind of the king, it was the more necessary to leave
that part untouched.

<span id="ix.xx-p15"></span>But if the other view be more approved, that
the enemies of Jeremiah did here rise against him, and alleged the case
of Uriah, there is also some appearance of reason in its favor; the king
was living, his counsellors were present, as we have said. It might then
be, that those who wished the death of Jeremiah, referred to this recent
example in order to have him destroyed, — “Why should he escape, since
Uriah was lately put to death, for the cause is exactly the same? Uriah
did not go any farther than Jeremiah; he seems indeed to have taken the
words from his mouth. As, then, the king did slay him, why should
Jeremiah be spared? Why should he escape the punishment the other
underwent, when his crime is more grievous?” It hence appears that this
view can without absurdity be defended, that is, that the enemies of
Jeremiah endeavored to aggravate his case by referring to the punishment
the king inflicted on Uriah, whose case was not dissimilar; and I do not
reject this view. If any approve of the other, that this part was spoken
by the advocates of Jeremiah, I readily allow it; but I dare not yet
reject wholly the idea, that Jeremiah was loaded with prejudice by
having the case of Uriah brought forward, who was killed by the king for
having prophesied against the city and the Temple.  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md)

<span id="ix.xx-p25"></span>Let us now consider the words; *There was
also a man who prophesied in the name of Jehovah,* etc. If we receive
the opinion of those who think that Jeremiah’s enemies speak here, then
*the name of Jehovah* is to be taken for a false pretense, as though
they had said, “It is a very common thing to pretend the name of God;
for every one who claims to himself the office of teaching, boasts that
he is sent from above, and that what he speaks has been committed to him
by God.” Thus they indirectly condemned Jeremiah; for it was not enough
for him to pretend God’s name, as Uriah, of whom they spoke, had also
professed most loudly that he was God’s prophet, that he brought nothing
as his own, and that he had a sure call. But if this part is to be
ascribed to God’s true worshippers, whose object it was to protect and
defend Jeremiah, to speak in the name of Jehovah, as we said yesterday,
was not only to glory on account of the prophetic office, but also to
give evidence of faithfulness and of integrity, so as really and by the
effect to prove that he was God’s prophet, such as he wished to be
thought.

<span id="ix.xx-p26"></span>They then added, he *prophesied against this
city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah* If
the adversaries of Jeremiah were the speakers, we see that he was so
overpowered, that it was afterwards superfluous to know anything more of
his cause; for another had already been condemned, whose case was in no
way dissimilar or different; “He spoke *according to the words of
Jeremiah,* and he was condemned, why then should we now hesitate
respecting Jeremiah?” We see how malignantly they turned against
Jeremiah this example, as though he was condemned beforehand in the
person of another. But if these were the words of the godly, they are to
be accounted for in another way; what is intimated is, that if Jeremiah
was slain, God’s vengeance would be provoked; for it was more than
enough to shed the innocent blood of one Prophet.

<span id="ix.xx-p27"></span><span id="ix.xx-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p28"></span>It then follows, *And when, Jehoiakim the
king, and all his mighty men and the princes, heard his words, etc*.
This verse seems to favor the opinion of those who conclude that godly
men were the speakers; for they spoke dishonorably of the king and his
counsellors; the king heard and his mighty men, (powerful men,
literally,) and also all the princes; and *the king sought to slay him*
These words, however, may also be ascribed to the ungodly and the
wicked, for they wished to terrify the common people by first mentioning
the king and then the mighty men and the princes. And to seek to kill
him, might also have been excused, even that the king could not bear
such a reproach without revenging it; for he saw that the Prophet had
taken such a liberty as not, to spare the holy city nor the Temple: *The
king* then *heard, and his mighty men and princes;* and then, *the king
sought to slay him*

<span id="ix.xx-p29"></span>*But when Uriah heard it, he feared and
fled* This passage teaches us that even the faithful servants of God,
who strive honestly to fulfill their office, are yet not always so
courageous as boldly to despise all dangers; for it is said that the
Prophet *feared;* but he was not on this account condemned. This fear
was not indeed blameless; but his fear was such, that he yet continued
in his vocation. He might indeed have pleased the king, but he dreaded
such perfidy more than death. He, therefore, so feared, that he turned
not aside from the right course, nor denied the truth., nor admitted
anything unworthy of his dignity or of the character he sustained. His
fear then, though wrong, did not yet so possess the Prophet, but that he
was ever faithful to God in his vocation. It then follows, that he *went
into Egypt* We hence conclude, that the king’s wrath and cruelty were so
great, that the holy man could not find a corner to hide himself in
through the whole land of Judea, nor even in other regions around. He
was therefore forced to seek a hiding place in Egypt.

<span id="ix.xx-p30"></span><span id="ix.xx-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p31"></span>It is afterwards added that the king *sent
men,* even *Elnathan,* the chief of the legation, with others.  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md) There is no doubt but that Jehoiakim
sent to the king of Egypt and complained that a turbulent man had fled,
and that he asked him to deliver him up as a fugitive. So then he was
brought back, not through power, but through a nefarious compact, for he
was betrayed by the king of Egypt.

<span id="ix.xx-p34"></span><span id="ix.xx-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p35"></span>It is at length added, that they *led up
Uriah from Egypt, and brought him to King Jehoiakim, who slew him with
the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people,*
by way of dishonor; for Jeremiah here calls them the graves of the
common people, as we in French call shambles *des charniers.* The rich
are honorably and splendidly buried at this day, and every one has his
own grave; but when there is a vast number, the bodies are thrown
together, for it would be too expensive to dig a grave for each. It
seems also that there was such a practice in Judea, and that God’s
Prophet was buried in this ignominious manner.

<span id="ix.xx-p36"></span>Thus they who spoke intimated that the
king’s wrath so burned, that he not only put him to death, but followed
up his vengeance, so that a new disgrace awaited the Prophet, even when
dead, for he was cast among the obscure and ignoble common people.

<span id="ix.xx-p37"></span>I have hitherto so explained this passage as
to leave it doubtful whether the probability is that the speakers were
Jeremiah’s enemies or his advocates. And though, as I have declared
twice or three times, I reject not the view which is different from that
which I embrace, yet it seems most probable to me that the words were
spoken by the godly men who defended the cause of Jeremiah. All the
various reasons which lead me to this conclusion I will not here
specify; for every one may himself see why I prefer this view. The
common consent of almost all interpreters also influences me, from which
I wish not to depart, except necessity compels me, or the thing itself
makes it evident that they were mistaken. But we have seen from the
beginning, that the two examples consecutively follow one another, and
that nothing intervenes; it may hence be supposed, that the enemies of
Jeremiah had previously performed their part. The words themselves then
shew that those who commenced the discourse were those who carried it
on. And that they did not mention the reason why they adduced this
example is not to be wondered at; for the displeasure of the king was
feared, and he had given no common proof, in his treatment of the holy
Prophet, how impatiently he bore anything that trenched on his own
dignity. They therefore cautiously related the matter, and left what
they did not express to be collected by those who heard them. But it was
easy from their words to know what they meant, — that God’s vengeance
was to be dreaded; for one Prophet had been slain; what if there was to
be no end to cruelty? would not God at length arise to execute judgment
when his servants were so unworthily treated? As, then, the words are
not completed, it seems probable to me that God’s true servants spoke
thus reservedly and cautiously, because they dared not to express their
thoughts openly.

<span id="ix.xx-p38"></span>Further, these words, *the king sought to
slay him,* and *the king sent men, etc*., are more suitable when
considered as spoken by the defenders of Jeremiah than by the ungodly
and the wicked; and they also named Elnathan, that they might hand down
his name with infamy to future ages. And they lastly added that the
Prophet *was brought up from Egypt* What was very shameful seems
certainly to be set here before us, that he was forcibly brought back
from that land to which he had fled for an asylum, and also that he was
brought to the king, that he smote him with the sword, that is, cruelly
killed him; and further, that being not satisfied with this barbarous
act, he caused him to be ignominiously buried. All these particulars, as
I have said, seem to shew that these words may be more suitably applied
to the holy men who defended the cause of Jeremiah than to his enemies.
It now follows, —

<span id="ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#024.md)<span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p2"></span>**24.** Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the
son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the
hand of the people to put him to death.

<span id="ix.xxi-p3"></span>**24.** Veruntamen manus Achicam, filii
Saphan, fuit cum Jeremia, ne traderetur ipse (*vel,* ne traderent ipsum)
in manum populi ad interficiendum ipsum.

<span id="ix.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxi-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p6"></span>There is here an adversative particle, and
not without reason; for the contention is pointed out which had so raged
that it became difficult to extricate the holy Prophet from danger. We
hence conclude that Jeremiah was in so much peril that it was with great
and arduous effort that Ahikam saved him. There is a frequent mention of
this man in sacred history, and his name will hereafter be found in
several places, and he was left to govern the remnant of the people
after the demolition of the city. (<span id="ix.xxi-p6.1"></span>[2Ki
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#022.md)<span id="ix.xxi-p6.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxi-p6.2"></span>[Jer
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#014)<span id="ix.xxi-p6.2"></span>..md)
 <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md) And there is no doubt but that
he made progress in religion and was an upright man, and that his
virtues were so valued by Nebuchadnezzar that he bestowed on him such an
honor. He was soon afterwards slain by the ungodly and the wicked; but
there is nothing related of him but what is honorable to him. It was
indeed an extraordinary act of courage that he dared to oppose the fury
of the whole people, and to check the priests and the false prophets who
had conspired to put the holy man to death.

<span id="ix.xxi-p8"></span>This is the reason why it is in the last
place added, that *the hand of Ahikam was with Jeremiah;* though the
people were furious, and the priests would by no means be restrained
from persecuting the holy man, yet Ahikam could not be turned from his
holy purpose, but persevered to defend a good cause until Jeremiah
escaped in safety. It is hence said, that his *hand was with Jeremiah;*
for by hand in Scripture is meant effort, *(conatus;)* for where there
is anything to be done, or any difficulty, the Scripture uses the word
*hand* But as Ahikam exerted himself to the uttermost, not only in
aiding the holy Prophet by his words, but also in repressing the fury of
the people, and in boldly resisting the priests and the false prophets,
the *hand* in this place means aid; his *hand was with Jeremiah,* that
is, he aided or helped him, so that he was *not delivered up into the
hand of the people*

<span id="ix.xxi-p9"></span>It hence also appears, as we said yesterday,
that the tumult of the people was not immediately allayed, for the false
prophets and the priests had so roused their virulence that they became
almost implacable. Here, then, is set before us an example of courage
and perseverance; for it is not enough for us to defend a good cause
when we may do so with safety, except we also disregard all ill-will and
despise all dangers, and resist the fury of the wicked, and undergo
contentions and dangers for God’s servants whenever necessary. We are
also taught at the same time how much weight belongs to the influence of
one man when he boldly defends a good cause and yields not to the
madness of the wicked, but risks extremities rather than betray the
truth of God and his ministers. Now follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc19008.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span> Indeed his message does not seem to have
been to the priests nor to the false prophets, but to the people who
came to worship, as though it was useless to address them. There are
none in so hopeless a state as unfaithful and corrupt priests and false
prophets; the people led astray by them may be restored, but their own
case is almost past hope. This appears to be intimated here; for they
are passed by, while the people are addressed. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc19008.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span> As it stands opposed to add, to subtract or
take away would be the most suitable term. Such is the word used by the
Sept., the Vulg., and the Syr.; the Targ. is diminish, the word of our
version. — Ed.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc19008.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span> I render the verse as follows, —

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span>**3.** It may be they will hear and turn
every one from his way that is evil; then I will repent as to the evil
which I purpose to bring on them for the evil of their doings.

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span>Here is “evil for evil,” the evil of
punishment for the evil of sin. The word is often used in these two
senses. It is changed in the Sept., <span id="ix.iii-p16.1"></span>κάκων
and <span id="ix.iii-p16.2"></span>πονήρων; and in the Vulg., “<span
id="ix.iii-p16.3"></span>malum“ and “<span
id="ix.iii-p16.4"></span>malitia.” “Thus evil,” says Gataker, “begetteth
evil, a just retaliation of evil for evil. The evil of iniquity and the
evil of penalty are as the needle and the thread; the one goeth before
and maketh way for the other; and when one hath found a passage it
draweth on the other.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc19008.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="ix.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p23"></span> It is better to commence the parenthesis
after the word “prophets;” the three verses I render thus, —

<span id="ix.iv-p24"></span>**4.** And say to them, Thus saith Jehovah,
If ye will not hear me, so as to

<span id="ix.iv-p25"></span>**5.** walk in my law, which I have set
before you, by hearkening to the words of my servants the prophets,
(whom I have been sending to you, even rising up early and sending; but
ye did not hearken;)

<span id="ix.iv-p26"></span>**6.** then will I make this house like
Shiloh, and this city will I make a urse to all the nations of the
earth.

<span id="ix.iv-p27"></span>The Vulg. and the Syr. are in effect the
same as above. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc19008.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="ix.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p11"></span> It appears better to connect this
sentence with the following verse, in this manner, —

<span id="ix.viii-p12"></span>**10.** While the whole people were
assembled against Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, then the princes of
Judah heard these things, and went up from the king’s house into the
house of Jehovah, etc.

<span id="ix.viii-p13"></span>This seems to be the beginning of another
section. The <span id="ix.viii-p13.1"></span>ו repeated ought often to
be thus rendered, while or when, and then; and indeed in our language,
then may be sometimes omitted. Were it here rendered and in both
instances, the meaning would be the same, only the connection appears
more evident when rendered as above; the report of the people
congregated against Jeremiah reached the princes — *Ed*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc19008.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span> The present Hebrew text is, “the new gate of
Jehovah.” “House,” before Jehovah, is found in many MSS., and is given
by all the Versions, except the Sept., where Jehovah as well as house,
is left out. The true reading no doubt is, “the house of Jehovah.” It
was called “the new gate,” says Gataker, because it had been renewed by
Jotham. See <span id="ix.ix-p8.1"></span>[2Ki
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#035.md)<span id="ix.ix-p8.1"></span>. It
is rendered “the eastern gate” by the Targ. It was in the porch of this
gate, according to some, that the great consistory sat. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc19008.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="ix.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p9"></span> The words literally are, “The judgment (or
sentence) of death is to this man,” or, belongs “to this man,” that is,
is deserved by him. They were now, it seems, before the court of
justice, the princes sat as magistrates or judges; and this was the
accusation brought by the priests and prophets; they had no power
themselves of passing the sentence, they only declared him as worthy of
death. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc19008.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="ix.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p8"></span> The words are, —

<span id="ix.xii-p9"></span>**13.** And now make good your ways and your
doings, etc.;

<span id="ix.xii-p10"></span>or, But now, etc. It reads better than
“therefore,” as in our version, borrowed from the Vulg. The Sept. is
“and,” and the Targ. also. “Amend” of our version, is the Syr.; “make
good” is the rendering of the other early versions. He mentions what is
posterior first; to hear God’s voice is in order previous to the making
good our ways; but this is according to the practice often adopted by
the prophets. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc19008.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p12"></span> “And upon this city,” etc., according to
our version and all the early versions and that of Calvin; but the
preposition is different, and might be rendered “against:” by killing
him, they must have brought the guilt of innocent blood on themselves as
perpetrators, and against the city and its inhabitants as having allowed
and countenanced such a deed. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc19008.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="ix.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p13"></span> “Meet,” in our version, is not the correct
word; the term signifies what is just and right. The Sept. renders the
phrase very loosely, “as it is expedient and as it is best for you.” The
Vulg. is nearly the original, “what is good and right in your eyes;”
literally it is, “as good and as right in your eyes.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc19008.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="ix.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p9"></span> The phrase literally is, “Not to this man
the judgment of death.” So nearly is the Sept. and the Vulg., “There is
not to this man the judgment of death.” Our version is the Syr. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc19008.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="ix.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p20"></span> Some render the phrase thus, “Sion, being
a field, shall be plowed;” having become a field, it would be plowed.
There is in this case no need of <span id="ix.xvii-p20.1"></span>כ, as,
to be placed before “field;” nor is there a different reading either
here or in Micah, though it is supplied in the early versions, except
the Syr., which has, “Sion shall be reduced to a field.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc19008.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="ix.xvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p22"></span> The words literally are, “Then rose up
men from the elders of the land.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc19008.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="ix.xvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p23"></span> The Keri reads <span
id="ix.xvii-p23.1"></span>הכימ, and is countenanced by several MSS., and
is no doubt the true reading, and not <span
id="ix.xvii-p23.2"></span>היכימ, as in the present received text. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc19008.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="ix.xvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p32"></span> Both the Sept. and the Syr. and also the
Targ. give the meaning, but not the proper word, “And the Lord abstained
from the evils,” etc. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc19008.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="ix.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p16"></span> There are two other views taken of this
subject; some say that the second example, that of Uriah, was introduced
by the writer of the narrative, whether Jeremiah himself or Baruch, and
that this was mentioned to shew, that according to this precedent,
Jeremiah would have been killed, had it not been for the interposition
of Ahikam. This is the view taken by Gataker and Blayney.

<span id="ix.xx-p17"></span>But what appears most consistent with the
whole passage is the view given by Venema; he considers that the 17th
verse (<span id="ix.xx-p17.1"></span>[Jer
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#017)<span id="ix.xx-p17.1"></span>.md)
has been removed from its place between the 19th and the 20th (<span
id="ix.xx-p17.2"></span>[Jer
26:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#019.md)<span
id="ix.xx-p17.2"></span>), and that the “princes” mentioned the case of
Micah in favor of Jeremiah, and that “the elders of the land” adduced
the case of Uriah against him, and that notwithstanding this it is at
last added, that Ahikam, one of the princes, succeeded in his
deliverance. That chapters have been transposed in this book is
indubitable; the same thing may also have happened as to verses.

<span id="ix.xx-p18"></span>Then the passage would read thus, —

<span id="ix.xx-p19"></span>**16.** Then said the princes and all the
people to the priests and to the prophets, “Against this man there is no
judgment of death, for in

<span id="ix.xx-p20"></span>**18.** the name of Jehovah hath he spoken
to (or against) us. Micah the Morasthite was a prophet in the days of
Hezekiah, the king of Judah, and he spoke to all the people of Judah,
saying, ‘Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, Sion, being a field, shall be
plowed, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house
like the heights of

<span id="ix.xx-p21"></span>**19.** a forest.’ Slaying, did Hezekiah,
the king of Judah, and all Judah, slay him? did he not fear Jehovah and
intreat the favor of Jehovah? then Jehovah repented as to the evil which
he had pronounced against them; but we are doing a great evil against
our own souls.”

<span id="ix.xx-p22"></span>**17.** Then rose up men from the elders of
the land and spoke to the

<span id="ix.xx-p23"></span>**20.** whole assembly of the people,
saying, “But there was also a man, who prophesied in the name of
Jehovah, Uriah, the son of Shemaiah,” etc. etc.

<span id="ix.xx-p24"></span>This arrangement makes the whole narrative
plain, regular, and consistent. The conclusion comes in naturally, that
notwithstanding the adverse speech of the “elders” Jeremiah was saved by
the influence of Ahikam, one of the princes. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc19008.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="ix.xx-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p32"></span> To avoid what may seem a tautology in this
verse, Blayney renders the word for Egypt, adversaries, — “But Jehoiakim
the king sent adversaries, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men
with him, into Egypt.” Were the words rendered literally, the repetition
would not appear different from many that we meet with; “Then sent the
king Jehoiakim men into Egypt with Elnathan the son of Achbor, even men
with him into Egypt.” The repetition seems to have been intended to shew
that there was a strong force, and not one man, sent to take the
Prophet, and that this force was to go even as far as Egypt. The version
of the Sept. is, “And the king sent men into Egypt;” the Vulg. and the
Targ. are the same with our version; but the Syr. is, “And the king
Jehoiakim sent a certain Egyptian, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and some
with him, into Egypt.”

<span id="ix.xx-p33"></span>It is singular that in one MS. the word
<span id="ix.xx-p33.1"></span>םילגרמ, searchers, spies, is found instead
of <span id="ix.xx-p33.2"></span>םירצמ, rendered often Egypt, though it
comes from a root which means to bind close, to environ, to beset; and
so as a hyphil participle it would be besetters, or catchers — in modern
language, bumbailiffs, which is a corruption for bound bailiffs. This
meaning would exactly suit the passage, “Then the king Jehoiakim sent
men, catchers, with Elnathan the son of Achbor, even these men with him
into Egypt.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc19008.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="ix.xxi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p7"></span> This was his son Gedaliah, and not himself.
— *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](cc19009.md)
