[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc19011)  [Next](cc19013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 19: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part III*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span> A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xiii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xiii-p3"></span>JEREMIAH

<span id="xiii-p4"></span>CHAPTERS 20—29

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 20

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1** And Pashur the son of Immer the
priest, (and he was a governor in the Temple of Jehovah,) heard Jeremiah
prophesying these words:

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2** And Pashur smote Jeremiah the Prophet,
and put him in the prison which was in the higher gate of Benjamin,
opposite the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**3** And it happened the day after, that
Pashur brought out Jeremiah from prison; and Jeremiah said to him, — Not
Pashur has Jehovah called thy name, But terror on every side:

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**4** For thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, I
will make thee a terror To thyself and to all thy friends; And fall
shall they by the sword of thine enemies, While thine eyes are looking
on; And all Judah will I deliver Into the hand of the king of Babylon;
And he shall carry them into Babylon, And shall smite them with the
sword:

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**5** And I will give up all the strength of
this city, And all its labor and its every precious thing; And all the
treasures of the kings of Judah Will I give up into the hands of their
enemies; And they shall spoil them and take them away, And they shall
lead them into Babylon.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**6** And thou, Pashur, and all the
inhabitants of thy house, Go shall ye into captivity; Thou shalt come to
Babylon, and there die, And there shalt thou be buried and thy friends,
To whom thou hast falsely prophesied.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**7** Thou hast deceived me, Jehovah, and I
was deceived; Thou hast constrained me and didst prevail; I am become a
scorn all the day, All make a mock of me;

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**8** For from the time I have spoken, I
cried aloud against violence, And devastation have I proclaimed: Because
the word of Jehovah became to me A reproach and derision all the day,

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**9** Therefore I said, I will not mention
*him,* Nor speak any more in his name: But it became in my heart as a
burning fire, Closed up in my bones; And I was wearied with forbearing,
And I did not prevail.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**10** For I heard the slander of many,
Terror on every side, “Report ye, and we will report to him:” All my
friends watch for my haltings — “He may go astray, then we shall prevail
against him, And take our revenge on him.”

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**11** But Jehovah is with me as a terrible
giant; Therefore my persecutors shall fall and not prevail; They shall
be greatly ashamed, for they shall not succeed; *It will be* a perpetual
reproach Which shall not be forgotten.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**12** But thou, Jehovah of hosts, *Art he*
who provest the righteous, Who seest the reins and the heart; I shall
see thy vengeance on them, For to thee have I opened my cause.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**13** Sing ye to Jehovah, praise ye
Jehovah, For he has rescued the soul of the distressed From the hand of
the wicked.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**14** Cursed *be* the day on which I was
born; The day on which my mother bare me, Let it not be blessed:

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>**15** Cursed *be* the man who told my
father, Saying, “Born to thee is a male child,” Who with joy made him
joyful;

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**16** And let that man be as the cities,
Which Jehovah destroyed and repented not; And let him hear a cry in the
morning, And a tumult at noontide.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**17** Why hast thou not slain me from the
womb? That my mother might be my grave, Or her womb a perpetual
conception?

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>**18** Why from the womb did I come forth,
That I might see trouble and sorrow; That my days might be consumed in
reproach!

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 21

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**1** The word which came to Jeremiah from
Jehovah, when king Zedekiah sent to him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying,

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>**2** Inquire now for us of Jehovah, for
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon makes war with us, if Jehovah will
deal with us according to his wondrous works, that he may ascend from
us.

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**3** And Jeremiah said to them, Thus shall
ye say to Zedekiah, —

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Thus saith Jehovah, God of Israel, —
Behold, I prohibit all the warlike instruments Which are in your hands,
with which ye fight Against the king of Babylon and the Chaldeans, Who
besiege you without the walls; And I will gather them into the midst of
this city:

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>**5** And fight will I myself against you
With an extended hand and with a strong arm, Yea, in wrath and fury and
great indignation;

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>**6** And I will smite the inhabitants of
this city, Both man and beast; By a great pestilence shall they die.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>**7** And afterwards Jehovah said, — I will
deliver Zedekiah the king of Judah. His servants also and the people,
Even those who shall remain in the city, From the pestilence, and the
sword, and the famine, Into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon, And into the hand of their enemies, And into the hand of those
who seek their life; And he shall smite them with the edge of the sword;
And he will not spare them, Nor forgive, nor shew mercy.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>**8** To this people also shalt thou say,
— Thus saith Jehovah, — Behold, I set before you The way of life and the
way of death:

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>**9** He who abides in this city shall die
By the sword, or by famine, or by pestilence; But he who goeth out and
dwells With the Chaldeans who besiege you, Shall live, and his life
shall be for a prey:

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>**10** For I have set my face against this
city, For evil and not for good, saith Jehovah; Into the hand of the
king of Babylon shall it be given, And he shall burn it with fire.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span>**11** And as to the house of the king of
Judah, Hear ye the word of Jehovah;

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>**12** O house of David, thus saith
Jehovah, — In the morning execute ye judgment, And free the spoiled from
the hand of the oppressor, Lest go forth as fire my indignation, And
burn, and there be none to extinguish it, — Because of the wickedness of
their doings.

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span>**13** Behold, I am against thee,
inhabitant of the valley — The rock in the plain, saith Jehovah, Who
say, “Who shall descend to us? And who shall enter our habitations?”

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>**14** I will even visit upon you The
fruit of your doings, saith Jehovah; And I will kindle a fire in its
forest, And it shall consume all around it.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 22

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span>**1** Thus saith Jehovah, Go down to the
house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span>**2** And say, — Hear the word of Jehovah,
king of Judah, Who sittest on the throne of David, Thou, and thy
servants, and thy people, Who enter in through these gates:

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span>**3** Thus saith Jehovah, Do judgment and
justice, And rescue the spoiled from the hand of the oppressor; The
stranger, the orphan, and the widow, Defraud not; exercise no violence,
Nor shed innocent blood in this place.

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>**4** For if obeying ye obey this word,
Then shall enter through the gates of this house Kings, sitting for
David on his throne, Riding in chariots and on horses, — He himself, and
his servants, and his people:

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>**5** But if ye will not obey these words,
By myself have I sworn, saith Jehovah, That a waste shall this house
become.

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>**6** For thus saith Jehovah of the house
of the king of Judah, Gilead to me art thou, the head of Lebanon; Surely
I will make thee a desert, As cities which are not inhabited:

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>**7** And I will prepare against thee
destroyers, Every man and his instruments, And they shall cut down thy
choice cedars, And cast them into the fire.

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>**8** And pass shall many nations through
this city, And say shall each to his friend, “Why hath Jehovah done thus
to this great city?”

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>**9** And they shall say, “Because they
have forsaken The covenant of Jehovah their God, And bowed down before
alien gods, and served them.”

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>**10** Weep ye not for the dead, nor
bewail him; Weeping, weep for him who migrates, For return shall he no
more, That he may see the land of his nativity:

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span>**11** For thus saith Jehovah concerning
Shallum The son of Josiah the king of Judah, Who reigns instead of
Josiah his father, — When he shall have gone forth from this place He
shall not return here any more:

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>**12** For in the land where they shall
lead him away There shall he die, And this land shall he see no more.

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>**13** Woe to him who builds not with
justice his house, And not with judgment his chambers; Who makes his
neighbor to serve him for nothing, And pays him not for his work;

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>**14** Who says, “I will build for myself
A large house and wide chambers;” And he perforates for himself windows,
And covered it is with cedar, And painted with vermilion.

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span>**15** Shalt thou reign because thou
inclosest thyself in cedar? Thy father, did he not eat and drink? When
he did judgment and justice, It was then well with him:

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span>**16** He judged the cause of the poor
and needy, It was then well *with him;* Was not this to know me? saith
Jehovah:

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>**17** For thy eye and thy heart are not
Except on thy covetousness, And on shedding innocent blood, And on
rapacity and oppression, to do *them.*

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span>**18** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, Of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah the king of Judea, They shall not bewail
him, — “Ah, my brother! Ah, sister!” They shall not bewail him, — “Ah,
Lord! Ah, his glory!”

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span>**19** With the burial of an ass shall he
be buried, Drawn out and cast forth Beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span>**20** Ascend into Lebanon and cry, And
on Bashan lift up thy voice, And cry all around, For destroyed are all
thy lovers.

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span>**21** I spake to thee in thy
tranquillity, Thou saidst, “I will not hear:” It has been thy manner
from thy youth That thou didst not hear my voice.

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span>**22** Thy pastors shall the wind
consume, And thy lovers, into exile shall they go: Surely ashamed shalt
thou then be, And blush for all thy wickedness.

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span>**23** Thou hast set thy seat on Lebanon,
Thou hast made thy nest among the cedars: How gracious wilt thou be When
come on thee shall sorrows, The pain as of one in travail!

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span>**24** Live do I, saith Jehovah; Were
Coniah the son of Jehoiakim the king of Judah A sealing ring on my right
hand, I would thence pluck thee off:

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span>**25** And I will deliver thee Into the
hand of those who seek thy life, And into the hand of those whose face
thou dreadest, Even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar The king of Babylon,
And into the hand of the Chaldeans:

<span id="xiii.iii-p28"></span>**26** And I will cast thee and thy
mother who bare thee Into a foreign land where ye were not born, And
there shall ye die;

<span id="xiii.iii-p29"></span>**27** And into the land they set their
mind to return, Thither they shall not return.

<span id="xiii.iii-p30"></span>**28** Is this man Coniah a despised
*and* broken statue? Is he a vessel in which there is no delight? Why
are they east forth, he and his seed, And thrown to a land which they
have not known?

<span id="xiii.iii-p31"></span>**29** Land! land! land! hear the word of
Jehovah, —

<span id="xiii.iii-p32"></span>**30** Thus saith Jehovah, Write ye this
man childless, A man who shall not prosper in his days; Nay, none of his
seed shall prosper, Sitting on the throne of David, And ruling any more
in Judah.

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 23

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span>**1** Woe to the pastors who destroy and
scatter The flock of my pastures! saith Jehovah;

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span>**2** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, the God
of Israel, Concerning the pastors who feed my people, — Ye have
scattered my flock and driven them away, And ye have not visited them;
Behold, I will visit upon you The wickedness of your doings, saith
Jehovah:

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>**3** But I will gather the remnant of my
sheep From all the lands to which I shall drive them, And cause them to
return to their own folds, And they shall become fruitful and multiply;

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span>**4** And I will raise up over them pastors
Who shall feed them; And they shall no more fear nor dread, Nor shall
they fail, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span>**5** Behold, the days are coming, saith
Jehovah, That I will raise up to David a righteous branch, And reign
shall a king, And prudently shall he act; He will do judgment and
justice in the land.

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span>**6** In his days saved shall be Judah, And
Israel shall dwell in confidence: And this is the name by which they
shall call him, Jehovah Our Righteousness

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span>**7** Therefore, behold, the days will
come, saith Jehovah, In which it shall no more be said, “Live does
Jehovah,” Who brought the children of Israel from the land of Egypt;

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span>**8** But rather, “Live does Jehovah,” who
has brought up And led the seed of the house of Israel From the land of
the north, and all the lands To which I had driven them; And they shall
dwell in their own land.

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span>**9** On account of the prophets, Broken
is my heart within me, Disjointed are all my bones; I am become like a
drunken man Who has been overcome by wine, On account of Jehovah, And on
account of the words of his holiness;

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span>**10** For with adulterers the land is
filled: For on account of perjury mourned has the land, Dried up have
the pastures of the desert; And their course has been evil, And their
strength not right.

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span>**11** For both prophet and priest have
acted wickedly; Even in my house have I found Their wickedness, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.iv-p14"></span>**12** Therefore their way shall be to
them slippery; In darkness shall they stumble and fall therein; For I
shall bring on them evil, The year of their visitation, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.iv-p15"></span>**13** In the prophets of Samaria have I
seen fatuity, They prophesied by Baal, And made my people Israel to go
astray:

<span id="xiii.iv-p16"></span>**14** But in the prophets of Jerusalem
Have I seen depravity; By adultery and walking in falsehood They even
strengthen the hands of the wicked, That they may not turn, each from
his wickedness: They shall be all to me as Sodom, And its inhabitants as
Gomorrah.

<span id="xiii.iv-p17"></span>**15** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of
hosts Concerning these prophets, — I will feed them with a deadly
poison, And give them waters of gall to drink; For from the prophets of
Jerusalem Has gone forth impiety through all the laud.

<span id="xiii.iv-p18"></span>**16** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — Hear
ye not the words of the prophets Who prophesy to you; They make you to
be vain; A vision of their own heart do they speak, *And* not from the
mouth of Jehovah;

<span id="xiii.iv-p19"></span>**17** Who say to those who despise me,
Spoken has Jehovah, “Peace shall be to you;” And to all who walk in the
wickedness of their own hearts They say, “Come upon you shall not evil;

<span id="xiii.iv-p20"></span>**18** For who hath been in the counsel of
Jehovah, And seen and heard his word? Who hath listened to his word and
heard it?”

<span id="xiii.iv-p21"></span>**19** Behold the whirlwind of Jehovah!
With fury it goeth forth; Even the impending whirlwind; On the head of
the ungodly shall it fall:

<span id="xiii.iv-p22"></span>**20** Turn back shall not the anger of
Jehovah Till he has done and confirmed The thoughts of his own heart: In
the extremity of days Ye shall fully understand this.

<span id="xiii.iv-p23"></span>**21** I sent not the prophets, yet they
have run; I spoke not to them, yet they have prophesied.

<span id="xiii.iv-p24"></span>**22** But if they had stood in my
counsel, Surely they would have made my people hear my words, And turned
them from their evil way, And from the wickedness of their doings?

<span id="xiii.iv-p25"></span>**23** Am I a God at hand, saith Jehovah,
And not a God afar off?

<span id="xiii.iv-p26"></span>**24** Can a man hide himself in coverts
That I could not see him? saith Jehovah; Do not I fill the heavens and
the earth? saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.iv-p27"></span>**25** I have heard what the prophets say
Who prophesy falsely in my name, Saying, “I have dreamed, I have
dreamed.”

<span id="xiii.iv-p28"></span>**26** How long will it be in the heart of
the prophets To prophesy falsehood, Yea, of the prophets of the deceit
of their own heart!

<span id="xiii.iv-p29"></span>**27** Who think to make my people forget
My name by their own dreams, Which they relate, each to his friend, As
forgotten my name have their fathers through Baal.

<span id="xiii.iv-p30"></span>**28** The prophet who hath a dream, He
will relate a dream; And he with whom is my word, He will speak my word
of truth: What is the chaff to the wheat? saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.iv-p31"></span>**29** Is not my word like fire? saith
Jehovah, And like the hammer that breaks the stone?

<span id="xiii.iv-p32"></span>**30** Therefore, behold, I am against the
prophets, saith Jehovah, Who steal my words, each from his friend:

<span id="xiii.iv-p33"></span>**31** Behold, I am against the prophets,
saith Jehovah, Who elevate their own tongue, And say, “*It* *is* the
word:”

<span id="xiii.iv-p34"></span>**32** Behold, I am against those Who
prophesy false dreams, saith Jehovah; And who relate them, and deceive
my people By their lies and their levity, Though I sent them not, nor
commanded them: And they will not profit this people, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.iv-p35"></span>**33** But if ask thee will this people,
Or a prophet, or a priest, saying, “What is the burden of Jehovah?” Then
shalt thou say to them, “What burden? — I will forsake you, saith
Jehovah.”

<span id="xiii.iv-p36"></span>**34** And the prophet, and the priest,
and the people, Who shall say, “The burden of Jehovah,” I will even
punish that man and his house.

<span id="xiii.iv-p37"></span>**35** Thus shall ye say, every one to his
friend, And every one to his brother, “What has Jehovah answered?” Or
“What has Jehovah spoken?”

<span id="xiii.iv-p38"></span>**36** But the burden of Jehovah mention
no more; For the burden of each shall be his word: For ye have corrupted
the words of the living God, Of Jehovah of hosts, our God.

<span id="xiii.iv-p39"></span>**37** Thus shalt thou say to the prophet,
— “What has Jehovah answered thee?” Or “What has Jehovah spoken?”

<span id="xiii.iv-p40"></span>**38** But if ye will say, “The burden of
Jehovah;” Therefore Jehovah saith thus, — Because ye say, “The burden of
Jehovah,” Though I sent to you, saying, Ye shall not say, “The burden of
Jehovah.”

<span id="xiii.iv-p41"></span>**39** Therefore, behold, I will wholly
take you away, And will cast you off, and this city Which I gave to you
and to your fathers, From my presence; And I will bring upon you a
perpetual reproach, And a perpetual disgrace, Which shall not be
forgotten.

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 24

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span>**1** Jehovah shewed me a vision, and,
behold, two baskets of figs set before the Temple of Jehovah, after
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away Jeconiah the son of
Jehoiakim the king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, and the
artificer, and the engraver, from Jerusalem, and led them away to
Babylon:

<span id="xiii.v-p4"></span>**2** One basket of figs very good, like
early figs, and another basket of figs very bad, which could not be
eaten, being so bad.

<span id="xiii.v-p5"></span>**3** And Jehovah said to me, “What seest
thou, Jeremiah?” And I said, “Figs, good figs, very good; and bad, very
bad, which cannot be eaten, being so bad.”

<span id="xiii.v-p6"></span>**4** And the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying,

<span id="xiii.v-p7"></span>**5** Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel,
As these good figs, so will I acknowledge the captivity of Judah, which
I sent from this place to the land of the Chaldeans, for good:

<span id="xiii.v-p8"></span>**6** And I will set my eye upon them for
good, and will restore them to this land; and I will build them up and
not pull them down, and I will plant them and not pluck them up;

<span id="xiii.v-p9"></span>**7** And I will give them a heart to know
me, that I am Jehovah; and they shall be to me a people, and I will be
to them a God, for they shall return to me with their whole heart.

<span id="xiii.v-p10"></span>**8** But as to the bad figs, which cannot
be eaten, being so bad, surely thus saith Jehovah, so will I render
Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue at
Jerusalem, those who remain in this land and those who dwell in the land
of Egypt;

<span id="xiii.v-p11"></span>**9** And I will set them for a commotion,
for an evil to all kingdoms of the earth, for a reproach, and a terror,
and a taunt, and a curse in all places where I shall drive them;

<span id="xiii.v-p12"></span>**10** And I will send among them the
sword, the famine, and the pestilence, until they be consumed from the
face of the land which I gave to them and to their fathers.

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 25

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span>**1** The word which came by Jeremiah to
all the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah the king of Judah, (this was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar the
king of Babylon,)

<span id="xiii.vi-p4"></span>**2** Which Jeremiah the prophet spake to
all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
saying, —

<span id="xiii.vi-p5"></span>**3** From the thirteenth year of Josiah
the son of Amon the king of Judah, to this day, (this is the
twenty-third year,) hath Jehovah spoken to me, and I have spoken to you,
rising up early, but ye have not hearkened:

<span id="xiii.vi-p6"></span>**4** And Jehovah sent to you all his
servants the prophets, rising up early and sending, (but ye hearkened
not, nor inclined your ear to hear,)

<span id="xiii.vi-p7"></span>**5** Saying, — Return ye, I pray, each
from his evil way, And from the wickedness of your doings, And dwell in
the land which Jehovah gave To you and to your fathers from age to age:

<span id="xiii.vi-p8"></span>**6** And walk ye not after alien gods, To
serve them and to bow down before them; And provoke me not by the work
of your hands, And I will not do you evil.

<span id="xiii.vi-p9"></span>**7** But ye hearkened not to me, saith
Jehovah; For ye provoked me by the work of your hands, To do evil to
you.

<span id="xiii.vi-p10"></span>**8** Therefore thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, — Because ye have not hearkened to my words,

<span id="xiii.vi-p11"></span>**9** Behold, I will send for and take All
the families of the north, saith Jehovah, And Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon, my servant; And I will bring them to this land And to its
inhabitants, And to all these nations around; And I will destroy them,
And make them an astonishment, And a hissing, and perpetual desolations;

<span id="xiii.vi-p12"></span>**10** And I will cause to cease among
them The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, The voice of the
bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, The sound of millstones, and the
light of the candle.

<span id="xiii.vi-p13"></span>**11** And this whole land shall be a
waste and a wonder; And serve shall these nations The king of Babylon
seventy years.

<span id="xiii.vi-p14"></span>**12** And it shall be, when fulfilled
shall be seventy years, *That* I shall visit on the king of Babylon, And
on his people, saith Jehovah, Their iniquity, — and upon the land of
Chaldea, And I will make it perpetual desolations:

<span id="xiii.vi-p15"></span>**13** And I will bring on that land all
my words, Which I have spoken concerning it, All that is written in this
book, Which Jeremiah has prophesied of the nations:

<span id="xiii.vi-p16"></span>**14** For they shall rule over strong
nations, And over mighty kings; And I will render to these according to
their doing, And according to the work of their hands.

<span id="xiii.vi-p17"></span>**15** For thus said Jehovah, the God of
Israel, to me, Take the cup of the wine of this wrath from my hand, and
give it to drink to all the nations to whom I shall send thee,

<span id="xiii.vi-p18"></span>**16** That they may drink and be
incensed, and become distracted on account of the sword which I shall
send among them.

<span id="xiii.vi-p19"></span>**17** And I took the cup from the hand of
Jehovah, and gave it to drink to all the nations to whom Jehovah had
sent me, —

<span id="xiii.vi-p20"></span>**18** To Jerusalem and to the cities of
Judah, even to its kings and to its princes, to make them a waste, and
an astonishment, and a hissing, and a curse, as at this day, —

<span id="xiii.vi-p21"></span>**19** To Pharaoh the king of Egypt, to
his servants, and to his princes, and to all his people,

<span id="xiii.vi-p22"></span>**20** And to the promiscuous multitude,
and to all the kings of the land of Uz, and to all the kings of the land
of the Philistines, and to Askelon, and to Gaza, and to Ekron, and to
the remnant of Ashdod, —

<span id="xiii.vi-p23"></span>**21** To Edom, and to Moab, and to the
children of Ammon,

<span id="xiii.vi-p24"></span>**22** And to all the kings of Tyre, and
to all the kings of Sidon, and to all the kings of the island beyond the
sea,

<span id="xiii.vi-p25"></span>**23** And to Dedan, and to Tema, and to
Buz, and to all the extreme ones in a corner,

<span id="xiii.vi-p26"></span>**24** And to all the kings of Arabia, and
to all the kings of the mingled race who dwell in the desert,

<span id="xiii.vi-p27"></span>**25** And to all the kings of Zimri, and
to all the kings of Elam, and to all the kings of the Medes,

<span id="xiii.vi-p28"></span>**26** And to all the kings of the north,
those who are near, as well as those who are afar off, every one shall
be against his brother, — and to all kingdoms of the earth, which are
upon the face of the earth; and the king of Sheshach shall drink after
them.

<span id="xiii.vi-p29"></span>**27** And thou shalt say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, Drink ye and be drunken, and
vomit and fall, and rise not on account of the sword which I send among
you.

<span id="xiii.vi-p30"></span>**28** And it shall be, if they refuse to
take the cup from thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah of hosts, Drinking ye shall drink;

<span id="xiii.vi-p31"></span>**29** For behold, upon the city on which
my name is called, I begin to bring evil, and shall ye be treated as
innocent? ye shall not be treated as innocent; for I am calling for a
sword on all the inhabitants of the earth, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.vi-p32"></span>**30** Thou shalt also prophesy to them
all these words, and say to them, — Jehovah from on high shall roar, And
from his holy habitation utter his voice; Roaring he shall roar on his
dwelling, A shout like that of vintagers shall he respond Against all
the inhabitants of the earth:

<span id="xiii.vi-p33"></span>**31** Reach shall the sound to the
extremity of the earth, For a contention has Jehovah with the nations, A
dispute has he with all flesh; The wicked will he give to the sword,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.vi-p34"></span>**32** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, And a great tempest
shall be raised From the extremities of the earth;

<span id="xiii.vi-p35"></span>**33** And the slain of Jehovah in that
day shall be From one end to the other end of the earth: They shall not
be lamented, nor gathered, nor buried; *As* dung on the face of the
earth shall they be.

<span id="xiii.vi-p36"></span>**34** Howl, ye pastors, and cry, And roll
\[in the dust,\] ye choice of the flock; For fulfilled are your days For
the slaughter and your breakings; And ye shall fall like a precious
vessel:

<span id="xiii.vi-p37"></span>**35** And perish shall flight from the
pastors, And escape from the choice of the flock.

<span id="xiii.vi-p38"></span>**36** The voice of the cry of the
pastors! And the howling of the choice of the flock! For destroyed has
Jehovah their pastures;

<span id="xiii.vi-p39"></span>**37** Perished also are the peaceful
tents, Through the indignation of the wrath of Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.vi-p40"></span>**38** He has left, as a lion, his
tabernacle; For reduced is their land to a waste Through the wrath of
the Oppressor, And through the indignation of his wrath.

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 26

<span id="xiii.vii-p3"></span>**1** In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, this word came from
Jehovah, saying,

<span id="xiii.vii-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah, Stand in the
court of the house of Jehovah, and speak to all the cities of Judah, who
come to worship in the Temple of Jehovah, all the words which I have
commanded thee to speak to them; diminish not a word:

<span id="xiii.vii-p5"></span>**3** If peradventure they will hear, and
turn, each from his evil way, then will I repent of the evil which I
think of doing to them on account of the wickedness of their doings.

<span id="xiii.vii-p6"></span>**4** Thou shalt then say to them, Thus
saith Jehovah, If ye will not hear me to walk in my law, which I have
set before you,

<span id="xiii.vii-p7"></span>**5** To hearken to the words of my
servants the prophets, whom I send to you, rising up

<span id="xiii.vii-p8"></span>**6** Early and sending, (but ye have not
hearkened,) then will I make this house like Shiloh, and this city will
I make a curse to all the nations of the earth.

<span id="xiii.vii-p9"></span>**7** And the priests, and the prophets,
and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of
Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.vii-p10"></span>**8** And it was when Jeremiah had
finished speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the
people, that the priests, and the prophets, and all the people
apprehended him, saying, “Dying thou shalt die;

<span id="xiii.vii-p11"></span>**9** Why hast thou prophesied in the
name of Jehovah, saying, ‘Like Shiloh shall this house be, and this city
shall be desolate without, an inhabitant?’” (And all the people were
assembled against Jeremiah in the Temple of Jehovah.)

<span id="xiii.vii-p12"></span>**10** And the princes of Judah heard of
these things, and went down from the king’s house to the house of
Jehovah, and sat at the entrance of the new gate of the Temple of
Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.vii-p13"></span>**11** Then said the priests and the
prophets to the princes, and to all the people, saying, “This man is
worthy of death; for he has prophesied against this city as ye have
heard with your ears.”

<span id="xiii.vii-p14"></span>**12** And Jeremiah said to all the
princes, and to all the people, saying, — Jehovah hath sent me to
prophesy against this house, and against this city all the words which
ye have heard:

<span id="xiii.vii-p15"></span>**13** And now make good your ways and
your doings, and obey the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah will
repent of the evil which he hath pronounced against you.

<span id="xiii.vii-p16"></span>**14** And as for me, behold I am in your
hand; do to me as may seem good and right in your eyes:

<span id="xiii.vii-p17"></span>**15** But know assuredly, that if ye
slay me, ye will bring innocent blood on yourselves, and on this city,
and on its inhabitants; for in truth Jehovah hath sent me to you, to
speak all these words in your ears.

<span id="xiii.vii-p18"></span>**16** And the princes, and all the
people said to the priests and the prophets, “This man is not worthy of
death; for in the name of Jehovah our God hath he spoken to us.”

<span id="xiii.vii-p19"></span>**17** Then rose up men from the elders
of the land, and said to the whole assembly of the people, saying, —

<span id="xiii.vii-p20"></span>**18** Micah the Morasthite prophesied in
the days of Hezekiah the king of Judah, saying, — “Thus saith Jehovah of
hosts, — Sion as a field shall be plowed, And Jerusalem shall become
heaps, And the mount of the house like the heights of the forest.”

<span id="xiii.vii-p21"></span>**19** Killing, did Hezekiah the king of
Judah, and all Judah, kill him? did he not fear Jehovah? and did he not
supplicate the face of Jehovah? and Jehovah repented of the evil which
he had spoken against them: but we are doing a great evil against our
own souls.

<span id="xiii.vii-p22"></span>**20** But there was also a man who
prophesied in the name of Jehovah, Uriah the son of Shemaiah, from
Kirjath-jearim; and he prophesied against this city, and against this
land according to all the words of Jeremiah:

<span id="xiii.vii-p23"></span>**21** When the King Jehoiakim and all
the chief men and the princes heard his words, then the king sought to
slay him; but Uriah heard and feared, and he fled and went into Egypt.

<span id="xiii.vii-p24"></span>**22** And the King Jehoiakim sent men
into Egypt, *even* Elnathan the son of Achbor, and men with him into
Egypt:

<span id="xiii.vii-p25"></span>**23** And they brought Uriah up from
Egypt, and brought him to the King Jehoiakim, who slew him with the
sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.

<span id="xiii.vii-p26"></span>**24** Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam
the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, so that he was not delivered into
the hand of the people to be slain.

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 27

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span>**1** In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, the king of Judah, this word came to
Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying, —

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span>**2** Thus said Jehovah to me, Make for
thee bands and yokes, and put them on thy neck;

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span>**3** Then send them to the king of Edom,
and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and
to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Sidon, by the hand of the
ambassadors, who shall come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah the king of Judah:

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span>**4** And thou shalt give them a message
to their masters, saying, — Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of
Israel, Thus shall ye say to your masters, —

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span>**5** I made the earth, man also and
beast, Which are on the face of the earth, By my great power and my
extended arm; And given it have I to whom it seemed good to me:

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span>**6** And now given have I all these
lands Into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar The king of Babylon, my servant;
And also the beast of the field Have I given to him to serve him:

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span>**7** And serve him and his son, And his
son’s son, shall all nations, Until the time of his land shall come, And
also of himself; yea, serve him Shall many nations and great kings.

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span>**8** And it shall be as to the nation
and kingdom, Who will not serve him, *even* Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon, And who will not put their neck Under the yoke of the king of
Babylon, With the sword, and famine, and pestilence, Will I visit that
nation, saith Jehovah, Until I consume them by his hand.

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span>**9** And you, hearken not to your
prophets, And to your diviners, and to your dreamers, And to your
augurs, and to your sorcerers, Who speak to you, saying, — “Ye shall not
serve the king of Babylon;”

<span id="xiii.viii-p12"></span>**10** For they prophesy falsely to you,
That they might move you far from your own land, And that I might cast
you away and ye perish:

<span id="xiii.viii-p13"></span>**11** But the nation which shall bring
its neck Under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serve him, I will
leave it in its own land, saith Jehovah; And it shall cultivate it and
dwell in it.

<span id="xiii.viii-p14"></span>**12** To Zedekiah also, the king of
Judah, I spoke according to all these words, saying, — Bring your neck
under the yoke of the king of Babylon, And serve him and his people, and
ye shall live.

<span id="xiii.viii-p15"></span>**13** Why should ye perish, thou and
thy people, By the sword, and famine, and pestilence, As Jehovah has
spoken of the nation, Which will not serve the king of Babylon:

<span id="xiii.viii-p16"></span>**14** And hearken not to the words of
the prophets, Who speak to you, saying, — “Ye shall not serve the king
of Babylon;” For falsely do they prophesy to you;

<span id="xiii.viii-p17"></span>**15** For I have not sent them, saith
Jehovah, But they prophesy in my name falsely, That I might drive you
out, And that ye might perish, ye, And the prophets who prophesy to you.

<span id="xiii.viii-p18"></span>**16** To the priests also and to all
the people spake I, saying, — Thus saith Jehovah, — Hearken not to the
words of your prophets, Who prophesy to you, saying, — “Behold, the
vessels of the house of Jehovah Shall now soon be restored from
Babylon;” For falsehood do these prophesy to you:

<span id="xiii.viii-p19"></span>**17** Hearken ye not to them; Serve the
king of Babylon and ye shall live; Why should this city become a
desolation?

<span id="xiii.viii-p20"></span>**18** But if they be prophets, And if
the word of Jehovah be with them, Let them now intercede with Jehovah of
hosts, That the vessels which remain in the house of Jehovah, And in the
house of the king of Judah, And in Jerusalem, may not go to Babylon.

<span id="xiii.viii-p21"></span>**19** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts
of the pillars, and of the sea, and of the bases, and of the residue of
the vessels which are left in this city,

<span id="xiii.viii-p22"></span>**20** Which Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon did not take away, when he led captive Jeconiah the king of
Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and
Jerusalem;

<span id="xiii.viii-p23"></span>**21** yea, thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel, of the vessels which remain in the house of Jehovah,
and in the house of the king, and in Jerusalem;

<span id="xiii.viii-p24"></span>**22** To Babylon shall they be carried,
and there shall they be until the day in which I shall visit them, saith
Jehovah, and bring them up and restore them to this place.

<span id="xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 28

<span id="xiii.ix-p3"></span>**1** And it was in that year, at the
beginning of the reign of Zedekiah the king of Judah, in the fourth
year, in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, who
was of Gibeon, spoke to me in the Temple of Jehovah, in the presence of
the priests, and of all the people, saying,

<span id="xiii.ix-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

<span id="xiii.ix-p5"></span>**3** Further, when two years shall pass, I
will restore to this place all the vessels of the house of Jehovah which
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon has taken away from this place and
carried to Babylon:

<span id="xiii.ix-p6"></span>**4** And Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim the
king of Judah, and all the captives of Judah, who have gone to Babylon,
will I restore to this place, saith Jehovah; for I have broken the yoke
of the king of Babylon.

<span id="xiii.ix-p7"></span>**5** Then Jeremiah the prophet said to
Hananiah the prophet, in the presence of the priests and in the presence
of all the people, who were standing in the house of Jehovah;

<span id="xiii.ix-p8"></span>**6** Yea, Jeremiah the prophet said, Amen,
may Jehovah do so, may Jehovah confirm thy words which thou hast
prophesied as to the restoration of the vessels of the temple, and of
all the captives from Babylon to this place.

<span id="xiii.ix-p9"></span>**7** Nevertheless, hear thou now this word
which I declare in thy hearing, and in the hearing of all the people;

<span id="xiii.ix-p10"></span>**8** The prophets who have been before me
and before thee from the beginning, and prophesied against many nations
and great kingdoms, *have prophesied* of war, and of evil, and of
pestilence:

<span id="xiii.ix-p11"></span>**9** The prophet who prophesies of peace,
when the word shall come to pass, that prophet shall be known that
Jehovah has sent him in truth.

<span id="xiii.ix-p12"></span>**10** Then Hananiah the prophet took the
band from the neck of Jeremiah the prophet and broke it;

<span id="xiii.ix-p13"></span>**11** And Hananiah spake in the presence
of all the people, saying, — Thus saith Jehovah, In this manner will I
break off the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon from the neck
of all the nations. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.

<span id="xiii.ix-p14"></span>**12** And the word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah, after Hananiah the prophet broke off the yoke from the neck of
Jeremiah the prophet, saying, —

<span id="xiii.ix-p15"></span>**13** Go and speak to Hananiah, saying,
Thus saith Jehovah, Thou hast broken the bands of wood; but make for
thee instead of them bands of iron:

<span id="xiii.ix-p16"></span>**14** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
the God of Israel, A yoke of iron have I laid on the neck of all these
nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and
they shall serve him; and I have also given to him the beasts of the
field.

<span id="xiii.ix-p17"></span>**15** Jeremiah the prophet said also to
Hananiah the prophet, Hear, I pray, Hananiah; Jehovah hath not sent
thee, and thou hast made this people to trust in falsehood:

<span id="xiii.ix-p18"></span>**16** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah,
Behold, I will cast thee away from the face of the earth; die shalt thou
this year, because thou hast spoken revolt against Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.ix-p19"></span>**17** And Hananiah the prophet died in
that year, in the seventh month.

<span id="xiii.x"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 29

<span id="xiii.x-p3"></span>**1** These are the words of the epistle
which Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the
elders of the captivity, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to
the whole people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had led away captive from
Jerusalem to Babylon,

<span id="xiii.x-p4"></span>**2** After Jeconiah the king, and the queen
had gone forth, and the chief men, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem,
the artificers also, and the engravers, from Jerusalem, —

<span id="xiii.x-p5"></span>**3** By the hand of Elasah the son of
Shaphan, and of Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah the king of
Judah had sent to Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, to Babylon,)
saying, —

<span id="xiii.x-p6"></span>**4** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, to the whole captivity whom I have led captive from Jerusalem
to Babylon, —

<span id="xiii.x-p7"></span>**5** “Build ye houses, and inhabit *them;*
plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them;

<span id="xiii.x-p8"></span>**6** Take wives, and beget sons and
daughters; Take also wives for your sons, And give your daughters in
marriage to husbands, And let them bear sons and daughters; And increase
there and be not diminished:

<span id="xiii.x-p9"></span>**7** And seek the peace of the city, To
which I have removed you; And pray for it to Jehovah, For in its peace
shall be your peace.”

<span id="xiii.x-p10"></span>**8** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the
God of Israel, — Let not your prophets who are in the midst of you, Nor
your diviners, deceive you; And attend not to your dreams which ye
dream:

<span id="xiii.x-p11"></span>**9** For they falsely prophesy to you in
my name; I have not sent them, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.x-p12"></span>**10** For thus saith Jehovah, — For when
completed in Babylon Shall be seventy years, I will visit you, And will
rouse up for you my good word, That I may bring you back to this place:

<span id="xiii.x-p13"></span>**11** For I know my thoughts, Which I
think of you, saith Jehovah, — Thoughts of peace and not of evil, To
give you the end and the expectation.

<span id="xiii.x-p14"></span>**12** And ye shall call on me and go
forward; And pray to me, and I will hear you:

<span id="xiii.x-p15"></span>**13** And ye shall seek me, and shall find
*me;* Because ye will seek me with the whole heart.

<span id="xiii.x-p16"></span>**14** And I will be found by your saith
Jehovah, And will restore your captivity, And will gather you from all
nations, And from all places, where I have driven you, Saith Jehovah,
and I will bring you back To the place whence I have expelled you.

<span id="xiii.x-p17"></span>**15** As ye have said, “Raise for us will
Jehovah prophets in Babylon;”

<span id="xiii.x-p18"></span>**16** Therefore thus saith Jehovah to the
king who sits on the throne of David, and to the whole people who dwell
in this city, to your brethren who have not gone forth with you into
exile, — thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —

<span id="xiii.x-p19"></span>**17** Behold, I will send upon them the
sword, The famine, and the pestilence, And will make them like worthless
figs, Which, being so bad, cannot be eaten:

<span id="xiii.x-p20"></span>**18** Yea, I will pursue them with the
sword, The famine, and the pestilence, And will set them for a commotion
To all the kingdoms of the earth, For a curse and for an astonishment,
And for a hissing and for a reproach, Among all the nations to whom I
shall drive them;

<span id="xiii.x-p21"></span>**19** Because they hearkened not to my
words, saith Jehovah, Which I sent to them by my servants the prophets,
Rising up early and sending; And ye hearkened not, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.x-p22"></span>**20** Hear ye also the word of Jehovah,
the whole captivity, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon;

<span id="xiii.x-p23"></span>**21** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah
the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy to you in my name a lie, — Behold, I
will deliver them into the hand Of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon,
And he shall kill them before your eyes:

<span id="xiii.x-p24"></span>**22** And taken from them shall be a curse
By all the captivity of Judah in Babylon, saying, — “Let Jehovah make
thee like Zedekiah and Ahab, Whom the king of Babylon burnt in the
fire:”

<span id="xiii.x-p25"></span>**23** Because they have done villainy in
Israel, And prostituted the wives of their friends, And spoke a word in
my name falsely, Which I had not commanded them; But I know, and am
witness, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xiii.x-p26"></span>**24** And as to Shemaiah, the Nehelamite,
thou shalt thus say, —

<span id="xiii.x-p27"></span>**25** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, the God
of Israel, saying, — Because thou hast sent in my name letters to the
whole people, who are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah, the son of
Maaseiah, the priest, and to all the priests, saying, —

<span id="xiii.x-p28"></span>**26** Jehovah hath made thee a priest in
the room of Jehoiada the priest, that ye might be the rulers of the
house of Jehovah over every one that is insane and prophesies, that thou
mightest put him in prison and in manacles:

<span id="xiii.x-p29"></span>**27** And thou — wherefore hast thou not
reproved Jeremiah, the Anathothite, who prophesies to you?

<span id="xiii.x-p30"></span>**28** Even because he hath sent to us in
Babylon, saying, — “Long is the time, build ye houses and inhabit them;

<span id="xiii.x-p31"></span>**29** Plant gardens and eat the fruit of
them.” (Now Zephaniah had read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the
prophet:)

<span id="xiii.x-p32"></span>**30** Therefore the word of Jehovah came
to Jeremiah, saying, —

<span id="xiii.x-p33"></span>**31** Send to the whole captivity, saying,
— Thus saith Jehovah of Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because Shemaiah has
prophesied to you, When I had not sent him, And has made you to trust in
falsehood;

<span id="xiii.x-p34"></span>**32** Therefore thus saith Jehovah, — Lo I
will visit Shemaiah the Nehelamite and his seed; There shall not be to
him a man To dwell in the midst of this people; And he shall not see the
good, Which I shall do to my people, saith Jehovah; Because he has
spoken rebellion against Jehovah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc19013)
