[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc19009)  [Next](cc19011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 19: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part III*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 28

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass the same year, in
the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth
year, *and* in the fifth month, *that* Hananiah the son of Azur the
prophet, which *was* of Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the LORD,
in the presence of the priests, and of all the people, saying,

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Factum est anno illo, principio regni
Zedechiae, regis Jehudah, anno quarto, mense quinto, loquutus ad me
Chananiah, filius Assur, propheta qui erat e Guibeon *(oriundus e
Guibeon)* in Templo Jehovae, coram oculis sacerdotum et totius populi,
dicendo,

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Sic dicit Jehova exercituum, Deus
Israel, confregi (aut contrivi) jugum regis Babylonis.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span><span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>The Prophet relates here with what
haughtiness, and even fury, the false prophet Hananiah came forward to
deceive the people and to proclaim his trumperies, when yet he must have
been conscious of his own wickedness.  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) It hence clearly appears how great
must be the madness of those who, being blinded by God, are carried away
by a satanic impulse. The circumstances of the case especially shew how
great a contempt of God was manifested by this impostor; for he came
into the Temple, the priests were present, the people were there, and
there before his eyes he had the sanctuary and the ark of the covenant;
and we know that the ark of the covenant is everywhere represented as
having the presence of God; for God was by that symbol in a manner
visible, when he made evident the presence of his power and favor in the
Temple. As Hananiah then stood before God’s eyes, how great must have
been his stupidity to thrust himself forward and impudently to announce
falsehood in the name of God himself! He had yet no doubt but that he
falsely boasted that he was God’s prophet.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>And he used the same words as Jeremiah did,
*Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel* Surely these words
ought to have been like a thunderbolt to him, laying prostrate his
perverseness, even had he been harder than iron; for what does Jehovah
of hosts mean? This name expresses not only the eternal existence of
God, but also his power, which diffuses itself through heaven and earth.
Ought not Hananiah then to have trembled when any other had alleged
God’s name? But now, though he derided and laughed to scorn the
prophetic office as well as God’s holy name, he yet hesitated not to
boast that God was the author of this prophecy, which was yet nothing
but an imposture. And he added, *the God of Israel,* so that he might be
in nothing inferior to Jeremiah. This was a grievous trial, calculated
not only to discourage the people, but also to break down the firmness
of the holy Prophet. The people saw that God’s name was become a subject
of contest; there was a dreadful conflict, “God has spoken to me;” “Nay,
rather to me.” Jeremiah and Hananiah were opposed, the one to the other;
each of them claimed to be a Prophet. Such was the conflict; the name of
God seemed to have been assumed at pleasure, and flung forth by the
devil as in sport.

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>As to Jeremiah, his heart must have been
grievously wounded, when he saw that unprincipled man boldly profaning
God’s name. But, as I have already said, God in the meantime supported
the minds of the godly, so that they were not wholly cast down, though
they must have been somewhat disturbed. For we know that God’s children
were not so destitute of feeling as not to be moved by such things; but
yet God sustained all those who were endued with true religion. It was
indeed easy for them to distinguish between Jeremiah and Hananiah; for
they saw that the former announced the commands of God, while the latter
sought nothing else but the favor and plaudits of men.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>But with regard to Hananiah, he was to them
an awful spectacle of blindness and of madness, for he dreaded not the
sight of God himself, but entered the Temple and profaned it by his
lies, and at the same time assumed in contempt the name of God, and
boasted that he was a prophet, while he was nothing of the kind. Let us
not then wonder if there be many mercenary brawlers at this day, who
without shame and fear fiercely pretend God’s name, and thus exult over
us, as though God had given them all that they vainly prattle, while yet
it may be fully proved that they proclaim nothing but falsehoods; for
God has justly blinded them, as they thus profane his holy name. We
shall now come to the words:

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>*And it was in the same year,* even *in the
fourth of Zedekiah’s reign, etc*. The fourth year seems to have been
improperly called the *beginning* of his reign. We have said elsewhere,
that it may have been that God had laid up this prophecy with Jeremiah,
and did not design it to be immediately published. But there would be
nothing strange in this, were the confirmation of his reign called its
beginning. Zedekiah was made king by Nebuchadnezzar, because the people
would not have been willing to accept a foreigner. He might indeed have
set one of his own governors over the whole country; and he might also
have made a king of one of the chief men of the land, but he saw that
anything of this kind would have been greatly disliked. He therefore
deemed it enough to take away Jeconiah, and to put in his place one who
had not much power nor much wealth, and who was to be his tributary, as
the case was with Zedekiah. But in course of time Zedekiah increased in
power, so that he was at peace in his own kingdom. We also know that he
was set over neighboring countries, as Nebuchadnezzar thought it
advantageous to bind him to himself by favors. This fourth year then
might well be deemed the beginning of his reign, for during three years
things were so disturbed, that he possessed no authority, and hardly
dared to ascend the throne. This then is the most probable opinion.
 <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md)

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span>He says afterwards, that Hananiah *spoke* to
him *in the presence of the priests and of the whole people*  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) Hananiah ought at least to have been
touched and moved when he heard Jeremiah speaking, he himself had no
proof of his own call; nay, he was an impostor, and he knew that he did
nothing but deceive the people, and yet he audaciously persisted in his
object, and, as it were, avowedly obtruded himself that he might contend
with the Prophet, as though he carried on war with God. He said, *Broken
is the yoke of the king of Babylon,* that is, the tyranny by which he
has oppressed the people shall be shortly broken. But he alluded to the
yoke which Jeremiah had put on, as we shall presently see. The
commencement of his prophecy was, that there was no reason for the Jews
to dread the present power of the king of Babylon, for God would soon
overthrow him. They could not have entertained hope of restoration, or
of a better condition, until that monarchy was trodden under foot; for
as long as the king of Babylon bore rule, there was no hope that he
would remit the tribute, and restore to the Jews the vessels of the
Temple. Hananiah then began with this, that God would break the power of
the king of Babylon, so that he would be constrained, willing or
unwilling, to let the people free, or that the people would with
impunity extricate themselves from the grasp of his power. He then adds,
—

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#003.md)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Within two full years will I bring
again into this place the vessels of the LORD’S house, that
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried
them to Babylon:

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Adhuc (in adhuc, *ad verbum)* anni duo
dierum (*hoc est,* cum transierint anni dierum duo,) ego reducam ad
locum hunc omnia vasa domus Jehovae (*id est,* Templi,) quae abstulit
Nebuchadnezer, rex Babylonis, a loco hoc et transportavit Babylonem.

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span><span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>We now see that what Hananiah had in view was
to promise impunity to the people, and not only this, but also to soothe
them with vain confidence, as though the people would have their king
soon restored, together with the spoils which the enemy had taken away.
But he began by referring to the power of the king, lest that terrible
sight should occupy the minds of the people so as to prevent them to
receive this joyful prophecy. He then says, *Further, when two years
shall pass,*  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) *I will bring back
to this place all the vessels which King Nebuchadnezzar has taken away*
Jeremiah had assigned to the people’s exile seventy years, as it has
been stated before, and as we shall hereafter often see; but here the
false prophet says, that after two years the exile of the king and of
the people would come to an end, and that the vessels which had been
taken away would be restored; he speaks also of the king himself, —

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>**4.** And I will bring again to this place
Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim King of Judah, with all the captives of
Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the Lord: for I will break the yoke
of the king of Babylon.

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Et Jechaniam, filium Jehoiakim, regem
Jehudah, et totam captivatatem (*hoc est,* totam turbam captivam; *est
enim* <span id="xi.iii-p3.1"></span>תולג *nomen collectivum*, *ut alibi
diximus*, totam *ergo* turbam captivam) Jehudah, quae profecta est
Babylonem *(hoc est,* qui abducti fuerunt, *vel,* qui profecti sunt;
*sed violonter tracti tamen)* ego reducam ad hunt locum, dicit Jehova;
quia contrivi jugurn regis Babylonis.

<span id="xi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p6"></span>Hananiah promised as to the king himself,
what he had just predicted respecting the vessels of the Temple and of
the palace. But it may be asked, how did he dare to give hope as to the
restoration of Jeconiah, since that could not have been acceptable to
Zedekiah? for Jeconiah could not have again gained what he had lost
without the abdication of Zechariah; but he would have never submitted
willingly to lose his own dignity and to become a private man, and to
allow him who had been deprived of this high honor to return again. But
there is no doubt but that he relied on the favor of the people, and
that he was fully persuaded that if Zedekiah could ill bear to be thus
degraded, he would yet be constrained to shew a different feeling; for
Zedekiah himself regarded his own reign as not honorable, as he sat not
in David’s throne by the right of succession. He had been set on the
throne by a tyrant, and he dared not to make any other pretense to the
people than that he wished Jeconiah to return and to possess the kingdom
of which he had been deprived. As then this impostor knew that the king
dared not to shew any displeasure, but that his prophecy would be
gratifying and acceptable to the people, he boldly promised what we here
read respecting the return of Jeconiah.

<span id="xi.iii-p7"></span>He hence says in God’s name, *Jeconiah, the
son of Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, and all the captive people, who
have been led away to Babylon, will I restore to this place.* We see
that he was ever inflated with the same arrogance, and that he wholly
disregarded God, whose name he thus in sport profaned. But all this
flowed from this fountain, even because he had been blinded by the
righteous judgment of God.

<span id="xi.iii-p8"></span>he then confirms his own prophecy, repeating
its beginning, *I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon*  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md) He had made open for himself an
entrance, by saying that the destruction of the Babylonian monarchy was
at hand; and now, after having given utterance to what seemed good to
him on the whole affair, he refers again to that event. As then he
promised that the monarchy would not stand longer than two years, the
Jews might have supposed that they would become free, and might thus
have hoped for a happy state of things; and this was the design of the
impostor; but what was the answer of Jeremiah? His opposition to him was
frank and firm; but as he saw that he had incurred the ill-will of the
people, he was anxious to remove it; and before he repeated what he had
said of their seventy years in exile, he shewed that he had not eagerly
received his commission, as though he had been alienated from his
people, or had disregarded their welfare, or had been carried away by
some morbid feeling to bring a sad and mournful message. He therefore
said, —

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#005.md)<span id="xi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p2"></span>**5.** Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto
the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence
of all the people that stood in the house of the LORD,

<span id="xi.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Tunc dixit Jeremias propheta Chananiae
prophetae coram oculis sacerdotum et coram oculis totius populi, qui
stabant in domo Jehovae *(hoc est,* in Tempe,)

<span id="xi.iv-p4"></span>**6.** Even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen:
the LORD do so: the LORD perform thy words which thou hast prophesied,
to bring again the vessels of the LORD’S house, and all that is carried
away captive, from Babylon into this place.

<span id="xi.iv-p5"></span>**6.** Et dixit Jeremias propheta, Amen, sic
faciat Jehova, stabiliet Jehova sermones tuos, quos prophetasti ad
reducendum *(hoc est,* ut reducantur) vasa Templi et tota captivitas ex
Babylone ad hunc locum.

<span id="xi.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv-p7"></span><span id="xi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p8"></span>I have shortly reminded you of the design of
the Prophet; for it was to be feared that the people would not hear him,
or at least that they would not well receive him, as he had threatened
them and handled them roughly and severely. We know that men ever seek
to be flattered; hence adulations are ever delightfully received. Such
is the pride of men, that they cannot bear to be called to an account
for what they have done; and *they* become also indignant, when they see
their crimes and vices brought to light; besides, they are so delicate
and tender, that they avoid as much as they can all adverse rumors; and
if any fear assails them, they instantly resist.

<span id="xi.iv-p9"></span>Now Jeremiah had been furnished with a
twofold message, to expose the vices of the people, to shew that the
Jews were unworthy to inherit the land, as they were covenant-breakers
and despisers of God and of his Law; and then, as they had been so often
refractory and perverse, he had another message, that they would not be
suffered to escape unpunished, as they had in so many ways, and for so
long a time continued to provoke God’s wrath; all this was very
displeasing to the people. It was therefore Jeremiah’s object to turn
aside the false suspicion under which he labored, and he testified that
he desired nothing more than the well-being of the people; “Amen,” he
said, “may it thus happen, I wish I were a false prophet; I would
willingly retract, and that with shame, all that I have hitherto
predicted, so great is my care and anxiety for the safety of the public;
for I would prefer the welfare of the whole people to my own
reputation.” But he afterwards added, as we shall see, that the promise
of Hananiah was wholly vain, and that nothing would save the people from
the calamity that was very near at hand.

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou continuest
to invite us to thyself, and often to remind us of our sins, that we may
embrace the hope of mercy that is offered to us, — O grant, that we may
not be ungrateful for this so great and invaluable a blessing, but come
to thee in real humility and true repentance, and that trusting in thine
infinite goodness, we may not doubt but that thou wilt be propitious to
us, so that we may be kindled with the desire for true religion, and in
all things obey thy word, that thy name may be glorified in us, until we
shall at length come into that celestial glory, which thy Son hath
obtained for us by his blood. — Amen.

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventh

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span><span id="xi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span>We began in the last Lecture to explain the
answer of Jeremiah, when he said to Hananiah, “May God confirm thy
words, and may the vessels of the Temple be restored to this place and
return together with the captive people.” We briefly stated what is now
necessary again to repeat, that there were two feelings in the Prophets
apparently contrary, and yet they were compatible with one another.
Whatever God had commanded them they boldly declared, and thus they
forgot their own nation when they announced anything of an adverse kind.
Hence, when the Prophets threatened the people, and said that war or
famine was near at hand, they doubtless were so endued with a heroic
greatness of mind, that dismissing a regard for the people, they
proceeded in the performance of their office; they thus strenuously
executed whatever God had commanded them. But they did not wholly put
off every humane feeling, but condoled with the miseries of the people;
and though they denounced on them destruction, yet they could not but
receive sorrow from their own prophecies. There was, therefore, no
inconsistency in Jeremiah in wishing the restoration of the vessels of
the Temple and the return of the exiles, while yet he ever continued in
the same mind, as we shall hereafter see.

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span>If any one objects and says that this could
not have been the case, for then Jeremiah must have been a vain and
false prophet; the answer to this is, that the prophets had no recourse
to refined reasoning, when they were carried away by a vehement zeal;
for we see that Moses wished to be blotted out of the book of life, and
that Paul expressed a similar wish, even that he might be an anathema
from Christ for his brethren. (<span id="xi.vi-p4.1"></span>[Ex
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032.md)<span id="xi.vi-p4.1"></span>;
<span id="xi.vi-p4.2"></span>[Ro
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="xi.vi-p4.2"></span>..md) Had
any one distinctly asked Moses, Do you wish to perish and to be cut off
from the hope of salvation? his answer, no doubt, would have been, that
nothing was less in his mind than to cast away the immutable favor of
God; but when his mind was wholly fixed on God’s glory, which would have
been exposed to all kinds of reproaches, had the people been destroyed
in the Desert, and when he felt another thing, a solicitude for the
salvation of his own nation, he was at the time forgetful of himself,
and being carried away as it were beyond himself, he said, “Rather blot
me out of the book of life,*”* and the ease of Paul was similar. And the
same view we ought to take of Jeremiah, when he, in effect, said, I
would I were a false prophet, and that thou hast predicted to the people
what by the event may be found to be true.” But Jeremiah did not intend
to take away even the least thing from God’s word; he only expressed a
wish, and surrendered to God the care for the other, the credit and the
authority of his prophecy, he did not, then, engage for this, as though
he ought to have made it good, if the event did not by chance correspond
with his prophecy; but he left the care of this with God, and thus,
without any difficulty, he prayed for the liberation and return of the
people. But it now follows —

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#007.md)<span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>**7.** Nevertheless hear thou now this word
that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people;

<span id="xi.vii-p3"></span>**7.** Verum audi nunc (*vel,* agedum,
*hortantis*) sermonem hunc, quem ego pronuncio (pronuncians sum) in
auribus tuis et in auribus totius populi, —

<span id="xi.vii-p4"></span>**8.** The prophets that have been before me
and before thee of old prophesied both against many countries, and
against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.

<span id="xi.vii-p5"></span>**8.** Prophetae qui fuerunt ante me et ante
to a seculo, et prophetarunt super terras multas *(vel,* magnas) et
regna magna de praelio, de malo et de peste:

<span id="xi.vii-p6"></span>**9.** The prophet which prophesieth of
peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, *then* shall the
prophet be known, that the LORD hath truly sent him.

<span id="xi.vii-p7"></span>**9.** Propheta qui prophetaverit de pace
*(hoc est,* de rebus prosperis,) cum venerit sermo *(id est,* cum eventu
comprobatus fuerit sermo prophetae,) cognoscetur propheta quod miserit
eum Jellova in veritate.

<span id="xi.vii-p8"></span> 

<span id="xi.vii-p9"></span><span id="xi.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p10"></span>Jeremiah, having testified that he did not
wish for anything adverse to his own people, but had a good will towards
them, now adds that what he had predicted was yet most true. Here is
seen more fully what I have said of his twofold feeling; for though the
Prophet wished to consult the welfare of the people, he did not yet
cease to render full obedience to God, and to announce those messages
which were at the same time very grievous: thus Jeremiah did not keep
silence, but became an herald of God’s vengeance against the people. On
the one hand, then, he showed that he desired nothing more than the
welfare and the safety of his people, and that yet it was not in his
power nor in that of any mortal to change the celestial decree which he
had pronounced. We hence see that God so influenced the minds and hearts
of his servants, that they were not cruel or barbarous; and yet they
were not made soft and pliable through the influence of humanity, but
boldly declared what God had commanded them.

<span id="xi.vii-p11"></span>For this reason he said, *Nevertheless,
hear thou this word which I pronounce in thine ears, and in the ears of
all the people* By these words Jeremiah indirectly condemned the vanity
of Hananiah, who sought to flatter the people, and by his adulations
hunted for favor and applause, as it is usual with such impostors, he
then said that it availed him nothing to give the people the hope of a
near deliverance, for God had not changed his purpose. And Jeremiah now
boldly and openly opposed him, as he had sufficiently rebutted that
ill-will with which he was unjustly loaded; for impostors ever find out
calumnies by which they assail the faithful servants of God. He might at
the beginning have objected to Jeremiah and said, “Thou art alienated
from thine own nation, thou art not touched by the many miseries by
which we have been hitherto distressed, nor carest thou for what may
happen to us in future.” Thus he might have kindled hatred against
Jeremiah, had he not cleared himself. But after he had testified that he
felt kindly and was well affected towards his own nation, he assailed
the impostor himself, and hesitated not to assert what seemed very
grievous, that the people would become captives.

<span id="xi.vii-p12"></span>Yet Jeremiah seems here to have been
smitten in some measure with fear; for he did not confirm his own
prophecy, but left that as it were in suspense; and yet he doubtless
exposed the false declaration of Hananiah. But we know that the whole of
what the Prophet said is not recited; for he only in a brief way records
the heads or the chief things; and further, as we shall presently see,
Jeremiah could not act as he wished in the midst of such a tumult, for
he would have spoken to the deaf; and as Hananiah had prejudiced the
minds of almost all, the holy Prophet would not have been listened to
while there was such a confusion. He was therefore satisfied with the
brief assertion, that God would soon shew that Hananiah was a false
witness in promising so quick a return to the captives and exiles.

<span id="xi.vii-p13"></span><span id="xi.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p14"></span>But he makes here only a general statement,
*The Prophets who have been before, me and thee, and prophesied against
many* (or great) *lands, and against great kingdoms, have prophesied of
war, and of evil, and of pestilence* The word <span
id="xi.vii-p14.1"></span>הער, *roe, evil,* is placed between two other
kinds of evil; but it is to be taken here no doubt for famine, as it is
evident from many other passages.  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md) Then he adds, changing the number,
*“When any prophet spoke of peace,* the event proved whether or not he
was a true prophet.  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) Now,
experience itself will shortly prove thee to be false, for after two
years the people who are now in Babylon will be still there under
oppression, and the condition of the residue will be nothing better, for
those who now remain in the city and throughout all Judea shall be
driven into exile as well as their brethren.”

<span id="xi.vii-p22"></span><span id="xi.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p23"></span>Jeremiah seems here to conclude that those
alone are to be deemed true prophets who prove by the event that they
have been sent from above; and it not only appears that this may be
gathered from his words, but it may also be shewn to be the definition
of a true prophet; for when the event corresponds with the prophecy,
there is no doubt but that he who predicted what comes to pass must have
been sent by God. But we must bear in mind what is said in <span
id="xi.vii-p23.1"></span>[Deut. 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#002.md)<span id="xi.vii-p23.1"></span>,
where God reminds the people that even when the event answers to the
prophecy, the prophets are not to be thoughtlessly and indiscriminately
believed, as though they predicted what was true;

<span id="xi.vii-p24"></span>“for God,” he says, “tries thee,” that is,
proves thy faith, whether thou wilt be easily carried away by every wind
of doctrine.”

<span id="xi.vii-p25"></span>But there are two passages, spoken by Moses
himself, which at the first sight seem to militate the one against the
other. We have already quoted the first from <span
id="xi.vii-p25.1"></span>[De 13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#000.md)<span
id="xi.vii-p25.1"></span>; we have the other in the <span
id="xi.vii-p25.2"></span>[De
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#018.md)<span id="xi.vii-p25.2"></span>,

<span id="xi.vii-p26"></span>“The prophet who has predicted what is
found to be true,  
I have sent him.”

<span id="xi.vii-p27"></span>God seems there to acknowledge as his
faithful servants those who foretell what is true. But Moses had before
reminded the people that even impostors sometimes speak the truth, but
that they ought not on this account to be believed. But we must remember
what God often declares by Isaiah, when he claims to himself alone the
foreknowledge of things,

<span id="xi.vii-p28"></span>“Go,” he says, “and inquire whether the
gods of the Gentiles will answer as to future things.” (<span
id="xi.vii-p28.1"></span>[Isa
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#007)<span id="xi.vii-p28.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xi.vii-p29"></span>We see that God ascribes to himself alone
this peculiarity, that he foreknows future events and testifies
respecting them. And surely nothing can be more clear than that God
alone can speak of hidden things: men, indeed, can conjecture this or
that, but they are often mistaken.

<span id="xi.vii-p30"></span>With regard to the devil, I pass by those
refined disquisitions with which Augustine especially wearied himself;
for above all other things he toiled on this point, how the devils
reveal future and hidden things? He speculated, as I have said, in too
refined a manner. But the solution of the difficulty, as to the subject
now in hand, may be easily given. We first conclude, that future events
cannot be known but by God alone, and that, therefore, prescience is his
exclusive property, so that nothing that is future or hidden can be
predicted but by him alone. But, then, it does not follow that God does
not permit liberty to the devil and his ministers to foretell something
that is true. How? As the case was with Balaam, who was an impostor,
ready to let on hire or to sell his prophecies, as it is well known, and
yet he was a prophet. But it was a peculiar gift to foretell things:
whence had he this? Not from the devil any farther than it pleased God;
and yet the truth had no other fountain than God himself and his Spirit.
When, therefore, the devil declares what is true, it is as it were
extraneous and adventitious.

<span id="xi.vii-p31"></span>Now, as we have said, that God is the
source of truth, it follows that the prophets sent by him cannot be
mistaken; for they exceed not the limits of their call, and so they do
not speak falsely of hidden things; but when they declare this or that,
they have him as their teacher. But these terms, as they say, are not
convertible — to foretell what is true and to be a true prophet: for
some, as I have said, predict what is found afterwards by trial and
experience to be true, and yet they are impostors; nor did God, in the
eighteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, intend to give a certain definition
by which his own prophets are to be distinguished; but as he saw that
the Israelites would be too credulous, so as greedily to lay hold on
anything that might have been said, he intended to restrain that excess,
and to correct that immoderate ardor. Hence he commanded them to expect
the event, as though he had said, “If any arise among you who will
promise this or that in my name, do not immediately receive what they
may announce; but the event will shew whether I have sent them.” So
also, in this place, Jeremiah says, that the true prophets of God had
spoken efficiently, as they had predicted nothing but what God had
ratified and really proved to have come from him.

<span id="xi.vii-p32"></span>Thus, then, we ought to think of most, that
is, that those who predict what is true are for the most part the
prophets of God: this is to be taken as the general rule. But we cannot
hence conclude, that all those who apparently predict this or that, are
sent by God, so that the whole of what they teach is true: for one
particular prophecy would not be sufficient to prove the truth of all
that is taught and preached. It is enough that God condemns their vanity
who speak from their own hearts or from their own brains, when the event
does not correspond. At the same time he points out his own prophets by
this evidence, — that he really shews that he has sent them, when he
fulfils what has been predicted by them. As to false prophets there is a
special reason why God permits to them so much liberty, for the world is
worthy of such reward, when it willingly offers itself to be deceived.
Satan, the father of lies, lays everywhere his snares for men, and they
who run into them, and wish to cast themselves on his tenterhooks,
deserve to be given up to believe a lie, as they will not, as Paul says,
believe the truth. (<span id="xi.vii-p32.1"></span>[2 Thess.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011)<span id="xi.vii-p32.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.vii-p33"></span>We now then see what was the object of
Jeremiah: his design was not to prove that all were true prophets who
predicted something that was true, for this was not, his subject; but he
took up another point, — that all who predicted this or that, which was
afterwards found to be vain, were thus convicted of falsehood. If then
any one predicted what was to be, and the thing itself came not to pass,
it was a sufficient proof of his presumption: it hence appeared, that he
was not sent of God as he boasted. This was the object of Jeremiah, nor
did he go beyond it; for he did not discuss the point, whether all who
predicted true things were sent from above, and whether all their
doctrines were to be credited and they believed indiscriminately; this
was not the subject handled by Jeremiah; but he shewed that Hananiah was
a false prophet, for it would appear evident after two years that he had
vainly spoken of what he had not received from God’s Spirit. And the
same thing Moses had in view, as I have already explained.

<span id="xi.vii-p34"></span>As to the *prophets,* who had been in all
ages and *prophesied* respecting many lands and great kingdoms, they
must be considered as exclusively the true prophets: for though there
had been some prophets among heathen nations, yet Jeremiah would not
have thought them worthy of so great an honor; and it would have been to
blend together sacred and profane things, had he placed these vain
foretellers and the true prophets in the same rank. But we know that all
God’s servants had so directed their discourse to the elect people, as
yet to speak of foreign kingdoms and of far countries; and this has not
been without reason distinctly expressed; for when they spoke of any
monarchy they could not of themselves conjecture what would be: it was
therefore necessary for them thus to speak by the impulse of the Holy
Spirit. Were I disposed to assume more than what is lawful, and to
pretend that I possess some special gift of prophesying, I could more
easily lie and deceive, were I to speak only of one city, and of the
state of things open before my eyes, than if I extended my predictions
to distant countries: when therefore Jeremiah says that the prophets had
spoken of divers and large countries, and of most powerful kingdoms, he
intimates that their predictions could not have been ascribed to human
conjectures; for were any one possessed of the greatest acuteness, and
were he to surpass angels in intelligence, he yet could not predict what
is hereafter to take place in lands beyond the seas But whatever had
been predicted by the prophets, God sanctioned it by the events of time.
It then follows that their call was at the same time sanctioned; that
is, when God as it were ratified from heaven what they had spoken on
earth. Whether therefore the prophets spoke of peace, that is, of
prosperity, or of war, famine, and pestilence, when experience proved
that true which they had said, their own authority was at the same time
confirmed, as though God had shewed that they had been sent by him.

<span id="xi.vii-p35"></span>We must also notice the word <span
id="xi.vii-p35.1"></span>תמאב*, beamet,* he says that God sent them *in
truth* He condemns here the boldness which impostors ever assume; for
they surpass God’s faithful servants in boasting that they have been
sent. As then they were thus insolent, and by a fallacious pretense of
having been called to their office, deceived unwary men, the Prophet
adds here this clause, intimating that they were not all sent in truth.
He thus conceded some sort of a call to these unprincipled men, but yet
shewed how much they differed from God’s servants, whose call was sealed
by God himself. It follows —

<span id="xi.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#010.md)<span
id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p2"></span>**10.** Then Hananiah the prophet took the
yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, and brake it.

<span id="xi.viii-p3"></span>**10.** Et abstulit Chananias propheta
ligamen illud (vinculum) e collo Jeremiae prophetae, et confregit illud.

<span id="xi.viii-p4"></span>**11.** And Hananiah spake in the presence
of all the people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Even so will I break the
yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from the neck of all nations
within the space of two full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his
way.

<span id="xi.viii-p5"></span>**11.** Et dixit Chananias in oculis totius
populi (hoc est, coram toto populo loquutus est,) dicendo, Sic dicit
Jehova, In hunc modum confringam jugum Nebuchadnezer, regis Babylonii
cum adhuc (id est simulae) fuerunt duo anni dierum e collo omnium
gentium: et profectus est Jeremias propheta per viam suam.

<span id="xi.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.viii-p7"></span><span id="xi.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p8"></span>It was not enough for the impostor to
resist the holy servant of God to his face, without laying sacrilegious
hands on that visible symbol, by which it had pleased God to testify
that the Prophet’s message was true. For such was the tardiness of the
people, nay, their insensibility, that they could not be much moved by
words; therefore God added a symbol, for Jeremiah carried cords or bands
around his neck: and it was a sign of reproach before men, yet, in order
to touch the people, he refused not to undergo that reproach.

<span id="xi.viii-p9"></span>The band then on the neck of Jeremiah was
like a sacrament; for it was a visible sign to establish the credit of
his message. And what did Hananiah do? After having insolently inveighed
against Jeremiah, and promised deliverance to the people after two
years, he violently broke and took off the cord or the band which
Jeremiah had around his neck.

<span id="xi.viii-p10"></span>We hence see how great and how impetuous
is the fury of those whom the devil impels: for when once they arrive at
that degree of temerity as to dare to resist the word of God, and, were
it possible, to cast him from his own throne, they spare no symbols of
his power and glory. We ought especially to notice this madness of
Hananiah; for he not only resisted God’s servant, and endeavored to
subvert his prophecy, but also snatched away the bands, that he might
set up the falsehood of the devil in opposition to the true sacrament.
This sign, as we have said, availed to confirm the prophecy of which we
have heard; but what was done by Hananiah? he not only took away that
sign, but by breaking the bands he attracted the attention of men, and
by such a representation made them to believe that there would be in two
years a deliverance. Then Hananiah displayed his furious zeal in two
ways; for he profaned that symbol which Jeremiah had adopted according
to God’s command, and he also took it away, as though he aimed to be
above God, and to overthrow his truth, and would triumph over it.

<span id="xi.viii-p11"></span>The same thing we now see done under the
Papacy: for we know that what Christ had commanded has been either
corrupted, or obscured, or blotted out by them; and they have also
devised fictitious sacraments and innumerable pompous rites, by which
they fascinate foolish and credulous men. The same did Hananiah; and
therefore his disciples and imitators are the Papists; who not only
reject or extenuate the testimonies which have come from God, but
plainly dishonor his sacraments by arrogantly bringing forward their own
devices and inventions.

<span id="xi.viii-p12"></span><span id="xi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p13"></span>We must also notice how craftily this
impostor insinuated himself; for he seemed to imitate the true prophets
of God, for he set a sign before the people, and then added a doctrine.
The Papists have their empty signs, but they only delight the eyes,
while yet they have no care nor concern for the ears. But Hananiah came
still nearer to God’s servants, so that he might deceive even those who
were not stupid. What, indeed, could we desire more in this man than
that he should set forth a sign? He also added the name of God and
declared what was his purpose, *in this manner will I break the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzar:* nor did he speak in his own name, but assumed the
person of God, *Thus saith Jehovah,* I will break the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="xi.viii-p14"></span>But as we have elsewhere said, this
preposterous imitation of the devil ought not to disturb pious minds;
for God ever supplies his own people with the spirit of discernment,
provided they humbly pray to him. And therefore whenever Jeremiah
repeated the word prophet, which he conceded to Hananiah, as he assumed
it himself, for whenever he spoke of Hananiah, he honored him with this
name, even that he was a prophet, — the holy man was not ignorant what
an occasion of offense it was, when a prophet, who is so acknowledged in
the Church of God, is yet the minister of Satan, a liar and an impostor.
But his object was to warn us in due time, lest novelty should frighten
us when any boasts of the title of a prophet. So the Papists brag that
they are prelates and bishops, and boast that they are the successors of
the Apostles: but the devil is their chief, who calls himself the Vicar
of Christ on the earth. Then Jeremiah designedly called Hananiah so many
times a prophet, so that our faith, when any such thing happens to us,
may not fail, as though some new thing had taken place. I cannot to-day
finish the last part of the verse.

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xi.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou wouldest
so try the constancy of our faith as to permit the devil to blend his
lies with thy holy truth, we may not yet be entangled in them, but be
attentive to that light which thou settest before us, and by which thou
guidest us into the way of salvation; and may we in the spirit of
docility so offer ourselves to be ruled by thee, that thou mayest also
become our faithful and infallible leader, until we shall at length
attain that eternal life which has been obtained for us by the blood of
thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xi.x"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p1"></span>Lecture one Hundred and Eighth

<span id="xi.x-p2"></span>Hananiah, after having broken the bands of
Jeremiah, predicted that God would liberate the Jews as well as other
nations from under the yoke of King Nebuchadnezzar; and it is at length
added, that Jeremiah *went his way;* by which words the Prophet
intimates that he left the place, for he was unwilling contentiously to
dispute with a violent man, or rather with a wild beast; for it is
probable, nay, it may be concluded as certain, that Hananiah had great
power in the Temple, for his prophecies were plausible. For as men
always seek flatteries, when they heard promised to them what was
especially desirable, even an end to all their evils and calamities
after two years, all of them greedily received what the impostor had
said. Besides, not only his tongue fought against Jeremiah, but also his
hands, for he violently assailed the holy man when he broke his bands.
Hence Jeremiah could not have acted otherwise than to turn aside as it
were from the storm; nor did he do this through fear, but because he saw
that his adversary would be his superior in wrangling, nor did he hope
to be heard amidst noise and clamors; for he saw that a great tumult
would immediately rise if he began to speak. He found it therefore
necessary to withdraw from the people.

<span id="xi.x-p3"></span>We are hereby reminded that we ought wisely to
consider what occasions may require; for it is not right nor expedient
to speak always and everywhere. When, therefore, the Lord opens our
mouth, no difficulties ought to restrain us so as not to speak boldly;
but when there is no hope of doing good, it is better sometimes to be
silent than to excite a great multitude without any profit. True indeed
is that saying of Paul, that we ought to be instant out of season,
(<span id="xi.x-p3.1"></span>[2Ti
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span id="xi.x-p3.1"></span>;.md) but
he means, that the ministers of Christ, though they may sometimes offend
and exasperate the minds of many, ought not yet to desist but to
persevere. But Jeremiah had no hearers, and the whole people were so
incensed, that he could do nothing against that impostor even if he
exposed himself to death. He therefore was silent, for he had already
discharged the duties of his office; he might have also withdrawn, that
he might come furnished with new messages, and thus endued with new
authority, as, indeed, it appears from what follows, —

<span id="xi.xi"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#012.md)<span id="xi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p2"></span>**12.** Then the word of the LORD came unto
Jeremiah *the prophet*, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the
yoke from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="xi.xi-p3"></span>**12.** Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad Jeremiam,
postquam confregit Chananiah propheta jugum (*aut,* vinculum) e collo
Jeremiae prophetae, dicendo,

<span id="xi.xi-p4"></span>**13.** Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus
saith the LORD; Thou hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt make
for them yokes of iron.

<span id="xi.xi-p5"></span>**13.** Vade et loquere cum Chanania,
dicendo, (alloquere Chananiam, dicendo,) Sic dicit jehova, Vincula
lignea fregisti; fac autem tibi loco illorum vincula ferrea.

<span id="xi.xi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.xi-p7"></span><span id="xi.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p8"></span>It hence appears that Jeremiah had regard
only to the common benefit of the people, and that he wisely kept
silence for a time, that he might not throw pearls before swine, and
thus expose in a manner the holy name of God to the insolence of the
ungodly. He therefore waited until he might again go forth with new
messages, and thus secure more credit to himself. For had he contended
longer with Hananiah, contentions would have been kindled on every side,
there would have been no hearing in a tumult, and the Jews would have
wholly disregarded anything he might have then spoken. But as he had
withdrawn from the crowd, and was afterwards sent by God, the Jews could
not have so presumptuously despised him or his doctrine. This, then, was
the reason why he was for a short time silent.

<span id="xi.xi-p9"></span>If he feared and trembled in the midst of
these commotions, God in due time confirmed him by giving him new
commands: *The word of Jehovah,* he says, *came to Jeremiah,* after
Hananiah broke the band from his neck. By these words he intimates, that
the ungodly, however insolently they may rise up against God, ever
depart with shame and reproach. For Hananiah had not only opposed
Jeremiah by his words and tongue, but had also broken the cords or bands
from his neck. This, then, the Prophet now repeats, in order that he
might shew, as it were by his finger, that Hananiah by his audacity
gained nothing, except that he rendered his vanity more notorious.

<span id="xi.xi-p10"></span><span id="xi.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p11"></span>Now it is an abrupt sentence when he says,
*Go and speak to Hananiah, saying, Thus saith Jehovah, Thou hast broken
the wooden bands; but make to thee iron bands;* Jeremiah does not keep
to the same point; for in the first clause he relates what he had been
commanded to say to Hananiah; and in the second he relates what God had
commanded him to do, even iron bands. But there is no obscurity as to
the meaning; for doubtless the Prophet might have arranged his words
thus, “Thou hast broken the bands from my neck; but God has commanded me
to make new ones from iron.”  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md)
Though Jeremiah, then, only tells us here that God commanded him to make
iron bands, it may yet be easily concluded that when he spoke of wooden
bands he at the same time added what he relates of iron bands, but in a
different connection., Now follows the explanation, —

<span id="xi.xii"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#014.md)<span id="xi.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p2"></span>**14.** For thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel, I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these
nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they
shall serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also.

<span id="xi.xii-p3"></span>**14.** Quoniam sic dicit Jehova exercituum,
Deus Israel, jugum ferreum imposui super collum omnium gentium istorum,
ut serviant Nevuchadnezer, regi Babylonis, et servient ei, atque etiam
bestiam agri dedi illi.

<span id="xi.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xii-p5"></span><span id="xi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p6"></span>It would have been a vain spectacle, had
Jeremiah brought only his iron band around his neck; but when he added
an explanation of the symbol, he no doubt prevailed on many to believe
his prophecy, and rendered those inexcusable who had hardened themselves
in their wickedness. But it is worthy of being observed, that God
replaced the wooden bands with iron bands; and he did this, because the
whole people had through their foolish and wicked consent approved of
the madness of that impostor, who had dared to profane that symbol, by
which God had testified that he did not speak in vain, but seriously by
the mouth of his servant.

<span id="xi.xii-p7"></span>A profitable doctrine may be hence elicited,
— that the ungodly by barking against God gain nothing, except that they
kindle more and more his wrath, and thus render double their own evils,
like a dog, who being ensnared obstinately strives to extricate himself
from the snare and to shake it off, and thus strangles himself. In like
manner the ungodly, the more they resist God, the heavier judgment they
procure for themselves. And, therefore, whenever God declares to us that
he is offended with our sins, we ought to take heed, lest while we seek
to break the wooden bands, he be preparing and forming for us iron
bands. Our condition will ever become worse, unless we humbly deprecate
God’s wrath as soon as it appears, and also patiently submit to his
scourges when he chastises us for our offenses. We ought then to bear
this in mind as to the wooden and iron bands.

<span id="xi.xii-p8"></span>He adds, *Upon the neck of all these
nations* The Jews, as it has been stated, hoped that Nebuchadnezzar
could be in a moment driven back beyond the Euphrates, and would be made
to surrender other countries which he had occupied; and all the
neighboring nations had conspired, and sent ambassadors here and there;
and when the Amorites, the Moabites, and other nations gave
encouragement to the Jews, they also in their turn animated others, so
that they might all make an assault on the Babylonians. As, then, such a
secret conspiracy gave courage to the Jews, this was the reason why the
Prophet spoke of other nations. He says, *And they shall serve him* He
had, indeed, already subdued all these countries; but the Prophet means,
that the domination of the king of Babylon would continue, though
Hananiah had said, that it would stand only for two years. Continuance,
then, is set in opposition to a short time, as though the Prophet had
said, “Let, indeed, the nations chafe and fret, but they shall abide
under the yoke of King Nebuchadnezzar, and in vain shall they attempt to
extricate themselves, for God has delivered them up to bondage.”

<span id="xi.xii-p9"></span>This servitude may at the same time be
explained in another way; the condition of these nations was bearable,
as long as Nebuchadnezzar ordered tribute to be paid; and when he sent
his prefects, the object was no other than to retain possession; but
when he found that they could not be otherwise subdued than by a harder
servitude, he began to exercise great tyranny, though he had been before
an endurable master. The same thing may be also said of the Jews; for we
know that they had been tributaries to the king of Babylon; and as he
had spared them, his humanity might have been deemed a sort of liberty;
but when he found that a hard wood could not be split but by a hard
wedge, he began more violently to oppress them. Then that servitude
began which is now mentioned. The Jews, therefore, began then really to
serve the king of Babylon, when he saw that they would not endure that
bearable yoke which he had laid on them, but in their obstinacy and
pride ever struggled against it.

<span id="xi.xii-p10"></span>The Prophet adds, *The beast of the field
have 1 also given him* By these words he indirectly upbraids the Jews,
as we have before reminded you, with their perverseness, because they
perceived not that it was the righteous judgment of God, that
Nebuchadnezzar imposed laws on them as a conqueror; for they would have
been defended by a celestial aid, as it is said by Moses, had they not
deprived themselves of it. (<span id="xi.xii-p10.1"></span>[De
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#025)<span id="xi.xii-p10.1"></span>..md)
As, then, they had long rejected the protection of God, hence it was
that Nebuchadnezzar invaded their country and conquered them. As they
now continued to bite and champ their bridle, the Prophet exposes their
madness; for they did not humble themselves under the mighty hand of
God, while wild beasts, void of reason and understanding, perceived that
it happened through God’s secret and wonderful providence, that
Nebuchadnezzar took possession of these lands. This, then, is the reason
why the Prophet expressly mentioned wild beasts, as though he said, that
the Jews were so refractory, that there was in them less reason,
humility, and solicitude than in lions, bears, and animals of the like
kind; for through the secret impulse of God the wild beasts submitted to
the authority of King Nebuchadnezzar, while the Jews became more and
more insolent. It was the highest madness not to acknowledge God’s
judgment, while this was done by wild and savage animals. It follows, —

<span id="xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#015.md)<span id="xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p2"></span>**15.** Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto
Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; The LORD hath not sent thee;
but thou makest this people to trust in a lie.

<span id="xi.xiii-p3"></span>**15.** Et dixit jeremias propheta
Chananiae prophetae, Audi agedum Chanania, non misit to Jehova, et tu
confidere fecisti populum hunc super mendacio (*vel,* in mendacio.)

<span id="xi.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p6"></span>There would not have been weight enough in
the plain teaching of Jeremiah had he not confronted his adversary, as
the case is at this day with us; when insolent and unprincipled men rise
up and dare to vomit forth their blasphemies, by which they darken and
degrade the doctrines of true religion, we are under the necessity to
contend with them, otherwise what we teach would be ineffectual; for the
minds of many, I mean the simple, are in suspense and fluctuate when
they see a great conflict between two contrary parties. It was therefore
necessary for the holy man to expose the lies of Hananiah, for he ever
vaunted himself and boasted of his own predictions.

<span id="xi.xiii-p7"></span>But what did Jeremiah say? *Jehovah hath
not sent thee* This refutation ought to be noticed whenever we contend
with Satan’s ministers and false teachers; for whatever they may
pretend, and with whatever masks they may cover their lies, this one
thing ought to be more than sufficient to put an end to their boastings,
— that they have not been sent by the Lord. Jeremiah might have
contended in a long speech with Hananiah, for he might have been made
sufficiently eloquent through the Holy Spirit suggesting and dictating
whatever was needful on the subject; but this concise brevity produced
much greater effect than if he had made great display and used many
words. Let this, then, be borne in mind, that wherever there is a
controversy about religion, we ought ever to ask whether he who speaks
has been sent by God; for whatever he may babble, though the most acute,
and though he may talk things which may fill with wonder the minds of
the simple, yet all this is nothing but smoke when his doctrine is not
from God. So also we ought at this day to deal in a brief manner with
those mercenary dogs of the Pope who bark against the pure truth of the
Gospel; we ought to be satisfied with this compendious answer, — that
God is not their master and teacher. But as our state now is different
from that of the ancient people, we must observe that sent by the Lord
is he only whose doctrine is according to the rule of the Law, and of
the Prophets, and of the Gospel. If, then, we desire to know whom the
Lord has sent, and whom he approves as his servants, let us come to the
Scripture, and let there be a thorough examination; he who speaks
according to the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, has a sure and an
indubitable evidence of his divine call; but he who cannot prove that he
draws what he advances from these fountains, whatever his pretences may
be, ought to be repudiated as a false prophet. We hence see what an
important instruction this passage contains.

<span id="xi.xiii-p8"></span>He then adds, *Thou hast made this people
to rely on falsehood* They pervert the meaning of the Prophet who thus
render the words, “Thou hast falsely rendered this people secure,” at
least they lessen by one half what the Prophet intended to express; for
not only is Hananiah condemned because he vainly and falsely pretended
God’s name, but the word <span id="xi.xiii-p8.1"></span>רקש*, shicor,*
is introduced, the very thing employed; as though he had said, “Thou
feedest this people with a vain hope which thou hast formed in thine own
brains; therefore thy fictions make this people to go astray.” Hence
Jeremiah not only accused this impostor that he by his fictions deceived
the people, but also that he brought forward his prophecies in God’s
name; and these removed their fear and gave them some hope, so that the
people became torpid in their security.

<span id="xi.xiii-p9"></span>Let us learn from this passage that we
ought especially to take heed when the ground of trust is the subject,
lest we rely on any empty or perishable thing, like wretched hypocrites
who devour shadows only, and afterwards find nothing solid in their own
fictions. But when we refer to trust, let there be something solid on
which we can safely rely; and we know that we cannot possibly be
disappointed, if we look to God for all things, if we recumb on his
mercy alone; for there is no rest nor peace for us anywhere else but in
Christ. Let us then retain this object of trust, and let it be our only
support. It follows, —

<span id="xi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p2"></span>**16.** Therefore thus saith the LORD;
Behold, I will cast thee from off the face of the earth: this year thou
shalt die, because thou hast taught rebellion against the LORD.

<span id="xi.xiv-p3"></span>**16.** Propterea sic dicit Jehova, Ecce ego
emitto to (*hoc est,* projicio) e superficie terrae hujus (*vel,*
terrae; potius indefinite accipitur hoc loco pro tota terra: <span
id="xi.xiv-p3.1"></span>הנשה *videtur quidem paulo post notare certum
annum; sed in voce* <span id="xi.xiv-p3.2"></span>המדאה *puto exprimi
speciialiter Judaem, imo potius totum orbem, atque hoc facile
colligitur, quia denunciat Jeremias sublatum iri Chananiam e medio, et
non fore amplius superstitem mundo:* morieris, *ergo,* hoc anno, quia
defectionem loquutus es contra Jehovam.

<span id="xi.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p6"></span>Here is added the punishment which confirmed
the prophecy of *Jeremiah;* for it was God’s purpose to have regard to
the ignorance of many who would have otherwise stumbled, or made their
ignorance a pretext, for they could not determine which of the two had
been sent by God, Hananiah or Jeremiah. It was then God’s design, in his
paternal indulgence, to stretch forth his hand to them, and also in an
especial manner to render inexcusable the unbelieving who had already
given themselves up, as it were, to the devil; for the greater part were
not moved by an event, so memorable;  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) for it follows immediately, —

<span id="xi.xv"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#017.md)<span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p2"></span>**17.** So Hananiah the prophet died the same
year in the seventh month.

<span id="xi.xv-p3"></span>**17.** Et mortuus est Chananias propheta
anno illo, mense septimo.

<span id="xi.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xv-p5"></span><span id="xi.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p6"></span>All those who had disregarded Jeremiah saw,
in a manner, before their eyes the judgment of God. No surer
confirmation could have been expected by the Jews, had they a particle
of understanding, than to see the impostor slain by the word of Jeremiah
alone; for he never touched him with a finger, nor caused him to be led
to punishment, though he deserved this; but he drove him out of the
world by the mere sound of his tongue. As, then, the word of the holy
Prophet had a celestial and divine power, as though God himself had
fulminated from heaven, or with an armed hand had slain that ungodly
man, how great was their blindness not to be moved! However, they were
not moved; hence some of the Rabbins, wishing to conceal, as their
manner is, the reproach of their own nation, imagine that the disciples
of Hananiah secretly took away his body, and that then the people knew
nothing of his death. But what need is there of such an evasion as this?
for Jeremiah says no such thing, but speaks of the event as well known;
it was indeed a sure testimony of his own call. It hence follows that it
was not unknown to the Jews; and yet the devil had so blinded the
greatest part of them, that they paid no more attention to the holy man
than before; on the contrary, they wholly disregarded those threatenings
of which he had been the witness and herald.

<span id="xi.xv-p7"></span>But how does this appear? the greatest part
of the people often rose up against him as though he was the most wicked
of men; he was accused as the betrayer of his country, and hardly
escaped, through the clemency of. a cruel king, when he was cast into a
dungeon as one half-dead. Since, then, the Jews thus pertinaciously
raged, we hence understand what the Prophet so often threatened them
with, even with the spirit of giddiness, and of fury, and of madness,
and of stupor, and of drunkenness. Moreover, it was needful for that
small portion which was not wholly irreclaimable to be restored to the
right way; and this was done by this manifest proof of Jeremiah’s call.
It was also necessary on the other hand that the unbelieving should be
more restrained, so that they might be condemned by their own
conscience, as Paul calls heretics self-condemned who were become fixed
in their own perverseness, and had willingly and designedly sold
themselves as slaves to the devil.

<span id="xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xi.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou dost
kindly and graciously invite us to repentance, we may be so touched by
the sense of thy wrath, that we may not by our perverseness increase
more and more the heinousness of thy vengeance against us, but lay hold
on the mercy that is offered to us, so that we may experience the
efficacy and fruit of thy truth for our salvation, through Christ our
Lord. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc19010.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="xi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span> Was he thus conscious, or given up to believe
a lie? Was he led by ambition to act a part, or a conscientious bigot
under the delusive influence of the evil spirit? In either case he was
the servant of Satan; and are there not many like him still in the
world? — *Ed*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc19010.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="xi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span> Gataker mentions various attempted solutions
of this difficulty, the one stated here; another, that eleven years, the
extent of his reign, being divided into three parts, the three first and
the beginning of the fourth might be deemed the beginning of his reign;
and a third, which he prefers, that the fourth year refers not to
Zedekiah, but to the Sabbatical year, it was the fourth in that cycle;
and it appears that according to chronologers the destruction of
Jerusalem happened on a Sabbatical year, the fourth in the eighteenth
jubilee. In this case the first year of Zedekiah being the fourth after
a Sabbath-year, his eleventh would correspond with the next period of
their kind, allowance being made as to the commencement of the year in
which he began to reign. Blayney adopts the second solution. Perhaps it
would be best to take “beginning,” as Scott does, as meaning the early
or former part of his reign.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc19010.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="xi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span> Hananiah was, as some think, a priest, for
Gibeon in the tribe of Benjamin was one of the cities allotted to the
priests; he was, no doubt, by profession, a prophet, he is so called
throughout by Jeremiah. There was among the Jews, from early times, an
order of men called prophets; they were not all endued with the gift of
prophecy, but were trained up in seminaries for the purpose, to be the
interpreters of the law and teachers of the people. See <span
id="xi.i-p16.1"></span>[1Sa 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020.md)<span
id="xi.i-p16.1"></span>; <span id="xi.i-p16.2"></span>[2 Kings
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#003.md), [2 Kings
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p16.2"></span>.
Hananiah was probably a prophet of this kind, and was on this account
called a prophet by Jeremiah; but he appears here in another character,
as a prophet endued with the spirit of prophecy. The scribes in the New
Testament seem to have been the teaching prophets of the Old.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc19010.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="xi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span> It is better rendered in our version,
“Within two full years;” literally, “in during (that is, in the space
of) two full years:” not at the end, but within two years. He took the
range of two years, without specifying any particular time — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc19010.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="xi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p9"></span> The tense here is not correctly given, the
words are, “For I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon; and so are
all the Versions. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc19010.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="xi.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p15"></span> More than twenty MSS. read <span
id="xi.vii-p15.1"></span>בער, “famine,” which may be considered as the
true reading, though all the Versions favor the other.

<span id="xi.vii-p16"></span>It is rather difficult to render this
verse. Calvin here repeats the word “prophesied,” which perhaps would be
the best construction. There is a <span id="xi.vii-p16.1"></span>ו
before “prophesied” in the text, which connects it with “have been.” I
would then render it as follows, —

<span id="xi.vii-p17"></span>**8.** The prophets, who have been before
me and before thee from the beginning, and have prophesied concerning
many lands and against mighty kingdoms, have prophesied of war, and of
famine, and of pestilence.

<span id="xi.vii-p18"></span>There were prophets who did not prophesy
“concerning many lands,” etc.; he refers not to these, but to those who
had done this. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc19010.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="xi.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p19"></span> It is not the past but the future tense is
used here, “The prophet, who shall prophesy of peace,” etc.; so the
versions, except the Vulg. In the former verse Jeremiah speaks of what
all the previous prophets had predicted, that is, of war, famine, and
pestilence, as to various kingdoms, and Judah no doubt as forming a part
of them. Now, in this verse he seems to say, that if a prophet should be
found speaking a different language, contrary to that of all former
prophets, the event alone, the fulfillment of his prophecy alone could
prove him a true prophet. He intimates that as Hananiah said things
contrary to all former prophets, he was not to be believed until what he
said came to pass. The verse may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xi.vii-p20"></span>**9.** The prophet who shall prophesy (or
who prophesies) of peace, when the word of that prophet shall come, he
will be known as the prophet whom Jehovah hath sent in truth.

<span id="xi.vii-p21"></span>The first word, “the prophet,” is a
nominative case absolute, many instances of which are found in Hebrew. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc19010.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="xi.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p12"></span> It appears that the true reading has been
retained here only by the Sept. when the verb “make” is given in the
first person; the difference is only the addition of <span
id="xi.xi-p12.1"></span>י; then the sentence would be, —

<span id="xi.xi-p13"></span>The yokes of wood thou hast broken, But I
have made for them yokes of iron.

<span id="xi.xi-p14"></span>Or if the vau be considered conversive, the
line would be, —

<span id="xi.xi-p15"></span>But I will make for them yokes of iron.

<span id="xi.xi-p16"></span>The exigency of a passage is one of our best
guides. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc19010.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="xi.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p7"></span> The last clause of this verse is not here
explained. Calvin’s version is, “revolt hast thou spoken against
Jehovah;” the Vulg., “against the Lord hast thou spoken;” the Syr.,
“iniquity hast thou spoken before the Lord;” and the Targ.,
“perverseness hast thou spoken before Jehovah.” Blayney’s version is,
“thou hast spoken prevarication concerning Jehovah.” Gataker renders it
the same with Calvin, and explains it thus, — “Because by thy lying
tales thou hast heartened and encouraged men to stand out against God’s
word, and against his admonitions and menaces by his prophets.” Henry
gives the same view.

<span id="xi.xiv-p8"></span>Blayney says that, <span
id="xi.xiv-p8.1"></span>הרס properly signifies declining or turning
aside from the straight path, the path of truth and right, and that here
it means the presumption of uttering as a revelation from God what a man
knew to be not so. The same phrase occurs in two other places, <span
id="xi.xiv-p8.2"></span>[De 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005.md)<span
id="xi.xiv-p8.2"></span>; <span id="xi.xiv-p8.3"></span>[Jer
29:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#032.md)<span id="xi.xiv-p8.3"></span>.
The <span id="xi.xiv-p8.4"></span>לא here before Jehovah is <span
id="xi.xiv-p8.5"></span>לע in several MSS.; but the prepositions are
sometimes the same. The rendering that would suit the three places would
be the following: — “For of turning aside hast thou spoken contrary to
Jehovah,” that is, to his expressed will or command. The meaning might
be thus conveyed, — “for thou hast encouraged disobedience contrary to
the express command of God.” — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](cc19011.md)
