[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joh)  [Next](rom.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Acts

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The first book I wrote, Theophilus,
concerned all that Jesus began both to do and to teach,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> until the day in which he was received up,
after he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit to the apostles
whom he had chosen.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To these he also showed himself alive after
he suffered, by many proofs, appearing to them over a period of forty
days, and speaking about God's Kingdom.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Being assembled together with them, he
commanded them, "Don't depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise
of the Father, which you heard from me.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For John indeed baptized in water, but you
will be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days from now."

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Therefore, when they had come together,
they asked him, "Lord, are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel?"

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He said to them, "It isn't for you to know
times or seasons which the Father has set within his own authority.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But you will receive power when the Holy
Spirit has come upon you. You will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in
all Judea and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth."

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> When he had said these things, as they were
looking, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> While they were looking steadfastly into
the sky as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white clothing,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> who also said, "You men of Galilee, why
do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus, who was received up from
you into the sky will come back in the same way as you saw him going
into the sky."

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then they returned to Jerusalem from the
mountain called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey
away.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> When they had come in, they went up into
the upper room, where they were staying; that is Peter, John, James,
Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus,
Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> All these with one accord continued
steadfastly in prayer and supplication, along with the women, and Mary
the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> In these days, Peter stood up in the
midst of the disciples (and the number of names was about one hundred
twenty), and said,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> "Brothers, it was necessary that this
Scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the
mouth of David concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he was numbered with us, and received
his portion in this ministry.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now this man obtained a field with the
reward for his wickedness, and falling headlong, his body burst open,
and all his intestines gushed out.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> It became known to everyone who lived in
Jerusalem that in their language that field was called 'Akeldama,' that
is, 'The field of blood.'

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For it is written in the book of Psalms,
'Let his habitation be made desolate. Let no one dwell therein;' and,
'Let another take his office.'

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> "Of the men therefore who have
accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among
us,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> beginning from the baptism of John, to
the day that he was received up from us, of these one must become a
witness with us of his resurrection."

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> They put forward two, Joseph called
Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> They prayed, and said, "You, Lord, who
know the hearts of all men, show which one of these two you have chosen

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> to take part in this ministry and
apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own
place."

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> They drew lots for them, and the lot fell
on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now when the day of Pentecost had come,
they were all with one accord in one place.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Suddenly there came from the sky a sound
like the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Tongues like fire appeared and were
distributed to them, and one sat on each of them.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> They were all filled with the Holy Spirit,
and began to speak with other languages, as the Spirit gave them the
ability to speak.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews,
devout men, from every nation under the sky.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> When this sound was heard, the multitude
came together, and were bewildered, because everyone heard them speaking
in his own language.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> They were all amazed and marveled, saying
to one another, "Behold, aren't all these who speak Galileans?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> How do we hear, everyone in our own native
language?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and people from
Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, the parts of
Libya around Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Cretans and Arabians: we hear them
speaking in our languages the mighty works of God!"

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> They were all amazed, and were perplexed,
saying one to another, "What does this mean?"

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Others, mocking, said, "They are filled
with new wine."

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But Peter, standing up with the eleven,
lifted up his voice, and spoke out to them, "You men of Judea, and all
you who dwell at Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my
words.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For these aren't drunken, as you suppose,
seeing it is only the third hour of the day.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But this is what has been spoken through
the prophet Joel:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> 'It will be in the last days, says God,
that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh. Your sons and your
daughters will prophesy. Your young men will see visions. Your old men
will dream dreams.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Yes, and on my servants and on my
handmaidens in those days, I will pour out my Spirit, and they will
prophesy.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> I will show wonders in the sky above, and
signs on the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and billows of smoke.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The sun will be turned into darkness, and
the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord
comes.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> It will be, that whoever will call on the
name of the Lord will be saved.'

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> "Men of Israel, hear these words! Jesus
of Nazareth, a man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders
and signs which God did by him in the midst of you, even as you
yourselves know,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> him, being delivered up by the determined
counsel and foreknowledge of God, you have taken by the hand of lawless
men, crucified and killed;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> whom God raised up, having freed him from
the agony of death, because it was not possible that he should be held
by it.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For David says concerning him, 'I saw the
Lord always before my face, For he is on my right hand, that I should
not be moved.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Therefore my heart was glad, and my
tongue rejoiced. Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope;

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> because you will not leave my soul in
Hades, neither will you allow your Holy One to see decay.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> You made known to me the ways of life.
You will make me full of gladness with your presence.'

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> "Brothers, I may tell you freely of the
patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with
us to this day.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing
that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body,
according to the flesh, he would raise up the Christ to sit on his
throne,

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> he foreseeing this spoke about the
resurrection of the Christ, that neither was his soul left in Hades, nor
did his flesh see decay.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> This Jesus God raised up, to which we all
are witnesses.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Being therefore exalted by the right hand
of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy
Spirit, he has poured out this, which you now see and hear.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> For David didn't ascend into the heavens,
but he says himself, 'The Lord said to my Lord, "Sit by my right hand,

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> until I make your enemies a footstool for
your feet."'

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> "Let all the house of Israel therefore
know certainly that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus
whom you crucified."

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Now when they heard this, they were cut
to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, "Brothers,
what shall we do?"

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> Peter said to them, "Repent, and be
baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the
forgiveness of sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> For the promise is to you, and to your
children, and to all who are far off, even as many as the Lord our God
will call to himself."

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> With many other words he testified, and
exhorted them, saying, "Save yourselves from this crooked generation!"

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> Then those who gladly received his word
were baptized. There were added that day about three thousand souls.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> They continued steadfastly in the
apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and prayer.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> Fear came on every soul, and many wonders
and signs were done through the apostles.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> All who believed were together, and had
all things in common.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> They sold their possessions and goods,
and distributed them to all, according as anyone had need.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> Day by day, continuing steadfastly with
one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they took their
food with gladness and singleness of heart,

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> praising God, and having favor with all
the people. The Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were
being saved.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Peter and John were going up into the
temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> A certain man who was lame from his
mother's womb was being carried, whom they laid daily at the door of the
temple which is called Beautiful, to ask gifts for the needy of those
who entered into the temple.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Seeing Peter and John about to go into the
temple, he asked to receive gifts for the needy.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Peter, fastening his eyes on him, with
John, said, "Look at us."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He listened to them, expecting to receive
something from them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Peter said, "Silver and gold have I
none, but what I have, that I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, get up and walk!"

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He took him by the right hand, and raised
him up. Immediately his feet and his ankle bones received strength.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Leaping up, he stood, and began to walk. He
entered with them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> All the people saw him walking and praising
God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> They recognized him, that it was he who
used to sit begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the
temple. They were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened
to him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> As the lame man who was healed held on to
Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is
called Solomon's, greatly wondering.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> When Peter saw it, he responded to the
people, "You men of Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you
fasten your eyes on us, as though by our own power or godliness we had
made him walk?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the
God of our fathers, has glorified his Servant Jesus, whom you delivered
up, and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had determined to
release him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But you denied the Holy and Righteous
One, and asked for a murderer to be granted to you,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and killed the Prince of life, whom God
raised from the dead, to which we are witnesses.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> By faith in his name, his name has made
this man strong, whom you see and know. Yes, the faith which is through
him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> "Now, brothers, I know that you did this
in ignorance, as did also your rulers.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But the things which God announced by the
mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> "Repent therefore, and turn again, that
your sins may be blotted out, so that there may come times of refreshing
from the presence of the Lord,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> and that he may send Christ Jesus, who
was ordained for you before,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> whom heaven must receive until the times
of restoration of all things, which God spoke long ago by the mouth of
his holy prophets.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> For Moses indeed said to the fathers,
'The Lord God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers,
like me. You shall listen to him in all things whatever he says to you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> It will be, that every soul that will not
listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among the people.'

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel and
those who followed after, as many as have spoken, they also told of
these days.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> You are the children of the prophets, and
of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, 'In
your seed will all the families of the earth be blessed.'

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> God, having raised up his servant, Jesus,
sent him to you first, to bless you, in turning away everyone of you
from your wickedness."

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> As they spoke to the people, the priests
and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> being upset because they taught the people
and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> They laid hands on them, and put them in
custody until the next day, for it was now evening.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But many of those who heard the word
believed, and the number of the men came to be about five thousand.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> It happened in the morning, that their
rulers, elders, and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Annas the high priest was there, with
Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were relatives of the high
priest.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> When they had stood them in the middle of
them, they inquired, "By what power, or in what name, have you done
this?"

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit,
said to them, "You rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> if we are examined today concerning a good
deed done to a crippled man, by what means this man has been healed,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> be it known to you all, and to all the
people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you
crucified, whom God raised from the dead, in him does this man stand
here before you whole.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> He is 'the stone which was regarded as
worthless by you, the builders, which has become the head of the
corner.'

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> There is salvation in none other, for
neither is there any other name under heaven, that is given among men,
by which we must be saved!"

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now when they saw the boldness of Peter
and John, and had perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men,
they marveled. They recognized that they had been with Jesus.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Seeing the man who was healed standing
with them, they could say nothing against it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But when they had commanded them to go
aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> saying, "What shall we do to these men?
Because indeed a notable miracle has been done through them, as can be
plainly seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we can't deny it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But so that this spreads no further among
the people, let's threaten them, that from now on they don't speak to
anyone in this name."

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> They called them, and commanded them not
to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But Peter and John answered them,
"Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to
God, judge for yourselves,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> for we can't help telling the things
which we saw and heard."

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> When they had further threatened them,
they let them go, finding no way to punish them, because of the people;
for everyone glorified God for that which was done.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For the man on whom this miracle of
healing was performed was more than forty years old.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Being let go, they came to their own
company, and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said
to them.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> When they heard it, they lifted up their
voice to God with one accord, and said, "O Lord, you are God, who made
the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them;

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> who by the mouth of your servant, David,
said, 'Why do the nations rage, and the peoples plot a vain thing?

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> The kings of the earth take a stand, and
the rulers take council together, against the Lord, and against his
Christ.'

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> "For truly, in this city against your
holy servant, Jesus, whom you anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate,
with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> to do whatever your hand and your council
foreordained to happen.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Now, Lord, look at their threats, and
grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> while you stretch out your hand to heal;
and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy
Servant Jesus."

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> When they had prayed, the place was
shaken where they were gathered together. They were all filled with the
Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> The multitude of those who believed were
of one heart and soul. Not one of them claimed that anything of the
things which he possessed was his own, but they had all things in
common.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> With great power, the apostles gave their
testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Great grace was on them
all.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> For neither was there among them any who
lacked, for as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them, and
brought the proceeds of the things that were sold,

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> and laid them at the apostles' feet, and
distribution was made to each, according as anyone had need.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed
Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, Son of Encouragement), a Levite,
a man of Cyprus by race,

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> having a field, sold it, and brought the
money and laid it at the apostles' feet.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> But a certain man named Ananias, with
Sapphira, his wife, sold a possession,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> and kept back part of the price, his wife
also being aware of it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the
apostles' feet.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But Peter said, "Ananias, why has Satan
filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of
the price of the land?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> While you kept it, didn't it remain your
own? After it was sold, wasn't it in your power? How is it that you have
conceived this thing in your heart? You haven't lied to men, but to
God."

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and
died. Great fear came on all who heard these things.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The young men arose and wrapped him up, and
they carried him out and buried him.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> About three hours later, his wife, not
knowing what had happened, came in.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Peter answered her, "Tell me whether you
sold the land for so much." She said, "Yes, for so much."

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> But Peter asked her, "How is it that you
have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet
of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will
carry you out."

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> She fell down immediately at his feet,
and died. The young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her
out and buried her by her husband.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Great fear came on the whole assembly,
and on all who heard these things.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> By the hands of the apostles many signs
and wonders were done among the people. They were all with one accord in
Solomon's porch.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> None of the rest dared to join them,
however the people honored them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> More believers were added to the Lord,
multitudes of both men and women.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> They even carried out the sick into the
streets, and laid them on cots and mattresses, so that as Peter came by,
at the least his shadow might overshadow some of them.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Multitudes also came together from the
cities around Jerusalem, bringing sick people, and those who were
tormented by unclean spirits: and they were all healed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But the high priest rose up, and all
those who were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they
were filled with jealousy,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> and laid hands on the apostles, and put
them in public custody.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But an angel of the Lord opened the
prison doors by night, and brought them out, and said,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> "Go stand and speak in the temple to the
people all the words of this life."

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> When they heard this, they entered into
the temple about daybreak, and taught. But the high priest came, and
those who were with him, and called the council together, and all the
senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them
brought.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But the officers who came didn't find
them in the prison. They returned and reported,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> "We found the prison shut and locked, and
the guards standing before the doors, but when we opened them, we found
no one inside!"

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Now when the high priest, the captain of
the temple, and the chief priests heard these words, they were very
perplexed about them and what might become of this.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> One came and told them, "Behold, the men
whom you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the
people."

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Then the captain went with the officers,
and brought them without violence, for they were afraid that the people
might stone them.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> When they had brought them, they set them
before the council. The high priest questioned them,

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> saying, "Didn't we strictly command you
not to teach in this name? Behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your
teaching, and intend to bring this man's blood on us."

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> But Peter and the apostles answered, "We
must obey God rather than men.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
whom you killed, hanging him on a tree.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> God exalted him with his right hand to be
a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of
sins.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> We are His witnesses of these things; and
so also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him."

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> But they, when they heard this, were cut
to the heart, and determined to kill them.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But one stood up in the council, a
Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honored by all the
people, and commanded to put the apostles out for a little while.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> He said to them, "You men of Israel, be
careful concerning these men, what you are about to do.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> For before these days Theudas rose up,
making himself out to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed
him, were dispersed, and came to nothing.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> After this man, Judas of Galilee rose up
in the days of the enrollment, and drew away some people after him. He
also perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered abroad.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> Now I tell you, withdraw from these men,
and leave them alone. For if this counsel or this work is of men, it
will be overthrown.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But if it is of God, you will not be able
to overthrow it, and you would be found even to be fighting against
God!"

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> They agreed with him. Summoning the
apostles, they beat them and commanded them not to speak in the name of
Jesus, and let them go.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> They therefore departed from the presence
of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
dishonor for Jesus' name.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> Every day, in the temple and at home,
they never stopped teaching and preaching Jesus, the Christ.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now in those days, when the number of the
disciples was multiplying, a complaint arose from the Hellenists against
the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily service.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The twelve summoned the multitude of the
disciples and said, "It is not appropriate for us to forsake the word of
God and serve tables.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Therefore select from among you, brothers,
seven men of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we
may appoint over this business.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But we will continue steadfastly in prayer
and in the ministry of the word."

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> These words pleased the whole multitude.
They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip,
Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of
Antioch;

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> whom they set before the apostles. When
they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> The word of God increased and the number of
the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly. A great company of
the priests were obedient to the faith.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Stephen, full of faith and power, performed
great wonders and signs among the people.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But some of those who were of the synagogue
called "The Libertines," and of the Cyrenians, of the Alexandrians, and
of those of Cilicia and Asia arose, disputing with Stephen.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> They weren't able to withstand the wisdom
and the Spirit by which he spoke.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then they secretly induced men to say,
"We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God."

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> They stirred up the people, the elders,
and the scribes, and came against him and seized him, and brought him in
to the council,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> and set up false witnesses who said,
"This man never stops speaking blasphemous words against this holy place
and the law.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For we have heard him say that this Jesus
of Nazareth will destroy this place, and will change the customs which
Moses delivered to us."

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> All who sat in the council, fastening
their eyes on him, saw his face like it was the face of an angel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The high priest said, "Are these things
so?"

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> He said, "Brothers and fathers, listen. The
God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia,
before he lived in Haran,

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and said to him, 'Get out of your land, and
from your relatives, and come into a land which I will show you.'

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then he came out of the land of the
Chaldaeans, and lived in Haran. From there, when his father was dead,
God moved him into this land, where you are now living.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> He gave him no inheritance in it, no, not
so much as to set his foot on. He promised that he would give it to him
for a possession, and to his seed after him, when he still had no child.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> God spoke in this way: that his seed would
live as aliens in a strange land, and that they would be enslaved and
mistreated for four hundred years.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> 'I will judge the nation to which they will
be in bondage,' said God, 'and after that will they come out, and serve
me in this place.'

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> He gave him the covenant of circumcision.
So Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth
day. Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of
the twelve patriarchs.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> "The patriarchs, moved with jealousy
against Joseph, sold him into Egypt. God was with him,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and delivered him out of all his
afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of
Egypt. He made him governor over Egypt and all his house.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now a famine came over all the land of
Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction. Our fathers found no food.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But when Jacob heard that there was grain
in Egypt, he sent out our fathers the first time.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> On the second time Joseph was made known
to his brothers, and Joseph's race was revealed to Pharaoh.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Joseph sent, and summoned Jacob, his
father, and all his relatives, seventy-five souls.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died,
himself and our fathers,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> and they were brought back to Shechem,
and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver from the
children of Hamor of Shechem.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> "But as the time of the promise came
close which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in
Egypt,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> until there arose a different king, who
didn't know Joseph.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The same took advantage of our race, and
mistreated our fathers, and forced them to throw out their babies, so
that they wouldn't stay alive.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> At that time Moses was born, and was
exceedingly handsome. He was nourished three months in his father's
house.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> When he was thrown out, Pharaoh's
daughter took him up, and reared him as her own son.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians. He was mighty in his words and works.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But when he was forty years old, it came
into his heart to visit his brothers, the children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Seeing one of them suffer wrong, he
defended him, and avenged him who was oppressed, striking the Egyptian.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> He supposed that his brothers understood
that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance; but they didn't
understand.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> "The day following, he appeared to them
as they fought, and urged them to be at peace again, saying, 'Sirs, you
are brothers. Why do you wrong one another?'

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But he who did his neighbor wrong pushed
him away, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Do you want to kill me, as you killed the
Egyptian yesterday?'

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Moses fled at this saying, and became a
stranger in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> "When forty years were fulfilled, an
angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a
flame of fire in a bush.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> When Moses saw it, he wondered at the
sight. As he came close to see, a voice of the Lord came to him,

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> 'I am the God of your fathers, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.' Moses trembled, and
dared not look.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> The Lord said to him, 'Take your sandals
off of your feet, for the place where you stand is holy ground.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> I have surely seen the affliction of my
people that is in Egypt, and have heard their groaning. I have come down
to deliver them. Now come, I will send you into Egypt.'

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> "This Moses, whom they refused, saying,
'Who made you a ruler and a judge?'--God has sent him as both a ruler
and a deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the
bush.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> This man led them out, having worked
wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness for
forty years.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> This is that Moses, who said to the
children of Israel, 'The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you
from among your brothers, like me.'

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> This is he who was in the assembly in the
wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our
fathers, who received living oracles to give to us,

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> to whom our fathers wouldn't be obedient,
but rejected him, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt,

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> saying to Aaron, 'Make us gods that will
go before us, for as for this Moses, who led us out of the land of
Egypt, we don't know what has become of him.'

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> They made a calf in those days, and
brought a sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their
hands.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> But God turned, and gave them up to serve
the army of the sky, as it is written in the book of the prophets, 'Did
you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices forty years in the
wilderness, O house of Israel?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> You took up the tabernacle of Moloch, the
star of your god Rephan, the figures which you made to worship. I will
carry you away beyond Babylon.'

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> "Our fathers had the tabernacle of the
testimony in the wilderness, even as he who spoke to Moses commanded him
to make it according to the pattern that he had seen;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> which also our fathers, in their turn,
brought in with Joshua when they entered into the possession of the
nations, whom God drove out before the face of our fathers, to the days
of David,

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> who found favor in the sight of God, and
asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> But Solomon built him a house.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> However, the Most High doesn't dwell in
temples made with hands, as the prophet says,

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> 'heaven is my throne, and the earth a
footstool for my feet. What kind of house will you build me?' says the
Lord; 'or what is the place of my rest?

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Didn't my hand make all these things?'

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> "You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did,
so you do.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> Which of the prophets didn't your fathers
persecute? They killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous
One, of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers.

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> You received the law as it was ordained
by angels, and didn't keep it!"

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> Now when they heard these things, they
were cut to the heart, and they gnashed at him with their teeth.

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> But he, being full of the Holy Spirit,
looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God,

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> and said, "Behold, I see the heavens
opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!"

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> But they cried out with a loud voice, and
stopped their ears, and rushed at him with one accord.

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> They threw him out of the city, and
stoned him. The witnesses placed their garments at the feet of a young
man named Saul.

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> They stoned Stephen as he called out,
saying, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!"

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> He kneeled down, and cried with a loud
voice, "Lord, don't hold this sin against them!" When he had said this,
he fell asleep.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Saul was consenting to his death. A great
persecution arose against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that
day. They were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and
Samaria, except for the apostles.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Devout men buried Stephen, and lamented
greatly over him.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering
into every house, and dragged both men and women off to prison.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Therefore those who were scattered abroad
went around preaching the word.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Philip went down to the city of Samaria,
and proclaimed to them the Christ.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> The multitudes listened with one accord to
the things that were spoken by Philip, when they heard and saw the signs
which he did.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For unclean spirits came out of many of
those who had them. They came out, crying with a loud voice. Many who
had been paralyzed and lame were healed.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> There was great joy in that city.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But there was a certain man, Simon by name,
who used to practice sorcery in the city, and amazed the people of
Samaria, making himself out to be some great one,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> to whom they all listened, from the least
to the greatest, saying, "This man is that great power of God."

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> They listened to him, because for a long
time he had amazed them with his sorceries.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But when they believed Philip preaching
good news concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ,
they were baptized, both men and women.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Simon himself also believed. Being
baptized, he continued with Philip. Seeing signs and great miracles
occurring, he was amazed.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Now when the apostles who were at
Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent
Peter and John to them,

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> who, when they had come down, prayed for
them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit;

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> for as yet he had fallen on none of them.
They had only been baptized in the name of Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then they laid their hands on them, and
they received the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit
was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them
money,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> saying, "Give me also this power, that
whoever I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit."

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> But Peter said to him, "May your silver
perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God
with money!

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> You have neither part nor lot in this
matter, for your heart isn't right before God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Repent therefore of this, your
wickedness, and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may be
forgiven you.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> For I see that you are in the gall of
bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity."

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Simon answered, "Pray for me to the Lord,
that none of the things which you have spoken happen to me."

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They therefore, when they had testified
and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the
Good News to many villages of the Samaritans.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> But an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip,
saying, "Arise, and go toward the south to the way that goes down from
Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert."

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> He arose and went; and behold, there was
a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of
the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem
to worship.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> He was returning and sitting in his
chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> The Spirit said to Philip, "Go near, and
join yourself to this chariot."

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Philip ran to him, and heard him reading
Isaiah the prophet, and said, "Do you understand what you are reading?"

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> He said, "How can I, unless someone
explains it to me?" He begged Philip to come up and sit with him.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now the passage of the Scripture which he
was reading was this, "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter. As a lamb
before his shearer is silent, so he doesn't open his mouth.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> In his humiliation, his judgment was
taken away. Who will declare His generation? For his life is taken from
the earth."

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> The eunuch answered Philip, "Who is the
prophet talking about? About himself, or about someone else?"

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Philip opened his mouth, and beginning
from this Scripture, preached to him Jesus.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> As they went on the way, they came to
some water, and the eunuch said, "Behold, here is water. What is keeping
me from being baptized?"

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> He commanded the chariot to stand still,
and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and
he baptized him.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> When they came up out of the water, the
Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the eunuch didn't see him any
more, for he went on his way rejoicing.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But Philip was found at Azotus. Passing
through, he preached the Good News to all the cities, until he came to
Caesarea.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> But Saul, still breathing threats and
slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> and asked for letters from him to the
synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any who were of the Way,
whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> As he traveled, it happened that he got
close to Damascus, and suddenly a light from the sky shone around him.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> He fell on the earth, and heard a voice
saying to him, "Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?"

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> He said, "Who are you, Lord?" The Lord
said, "I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But rise up, and enter into the city, and
you will be told what you must do."

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The men who traveled with him stood
speechless, hearing the sound, but seeing no one.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Saul arose from the ground, and when his
eyes were opened, he saw no one. They led him by the hand, and brought
him into Damascus.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> He was without sight for three days, and
neither ate nor drank.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Now there was a certain disciple at
Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, "Ananias!" He
said, "Behold, it's me, Lord."

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> The Lord said to him, "Arise, and go to
the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judah
for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus. For behold, he is praying,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> and in a vision he has seen a man named
Ananias coming in, and laying his hands on him, that he might receive
his sight."

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But Ananias answered, "Lord, I have heard
from many about this man, how much evil he did to your saints at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Here he has authority from the chief
priests to bind all who call on your name."

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> But the Lord said to him, "Go your way,
for he is my chosen vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings,
and the children of Israel.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For I will show him how many things he
must suffer for my name's sake."

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Ananias departed, and entered into the
house. Laying his hands on him, he said, "Brother Saul, the Lord, who
appeared to you on the road by which you came, has sent me, that you may
receive your sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit."

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Immediately something like scales fell
from his eyes, and he received his sight. He arose and was baptized.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> He took food and was strengthened. Saul
stayed several days with the disciples who were at Damascus.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Immediately in the synagogues he
proclaimed the Christ, that he is the Son of God.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> All who heard him were amazed, and said,
"Isn't this he who in Jerusalem made havoc of those who called on this
name? And he had come here intending to bring them bound before the
chief priests!"

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Saul increased more in strength, and
confounded the Jews who lived at Damascus, proving that this is the
Christ.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> When many days were fulfilled, the Jews
conspired together to kill him,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> but their plot became known to Saul. They
watched the gates both day and night that they might kill him,

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> but his disciples took him by night, and
let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> When Saul had come to Jerusalem, he tried
to join himself to the disciples; but they were all afraid of him, not
believing that he was a disciple.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Barnabas took him, and brought him to
the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord in the way,
and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached
boldly in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> He was with them entering into Jerusalem,

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> preaching boldly in the name of the Lord
Jesus. He spoke and disputed against the Hellenists, but they were
seeking to kill him.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> When the brothers knew it, they brought
him down to Caesarea, and sent him off to Tarsus.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> So the assemblies throughout all Judea
and Galilee and Samaria had peace, and were built up. They were
multiplied, walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the
Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> It happened, as Peter went throughout all
those parts, he came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> There he found a certain man named
Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years, because he was
paralyzed.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> Peter said to him, "Aeneas, Jesus Christ
heals you. Get up and make your bed!" Immediately he arose.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw
him, and they turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple
named Tabitha, which when translated, means Dorcas. This woman was full
of good works and acts of mercy which she did.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> It happened in those days that she fell
sick, and died. When they had washed her, they laid her in an upper
room.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples,
hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, imploring him not to
delay in coming to them.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> Peter got up and went with them. When he
had come, they brought him into the upper room. All the widows stood by
him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas had made
while she was with them.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> Peter put them all out, and kneeled down
and prayed. Turning to the body, he said, "Tabitha, get up!" She opened
her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> He gave her his hand, and raised her up.
Calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And it became known throughout all Joppa,
and many believed in the Lord.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> It happened, that he stayed many days in
Joppa with one Simon, a tanner.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now there was a certain man in Caesarea,
Cornelius by name, a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> a devout man, and one who feared God with
all his house, who gave gifts for the needy generously to the people,
and always prayed to God.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> At about the ninth hour of the day, he
clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him, and saying to
him, "Cornelius!"

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> He, fastening his eyes on him, and being
frightened, said, "What is it, Lord?" He said to him, "Your prayers and
your gifts to the needy have gone up for a memorial before God.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Now send men to Joppa, and get Simon, who
is surnamed Peter.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> He lodges with one Simon, a tanner, whose
house is by the seaside."

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> When the angel who spoke to him had
departed, Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout
soldier of those who waited on him continually.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Having explained everything to them, he
sent them to Joppa.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Now on the next day as they were on their
journey, and got close to the city, Peter went up on the housetop to
pray at about noon.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> He became hungry and desired to eat,
but while they were preparing, he fell into a trance.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> He saw heaven opened and a certain
container descending to him, like a great sheet let down by four corners
on the earth,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> in which were all kinds of four-footed
animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds of the sky.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> A voice came to him, "Rise, Peter, kill
and eat!"

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But Peter said, "Not so, Lord; for I
have never eaten anything that is common or unclean."

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> A voice came to him again the second
time, "What God has cleansed, you must not call unclean."

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> This was done three times, and
immediately the vessel was received up into heaven.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Now while Peter was very perplexed in
himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold, the men
who were sent by Cornelius, having made inquiry for Simon's house, stood
before the gate,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and called and asked whether Simon, who
was surnamed Peter, was lodging there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> While Peter was pondering the vision,
the Spirit said to him, "Behold, three men seek you.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But arise, get down, and go with them,
doubting nothing; for I have sent them."

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Peter went down to the men, and said,
"Behold, I am he whom you seek. Why have you come?"

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> They said, "Cornelius, a centurion, a
righteous man and one who fears God, and well spoken of by all the
nation of the Jews, was directed by a holy angel to invite you to his
house, and to listen to what you say."

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> So he called them in and lodged them.
On the next day Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the
brothers from Joppa accompanied him.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> On the next day they entered into
Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his
relatives and his near friends.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> When it happened that Peter entered,
Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and worshiped him.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But Peter raised him up, saying, "Stand
up! I myself am also a man."

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> As he talked with him, he went in and
found many gathered together.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> He said to them, "You yourselves know
how it is an unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself or
come to one of another nation, but God has shown me that I shouldn't
call any man unholy or unclean.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Therefore also I came without complaint
when I was sent for. I ask therefore, why did you send for me?"

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Cornelius said, "Four days ago, I was
fasting until this hour, and at the ninth hour, I prayed in my house,
and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing,

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> and said, 'Cornelius, your prayer is
heard, and your gifts to the needy are remembered in the sight of God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Send therefore to Joppa, and summon
Simon, who is surnamed Peter. He lodges in the house of Simon a tanner,
by the seaside. When he comes, he will speak to you.'

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Therefore I sent to you at once, and it
was good of you to come. Now therefore we are all here present in the
sight of God to hear all things that have been commanded you by God."

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Peter opened his mouth and said, "Truly
I perceive that God doesn't show favoritism;

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> but in every nation he who fears him
and works righteousness is acceptable to him.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> The word which he sent to the children
of Israel, preaching good news of peace by Jesus Christ--he is Lord of
all--

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> you yourselves know what happened,
which was proclaimed throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after
the baptism which John preached;

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> even Jesus of Nazareth, how God
anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about doing
good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for God was with
him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> We are witnesses of everything he did
both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they also
killed, hanging him on a tree.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> God raised him up the third day, and
gave him to be revealed,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> not to all the people, but to witnesses
who were chosen before by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after
he rose from the dead.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> He commanded us to preach to the people
and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as the Judge of
the living and the dead.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> All the prophets testify about him,
that through his name everyone who believes in him will receive
remission of sins."

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> While Peter was still speaking these
words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> They of the circumcision who believed
were amazed, as many as came with Peter, because the gift of the Holy
Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> For they heard them speaking in other
languages and magnifying God. Then Peter answered,

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> "Can any man forbid the water, that
these who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we should not be
baptized?"

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> He commanded them to be baptized in the
name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay some days.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now the apostles and the brothers who
were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> When Peter had come up to Jerusalem,
those who were of the circumcision contended with him,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> saying, "You went in to uncircumcised
men, and ate with them!"

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But Peter began, and explained to them in
order, saying,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> "I was in the city of Joppa praying, and
in a trance I saw a vision: a certain container descending, like it was
a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners. It came as far as
me.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> When I had looked intently at it, I
considered, and saw the four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals,
creeping things, and birds of the sky.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> I also heard a voice saying to me, 'Rise,
Peter, kill and eat!'

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But I said, 'Not so, Lord, for nothing
unholy or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.'

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But a voice answered me the second time
out of heaven, 'What God has cleansed, don't you call unclean.'

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> This was done three times, and all were
drawn up again into heaven.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Behold, immediately three men stood
before the house where I was, having been sent from Caesarea to me.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> The Spirit told me to go with them,
without discriminating. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we
entered into the man's house.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> He told us how he had seen the angel
standing in his house, and saying to him, 'Send to Joppa, and get Simon,
whose surname is Peter,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> who will speak to you words by which
you will be saved, you and all your house.'

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit
fell on them, even as on us at the beginning.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> I remembered the word of the Lord, how
he said, 'John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the
Holy Spirit.'

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> If then God gave to them the same gift
as us, when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I
could withstand God?"

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> When they heard these things, they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying, "Then God has also granted to
the Gentiles repentance to life!"

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> They therefore who were scattered
abroad by the oppression that arose about Stephen traveled as far as
Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except to
Jews only.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But there were some of them, men of
Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they had come to Antioch, spoke to the
Hellenists, preaching the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> The hand of the Lord was with them, and
a great number believed and turned to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> The report concerning them came to the
ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem. They sent out Barnabas to
go as far as Antioch,

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> who, when he had come, and had seen the
grace of God, was glad. He exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart
they should remain near to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For he was a good man, and full of the
Holy Spirit and of faith, and many people were added to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for
Saul.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> When he had found him, he brought him
to Antioch. It happened, that for a whole year they were gathered
together with the assembly, and taught many people. The disciples were
first called Christians in Antioch.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Now in these days, prophets came down
from Jerusalem to Antioch.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> One of them named Agabus stood up, and
indicated by the Spirit that there should be a great famine all over the
world, which also happened in the days of Claudius.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> As any of the disciples had plenty,
each determined to send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea;

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> which they also did, sending it to the
elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now about that time, King Herod stretched
out his hands to oppress some of the assembly.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> He killed James, the brother of John,
with the sword.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> When he saw that it pleased the Jews, he
proceeded to seize Peter also. This was during the days of unleavened
bread.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> When he had arrested him, he put him in
prison, and delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard
him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Peter therefore was kept in the prison,
but constant prayer was made by the assembly to God for him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The same night when Herod was about to
bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two
chains. Guards in front of the door kept the prison.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by
him, and a light shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side, and
woke him up, saying, "Stand up quickly!" His chains fell off from his
hands.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> The angel said to him, "Get dressed and
put on your sandals." He did so. He said to him, "Put on your cloak, and
follow me."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And he went out and followed him. He
didn't know that what was being done by the angel was real, but thought
he saw a vision.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> When they were past the first and the
second guard, they came to the iron gate that leads into the city, which
opened to them by itself. They went out, and went down one street, and
immediately the angel departed from him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> When Peter had come to himself, he
said, "Now I truly know that the Lord has sent out his angel and
delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from everything the Jewish
people were expecting."

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Thinking about that, he came to the
house of Mary, the mother of John whose surname was Mark, where many
were gathered together and were praying.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> When Peter knocked at the door of the
gate, a maid named Rhoda came to answer.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> When she recognized Peter's voice, she
didn't open the gate for joy, but ran in, and reported that Peter was
standing in front of the gate.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> They said to her, "You are crazy!" But
she insisted that it was so. They said, "It is his angel."

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But Peter continued knocking. When they
had opened, they saw him, and were amazed.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But he, beckoning to them with his hand
to be silent, declared to them how the Lord had brought him out of the
prison. He said, "Tell these things to James, and to the brothers." Then
he departed, and went to another place.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Now as soon as it was day, there was no
small stir among the soldiers about what had become of Peter.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> When Herod had sought for him, and
didn't find him, he examined the guards, and commanded that they should
be put to death. He went down from Judea to Caesarea, and stayed there.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now Herod was very angry with the
people of Tyre and Sidon. They came with one accord to him, and, having
made Blastus, the king's personal aide, their friend, they asked for
peace, because their country depended on the king's country for food.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> On an appointed day, Herod dressed
himself in royal clothing, sat on the throne, and gave a speech to them.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> The people shouted, "The voice of a
god, and not of a man!"

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Immediately an angel of the Lord struck
him, because he didn't give God the glory, and he was eaten by worms and
died.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the word of God grew and
multiplied.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Barnabas and Saul returned to
Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their service, also taking with them
John whose surname was Mark.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now in the assembly that was at Antioch
there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called
Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen the foster brother of Herod the
tetrarch, and Saul.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> As they served the Lord and fasted, the
Holy Spirit said, "Separate Barnabas and Saul for me, for the work to
which I have called them."

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Then, when they had fasted and prayed and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit,
they went down to Seleucia. From there they sailed to Cyprus.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> When they were at Salamis, they
proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. They had also John
as their attendant.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> When they had gone through the island to
Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose
name was Bar Jesus,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> who was with the proconsul, Sergius
Paulus, a man of understanding. This man summoned Barnabas and Saul, and
sought to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his
name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn aside the
proconsul from the faith.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> But Saul, who is also called Paul, filled
with the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him,

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> and said, "Full of all deceit and all
cunning, you son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness, will you
not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Now, behold, the hand of the Lord is on
you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sun for a season!"
Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him. He went around seeking
someone to lead him by the hand.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then the proconsul, when he saw what
was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Now Paul and his company set sail from
Paphos, and came to Perga in Pamphylia. John departed from them and
returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But they, passing on from Perga, came
to Antioch of Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day,
and sat down.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> After the reading of the law and the
prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, "Brothers,
if you have any word of exhortation for the people, speak."

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Paul stood up, and beckoning with his
hand said, "Men of Israel, and you who fear God, listen.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The God of this people chose our
fathers, and exalted the people when they stayed as aliens in the land
of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm, he led them out of it.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> For a period of about forty years he
put up with them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> When he had destroyed seven nations in
the land of Canaan, he gave them their land for an inheritance, for
about four hundred fifty years.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> After these things he gave them judges
until Samuel the prophet.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Afterward they asked for a king, and
God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin,
for forty years.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> When he had removed him, he raised up
David to be their king, to whom he also testified, 'I have found David
the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.'

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> From this man's seed, God has brought
salvation to Israel according to his promise,

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> before his coming, when John had first
preached the baptism of repentance to Israel.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> As John was fulfilling his course, he
said, 'What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, one comes
after me the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.'

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Brothers, children of the stock of
Abraham, and those among you who fear God, the word of this salvation is
sent out to you.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and
their rulers, because they didn't know him, nor the voices of the
prophets which are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Though they found no cause for death,
they still asked Pilate to have him killed.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> When they had fulfilled all things that
were written about him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him
in a tomb.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> But God raised him from the dead,

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> and he was seen for many days by those
who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to
the people.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> We bring you good news of the promise
made to the fathers,

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> that God has fulfilled the same to us,
their children, in that he raised up Jesus. As it is also written in the
second psalm, 'You are my Son. Today I have become your father.'

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> "Concerning that he raised him up from
the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he has spoken thus: 'I
will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.'

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Therefore he says also in another
psalm, 'You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.'

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> For David, after he had in his own
generation served the counsel of God, fell asleep, and was laid with his
fathers, and saw decay.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But he whom God raised up saw no decay.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Be it known to you therefore, brothers,
that through this man is proclaimed to you remission of sins,

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> and by him everyone who believes is
justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the
law of Moses.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> Beware therefore, lest that come on you
which is spoken in the prophets:

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> 'Behold, you scoffers, and wonder, and
perish; for I work a work in your days, a work which you will in no way
believe, if one declares it to you.'"

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> So when the Jews went out of the
synagogue, the Gentiles begged that these words might be preached to
them the next Sabbath.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Now when the synagogue broke up, many
of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas;
who, speaking to them, urged them to continue in the grace of God.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> The next Sabbath almost the whole city
was gathered together to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> But when the Jews saw the multitudes,
they were filled with jealousy, and contradicted the things which were
spoken by Paul, and blasphemed.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, and
said, "It was necessary that God's word should be spoken to you first.
Since indeed you thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of
eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> For so has the Lord commanded us,
saying, 'I have set you as a light for the Gentiles, that you should
bring salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth.'"

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> As the Gentiles heard this, they were
glad, and glorified the word of God. As many as were appointed to
eternal life believed.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> The Lord's word was spread abroad
throughout all the region.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> But the Jews stirred up the devout and
prominent women and the chief men of the city, and stirred up a
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and threw them out of their
borders.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> But they shook off the dust of their
feet against them, and came to Iconium.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> The disciples were filled with joy with
the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> It happened in Iconium that they entered
together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great
multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But the disbelieving Jews stirred up and
embittered the souls of the Gentiles against the brothers.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Therefore they stayed there a long time,
speaking boldly in the Lord, who testified to the word of his grace,
granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> But the multitude of the city was
divided. Part sided with the Jews, and part with the apostles.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> When some of both the Gentiles and the
Jews, with their rulers, made a violent attempt to mistreat and stone
them,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> they became aware of it, and fled to the
cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and the surrounding region.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> There they preached the Good News.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> At Lystra a certain man sat, impotent in
his feet, a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> He was listening to Paul speaking, who,
fastening eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be made whole,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> said with a loud voice, "Stand upright
on your feet!" He leaped up and walked.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> When the multitude saw what Paul had
done, they lifted up their voice, saying in the language of Lycaonia,
"The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!"

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> They called Barnabas "Jupiter," and
Paul "Mercury," because he was the chief speaker.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was
in front of their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and
would have made a sacrifice along with the multitudes.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> But when the apostles, Barnabas and
Paul, heard of it, they tore their clothes, and sprang into the
multitude, crying out,

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> "Men, why are you doing these things?
We also are men of like passions with you, and bring you good news, that
you should turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the
sky and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> who in the generations gone by allowed
all the nations to walk in their own ways.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Yet he didn't leave himself without
witness, in that he did good and gave you rains from the sky and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness."

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Even saying these things, they hardly
stopped the multitudes from making a sacrifice to them.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But some Jews from Antioch and Iconium
came there, and having persuaded the multitudes, they stoned Paul, and
dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But as the disciples stood around him,
he rose up, and entered into the city. On the next day he went out with
Barnabas to Derbe.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> When they had preached the Good News to
that city, and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra,
Iconium, and Antioch,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> confirming the souls of the disciples,
exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many
afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> When they had appointed elders for them
in every assembly, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to
the Lord, on whom they had believed.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> They passed through Pisidia, and came
to Pamphylia.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> When they had spoken the word in Perga,
they went down to Attalia.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> From there they sailed to Antioch, from
where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which
they had fulfilled.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> When they had arrived, and had gathered
the assembly together, they reported all the things that God had done
with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> They stayed there with the disciples
for a long time.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Some men came down from Judea and taught
the brothers, "Unless you are circumcised after the custom of Moses, you
can't be saved."

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Therefore when Paul and Barnabas had no
small discord and discussion with them, they appointed Paul and
Barnabas, and some others of them, to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles
and elders about this question.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> They, being sent on their way by the
assembly, passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the
conversion of the Gentiles. They caused great joy to all the brothers.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> When they had come to Jerusalem, they
were received by the assembly and the apostles and the elders, and they
reported all things that God had done with them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But some of the sect of the Pharisees who
believed rose up, saying, "It is necessary to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the law of Moses."

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> The apostles and the elders were gathered
together to see about this matter.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> When there had been much discussion,
Peter rose up and said to them, "Brothers, you know that a good while
ago God made a choice among you, that by my mouth the nations should
hear the word of the Good News, and believe.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> God, who knows the heart, testified about
them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just like he did to us.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> He made no distinction between us and
them, cleansing their hearts by faith.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Now therefore why do you tempt God,
that you should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which neither
our fathers nor we were able to bear?

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But we believe that we are saved
through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they are."

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> All the multitude kept silence, and
they listened to Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God
had done among the nations through them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> After they were silent, James answered,
"Brothers, listen to me.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Simeon has reported how God first
visited the nations, to take out of them a people for his name.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> This agrees with the words of the
prophets. As it is written,

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> 'After these things I will return. I
will again build the tabernacle of David, which has fallen. I will again
build its ruins. I will set it up,

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> That the rest of men may seek after the
Lord; All the Gentiles who are called by my name, Says the Lord, who
does all these things.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> All his works are known to God from
eternity.'

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> "Therefore my judgment is that we don't
trouble those from among the Gentiles who turn to God,

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> but that we write to them that they
abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual immorality, from what
is strangled, and from blood.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For Moses from generations of old has
in every city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues every
Sabbath."

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then it seemed good to the apostles and
the elders, with the whole assembly, to choose men out of their company,
and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas,
and Silas, chief men among the brothers.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> They wrote these things by their hand:
"The apostles, the elders, and the brothers, to the brothers who are of
the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: greetings.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Because we have heard that some who
went out from us have troubled you with words, unsettling your souls,
saying, 'You must be circumcised and keep the law,' to whom we gave no
commandment;

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> it seemed good to us, having come to
one accord, to choose out men and send them to you with our beloved
Barnabas and Paul,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> men who have risked their lives for the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> We have sent therefore Judas and Silas,
who themselves will also tell you the same things by word of mouth.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit,
and to us, to lay no greater burden on you than these necessary things:

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> that you abstain from things sacrificed
to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from sexual immorality,
from which if you keep yourselves, it will be well with you. Farewell."

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> So, when they were sent off, they came
to Antioch. Having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the
letter.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> When they had read it, they rejoiced
over the encouragement.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Judas and Silas, also being prophets
themselves, encouraged the brothers with many words, and strengthened
them.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> After they had spent some time there,
they were sent back with greetings from the brothers to the apostles.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> But Paul and Barnabas stayed in
Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others
also.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> After some days Paul said to Barnabas,
"Let's return now and visit our brothers in every city in which we
proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing."

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> Barnabas planned to take John, who was
called Mark, with them also.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> But Paul didn't think that it was a
good idea to take with them someone who had withdrawn from them in
Pamphylia, and didn't go with them to do the work.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> Then the contention grew so sharp that
they separated from each other. Barnabas took Mark with him, and sailed
away to Cyprus,

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> but Paul chose Silas, and went out,
being commended by the brothers to the grace of God.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> He went through Syria and Cilicia,
strengthening the assemblies.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> He came to Derbe and Lystra: and behold,
a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewess who
believed; but his father was a Greek.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> The brothers who were at Lystra and
Iconium gave a good testimony about him.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Paul wanted to have him go out with him,
and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those
parts; for they all knew that his father was a Greek.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> As they went on their way through the
cities, they delivered the decrees to them to keep which had been
ordained by the apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> So the assemblies were strengthened in
the faith, and increased in number daily.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> When they had gone through the region of
Phrygia and Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the
word in Asia.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> When they had come opposite Mysia, they
tried to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit didn't allow them.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Passing by Mysia, they came down to
Troas.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> A vision appeared to Paul in the night.
There was a man of Macedonia standing, begging him, and saying, "Come
over into Macedonia and help us."

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> When he had seen the vision,
immediately we sought to go out to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord
had called us to preach the Good News to them.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Setting sail therefore from Troas, we
made a straight course to Samothrace, and the day following to Neapolis;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and from there to Philippi, which is a
city of Macedonia, the foremost of the district, a Roman colony. We were
staying some days in this city.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> On the Sabbath day we went forth
outside of the city by a riverside, where we supposed there was a place
of prayer, and we sat down, and spoke to the women who had come
together.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> A certain woman named Lydia, a seller
of purple, of the city of Thyatira, one who worshiped God, heard us;
whose heart the Lord opened to listen to the things which were spoken by
Paul.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> When she and her household were
baptized, she begged us, saying, "If you have judged me to be faithful
to the Lord, come into my house, and stay." So she persuaded us.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> It happened, as we were going to
prayer, that a certain girl having a spirit of divination met us, who
brought her masters much gain by fortune telling.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Following Paul and us, she cried out,
"These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us a way
of salvation!"

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> She was doing this for many days. But
Paul, becoming greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, "I
command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!" It came out
that very hour.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> But when her masters saw that the hope
of their gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas, and dragged them
into the marketplace before the rulers.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> When they had brought them to the
magistrates, they said, "These men, being Jews, are agitating our city,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> and set forth customs which it is not
lawful for us to accept or to observe, being Romans."

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> The multitude rose up together against
them, and the magistrates tore their clothes off of them, and commanded
them to be beaten with rods.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> When they had laid many stripes on
them, they threw them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them
safely,

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> who, having received such a command,
threw them into the inner prison, and secured their feet in the stocks.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> But about midnight Paul and Silas were
praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to
them.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Suddenly there was a great earthquake,
so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and immediately all
the doors were opened, and everyone's bonds were loosened.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> The jailer, being roused out of sleep
and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to kill
himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> But Paul cried with a loud voice,
saying, "Don't harm yourself, for we are all here!"

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> He called for lights and sprang in,
and, fell down trembling before Paul and Silas,

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> and brought them out and said, "Sirs,
what must I do to be saved?"

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> They said, "Believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, and you will be saved, you and your household."

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> They spoke the word of the Lord to him,
and to all who were in his house.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> He took them the same hour of the
night, and washed their stripes, and was immediately baptized, he and
all his household.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> He brought them up into his house, and
set food before them, and rejoiced greatly, with all his household,
having believed in God.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> But when it was day, the magistrates
sent the sergeants, saying, "Let those men go."

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> The jailer reported these words to
Paul, saying, "The magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore
come out, and go in peace."

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> But Paul said to them, "They have
beaten us publicly, without a trial, men who are Romans, and have cast
us into prison! Do they now release us secretly? No, most certainly, but
let them come themselves and bring us out!"

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> The sergeants reported these words to
the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were
Romans,

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> and they came and begged them. When
they had brought them out, they asked them to depart from the city.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> They went out of the prison, and
entered into Lydia's house. When they had seen the brothers, they
encouraged them, and departed.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Now when they had passed through
Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a
Jewish synagogue.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Paul, as was his custom, went in to them,
and for three Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> explaining and demonstrating that the
Christ had to suffer and rise again from the dead, and saying, "This
Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ."

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> Some of them were persuaded, and joined
Paul and Silas, of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and not a few of
the chief women.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> But the unpersuaded Jews took along some
wicked men from the marketplace, and gathering a crowd, set the city in
an uproar. Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out
to the people.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> When they didn't find them, they dragged
Jason and certain brothers before the rulers of the city, crying, "These
who have turned the world upside down have come here also,

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> whom Jason has received. These all act
contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king,
Jesus!"

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The multitude and the rulers of the city
were troubled when they heard these things.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> When they had taken security from Jason
and the rest, they let them go.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> The brothers immediately sent Paul and
Silas away by night to Beroea. When they arrived, they went into the
Jewish synagogue.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Now these were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of the
mind, examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were
so.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Many of them therefore believed; also
of the prominent Greek women, and not a few men.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But when the Jews of Thessalonica had
knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also,
they came there likewise, agitating the multitudes.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Then the brothers immediately sent out
Paul to go as far as to the sea, and Silas and Timothy still stayed
there.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But those who escorted Paul brought him
as far as Athens. Receiving a commandment to Silas and Timothy that they
should come to him very quickly, they departed.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Now while Paul waited for them at
Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he saw the city full of
idols.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> So he reasoned in the synagogue with
the Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with
those who met him.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Some of the Epicurean and Stoic
philosophers also were conversing with him. Some said, "What does this
babbler want to say?" Others said, "He seems to be advocating foreign
deities," because he preached Jesus and the resurrection.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> They took hold of him, and brought him
to the Areopagus, saying, "May we know what this new teaching is, which
is spoken by you?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> For you bring certain strange things to
our ears. We want to know therefore what these things mean."

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Now all the Athenians and the strangers
living there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to
hear some new thing.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Paul stood in the middle of the
Areopagus, and said, "You men of Athens, I perceive that you are very
religious in all things.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> For as I passed along, and observed the
objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription:
'TO AN UNKNOWN GOD.' What therefore you worship in ignorance, this I
announce to you.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> The God who made the world and all
things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, doesn't dwell in
temples made with hands,

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> neither is he served by men's hands, as
though he needed anything, seeing he himself gives to all life and
breath, and all things.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> He made from one blood every nation of
men to dwell on all the surface of the earth, having determined
appointed seasons, and the boundaries of their dwellings,

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> that they should seek the Lord, if
perhaps they might reach out for him and find him, though he is not far
from each one of us.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> 'For in him we live, and move, and have
our being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'For we are also his
offspring.'

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> Being then the offspring of God, we
ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or
stone, engraved by art and design of man.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> The times of ignorance therefore God
overlooked. But now he commands that all people everywhere should
repent,

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> because he has appointed a day in which
he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has
ordained; of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has
raised him from the dead."

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> Now when they heard of the resurrection
of the dead, some mocked; but others said, "We want to hear you again
concerning this."

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> Thus Paul went out from among them.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> But certain men joined with him, and
believed, among whom also was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman
named Damaris, and others with them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> After these things Paul departed from
Athens, and came to Corinth.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> He found a certain Jew named Aquila, a
man of Pontus by race, who had recently come from Italy, with his wife
Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from
Rome. He came to them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and because he practiced the same trade,
he lived with them and worked, for by trade they were tent makers.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> He reasoned in the synagogue every
Sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> But when Silas and Timothy came down from
Macedonia, Paul was compelled by the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that
Jesus was the Christ.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> When they opposed him and blasphemed, he
shook out his clothing and said to them, "Your blood be on your own
heads! I am clean. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!"

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> He departed there, and went into the
house of a certain man named Justus, one who worshiped God, whose house
was next door to the synagogue.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue,
believed in the Lord with all his house. Many of the Corinthians, when
they heard, believed and were baptized.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> The Lord said to Paul in the night by a
vision, "Don't be afraid, but speak and don't be silent;

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> for I am with you, and no one will
attack you to harm you, for I have many people in this city."

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> He lived there a year and six months,
teaching the word of God among them.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> But when Gallio was proconsul of
Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him
before the judgment seat,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> saying, "This man persuades men to
worship God contrary to the law."

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> But when Paul was about to open his
mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, "If indeed it were a matter of wrong or
of wicked crime, you Jews, it would be reasonable that I should bear
with you;

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> but if they are questions about words
and names and your own law, look to it yourselves. For I don't want to
be a judge of these matters."

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> He drove them from the judgment seat.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Then all the Greeks laid hold on
Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment
seat. Gallio didn't care about any of these things.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Paul, having stayed after this many
more days, took his leave of the brothers, and sailed from there for
Syria, together with Priscilla and Aquila. He shaved his head in
Cenchreae, for he had a vow.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> He came to Ephesus, and he left them
there; but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the
Jews.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> When they asked him to stay with them a
longer time, he declined;

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> but taking his leave of them, and
saying, "I must by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I
will return again to you if God wills," he set sail from Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> When he had landed at Caesarea, he went
up and greeted the assembly, and went down to Antioch.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Having spent some time there, he
departed, and went through the region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in order,
establishing all the disciples.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an
Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus. He was mighty in
the Scriptures.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> This man had been instructed in the way
of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately
the things concerning Jesus, although he knew only the baptism of John.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> He began to speak boldly in the
synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside,
and explained to him the way of God more accurately.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> When he had determined to pass over
into Achaia, the brothers encouraged him, and wrote to the disciples to
receive him. When he had come, he greatly helped those who had believed
through grace;

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> for he powerfully refuted the Jews,
publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> It happened that, while Apollos was at
Corinth, Paul, having passed through the upper country, came to Ephesus,
and found certain disciples.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> He said to them, "Did you receive the
Holy Spirit when you believed?" They said to him, "No, we haven't even
heard that there is a Holy Spirit."

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> He said, "Into what then were you
baptized?" They said, "Into John's baptism."

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Paul said, "John indeed baptized with the
baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in
the one who would come after him, that is, in Jesus."

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> When they heard this, they were baptized
in the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> When Paul had laid his hands on them, the
Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke with other languages and
prophesied.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> They were about twelve men in all.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He entered into the synagogue, and spoke
boldly for a period of three months, reasoning and persuading about the
things concerning the Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> But when some were hardened and
disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, he departed
from them, and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of
Tyrannus.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> This continued for two years, so that
all those who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews
and Greeks.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> God worked special miracles by the
hands of Paul,

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> so that even handkerchiefs or aprons
were carried away from his body to the sick, and the evil spirits went
out.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> But some of the itinerant Jews,
exorcists, took on themselves to invoke over those who had the evil
spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, "We adjure you by Jesus whom
Paul preaches."

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> There were seven sons of one Sceva, a
Jewish chief priest, who did this.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> The evil spirit answered, "Jesus I
know, and Paul I know, but who are you?"

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> The man in whom the evil spirit was
leaped on them, and overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so
that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> This became known to all, both Jews and
Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. Fear fell on them all, and the name of the
Lord Jesus was magnified.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Many also of those who had believed
came, confessing, and declaring their deeds.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Many of those who practiced magical
arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all.
They counted the price of them, and found it to be fifty thousand pieces
of silver.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> So the word of the Lord was growing and
becoming mighty.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Now after these things had ended, Paul
determined in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and
Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, "After I have been there, I must
also see Rome."

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Having sent into Macedonia two of those
who served him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a
while.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> About that time there arose no small
stir concerning the Way.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> For a certain man named Demetrius, a
silversmith, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little
business to the craftsmen,

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> whom he gathered together, with the
workmen of like occupation, and said, "Sirs, you know that by this
business we have our wealth.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> You see and hear, that not at Ephesus
alone, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and
turned away many people, saying that they are no gods, that are made
with hands.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Not only is there danger that this our
trade come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess
Artemis will be counted as nothing, and her majesty destroyed, whom all
Asia and the world worships."

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> When they heard this they were filled
with anger, and cried out, saying, "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> The whole city was filled with
confusion, and they rushed with one accord into the theater, having
seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in
travel.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> When Paul wanted to enter in to the
people, the disciples didn't allow him.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> Certain also of the Asiarchs, being his
friends, sent to him and begged him not to venture into the theater.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Some therefore cried one thing, and
some another, for the assembly was in confusion. Most of them didn't
know why they had come together.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> They brought Alexander out of the
multitude, the Jews putting him forward. Alexander beckoned with his
hand, and would have made a defense to the people.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But when they perceived that he was a
Jew, all with one voice for a time of about two hours cried out, "Great
is Artemis of the Ephesians!"

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> When the town clerk had quieted the
multitude, he said, "You men of Ephesus, what man is there who doesn't
know that the city of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great
goddess Artemis, and of the image which fell down from Zeus?

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> Seeing then that these things can't be
denied, you ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> For you have brought these men here,
who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of your goddess.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> If therefore Demetrius and the
craftsmen who are with him have a matter against anyone, the courts are
open, and there are proconsuls. Let them press charges against one
another.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> But if you seek anything about other
matters, it will be settled in the regular assembly.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> For indeed we are in danger of being
accused concerning this day's riot, there being no cause. Concerning it,
we wouldn't be able to give an account of this commotion."

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> When he had thus spoken, he dismissed
the assembly.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent
for the disciples, took leave of them, and departed to go into
Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> When he had gone through those parts, and
had encouraged them with many words, he came into Greece.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> When he had spent three months there, and
a plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for
Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> These accompanied him as far as Asia:
Sopater of Beroea; Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians; Gaius
of Derbe; Timothy; and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> But these had gone ahead, and were
waiting for us at Troas.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> We sailed away from Philippi after the
days of Unleavened Bread, and came to them at Troas in five days, where
we stayed seven days.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> On the first day of the week, when the
disciples were gathered together to break bread, Paul talked with them,
intending to depart on the next day, and continued his speech until
midnight.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> There were many lights in the upper room
where we were gathered together.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> A certain young man named Eutychus sat in
the window, weighed down with deep sleep. As Paul spoke still longer,
being weighed down by his sleep, he fell down from the third story, and
was taken up dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Paul went down, and fell upon him, and
embracing him said, "Don't be troubled, for his life is in him."

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> When he had gone up, and had broken
bread, and eaten, and had talked with them a long while, even until
break of day, he departed.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> They brought the boy in alive, and were
greatly comforted.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But we who went ahead to the ship set
sail for Assos, intending to take Paul aboard there, for he had so
arranged, intending himself to go by land.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> When he met us at Assos, we took him
aboard, and came to Mitylene.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Sailing from there, we came the
following day opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos and
stayed at Trogyllium, and the day after we came to Miletus.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> For Paul had determined to sail past
Ephesus, that he might not have to spend time in Asia; for he was
hastening, if it were possible for him, to be in Jerusalem on the day of
Pentecost.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> From Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and
called to himself the elders of the assembly.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> When they had come to him, he said to
them, "You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in Asia,
how I was with you all the time,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> serving the Lord with all humility,
with many tears, and with trials which happened to me by the plots of
the Jews;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> how I didn't shrink from declaring to
you anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and from house
to house,

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> testifying both to Jews and to Greeks
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Now, behold, I go bound by the Spirit
to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there;

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> except that the Holy Spirit testifies
in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But these things don't count; nor do I
hold my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my race with joy, and
the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to fully testify to
the Good News of the grace of God.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> "Now, behold, I know that you all,
among whom I went about preaching the Kingdom of God, will see my face
no more.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Therefore I testify to you this day
that I am clean from the blood of all men,

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> for I didn't shrink from declaring to
you the whole counsel of God.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Take heed, therefore, to yourselves,
and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers,
to shepherd the assembly of the Lord and God which he purchased with his
own blood.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> For I know that after my departure,
vicious wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Men will arise from among your own
selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Therefore watch, remembering that for a
period of three years I didn't cease to admonish everyone night and day
with tears.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> Now, brothers, I entrust you to God,
and to the word of his grace, which is able to build up, and to give you
the inheritance among all those who are sanctified.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> I coveted no one's silver, or gold, or
clothing.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> You yourselves know that these hands
served my necessities, and those who were with me.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> In all things I gave you an example,
that so laboring you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words
of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, 'It is more blessed to give
than to receive.'"

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> When he had spoken these things, he
knelt down and prayed with them all.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> They all wept a lot, and fell on Paul's
neck and kissed him,

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> sorrowing most of all because of the
word which he had spoken, that they should see his face no more. And
they accompanied him to the ship.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> When it happened that we had parted from
them and had set sail, we came with a straight course to Cos, and the
next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Having found a ship crossing over to
Phoenicia, we went aboard, and set sail.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> When we had come in sight of Cyprus,
leaving it on the left hand, we sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre, for
there the ship was to unload her cargo.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Having found disciples, we stayed there
seven days. These said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go
up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> When it happened that we had accomplished
the days, we departed and went on our journey. They all, with wives and
children, brought us on our way until we were out of the city. Kneeling
down on the beach, we prayed.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> After saying goodbye to each other, we
went on board the ship, and they returned home again.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> When we had finished the voyage from
Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais. We greeted the brothers, and stayed with
them one day.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> On the next day, we, who were Paul's
companions, departed, and came to Caesarea. We entered into the house of
Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Now this man had four virgin daughters
who prophesied.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> As we stayed there some days, a certain
prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Coming to us, and taking Paul's belt,
he bound his own feet and hands, and said, "Thus says the Holy Spirit:
'So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man who owns this belt, and will
deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.'"

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> When we heard these things, both we and
they of that place begged him not to go up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Paul answered, "What are you
doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be
bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus."

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> When he would not be persuaded, we
ceased, saying, "The Lord's will be done."

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> After these days we took up our baggage
and went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Some of the disciples from Caesarea
also went with us, bringing one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple,
with whom we would stay.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> When we had come to Jerusalem, the
brothers received us gladly.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The day following, Paul went in with us
to James; and all the elders were present.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> When he had greeted them, he reported
one by one the things which God had worked among the Gentiles through
his ministry.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> They, when they heard it, glorified
God. They said to him, "You see, brother, how many thousands there are
among the Jews of those who have believed, and they are all zealous for
the law.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> They have been informed about you, that
you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses,
telling them not to circumcise their children neither to walk after the
customs.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> What then? The assembly must certainly
meet, for they will hear that you have come.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Therefore do what we tell you. We have
four men who have taken a vow.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Take them, and purify yourself with
them, and pay their expenses for them, that they may shave their heads.
Then all will know that there is no truth in the things that they have
been informed about you, but that you yourself also walk keeping the
law.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But concerning the Gentiles who
believe, we have written our decision that they should observe no such
thing, except that they should keep themselves from food offered to
idols, from blood, from strangled things, and from sexual immorality."

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Then Paul took the men, and the next
day, purified himself and went with them into the temple, declaring the
fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered
for every one of them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> When the seven days were almost
completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred
up all the multitude and laid hands on him,

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> crying out, "Men of Israel, help! This
is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the
law, and this place. Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple,
and has defiled this holy place!"

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> For they had seen Trophimus, the
Ephesian, with him in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought
him into the temple.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> All the city was moved, and the people
ran together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple.
Immediately the doors were shut.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> As they were trying to kill him, news
came up to the commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was
in an uproar.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Immediately he took soldiers and
centurions, and ran down to them. They, when they saw the chief captain
and the soldiers, stopped beating Paul.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Then the commanding officer came near,
arrested him, commanded him to be bound with two chains, and inquired
who he was and what he had done.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> Some shouted one thing, and some
another, among the crowd. When he couldn't find out the truth because of
the noise, he commanded him to be brought into the barracks.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> When he came to the stairs, it happened
that he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the
crowd;

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> for the multitude of the people
followed after, crying out, "Away with him!"

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> As Paul was about to be brought into
the barracks, he asked the commanding officer, "May I speak to you?" He
said, "Do you know Greek?

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> Aren't you then the Egyptian, who
before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness
the four thousand men of the Assassins?"

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> But Paul said, "I am a Jew, from Tarsus
in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, allow me to
speak to the people."

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> When he had given him permission, Paul,
standing on the stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. When there
was a great silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying,

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> "Brothers and fathers, listen to the
defense which I now make to you."

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> When they heard that he spoke to them in
the Hebrew language, they were even more quiet. He said,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> "I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of
Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed
according to the strict tradition of the law of our fathers, being
zealous for God, even as you all are this day.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> I persecuted this Way to the death,
binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> As also the high priest and all the
council of the elders testify, from whom also I received letters to the
brothers, and traveled to Damascus to bring them also who were there to
Jerusalem in bonds to be punished.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> It happened that, as I made my journey,
and came close to Damascus, about noon, suddenly there shone from the
sky a great light around me.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> I fell to the ground, and heard a voice
saying to me, 'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?'

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> I answered, 'Who are you, Lord?' He said
to me, 'I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.'

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> "Those who were with me indeed saw the
light and were afraid, but they didn't understand the voice of him who
spoke to me.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> I said, 'What shall I do, Lord?' The
Lord said to me, 'Arise, and go into Damascus. There you will be told
about all things which are appointed for you to do.'

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> When I couldn't see for the glory of
that light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I came into
Damascus.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> One Ananias, a devout man according to
the law, well reported of by all the Jews who lived in Damascus,

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> came to me, and standing by me said to
me, 'Brother Saul, receive your sight!' In that very hour I looked up at
him.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> He said, 'The God of our fathers has
appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to
hear a voice from his mouth.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> For you will be a witness for him to
all men of what you have seen and heard.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Now why do you wait? Arise, be
baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord.'

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> "It happened that, when I had returned
to Jerusalem, and while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> and saw him saying to me, 'Hurry and
get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not receive testimony
concerning me from you.'

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> I said, 'Lord, they themselves know
that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those who believed in you.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> When the blood of Stephen, your
witness, was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting to his death,
and guarding the cloaks of those who killed him.'

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> "He said to me, 'Depart, for I will
send you out far from here to the Gentiles.'"

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> They listened to him until he said
that; then they lifted up their voice, and said, "Rid the earth of this
fellow, for he isn't fit to live!"

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> As they cried out, and threw off their
cloaks, and threw dust into the air,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> the commanding officer commanded him to
be brought into the barracks, ordering him to be examined by scourging,
that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> When they had tied him up with thongs,
Paul asked the centurion who stood by, "Is it lawful for you to scourge
a man who is a Roman, and not found guilty?"

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> When the centurion heard it, he went to
the commanding officer and told him, "Watch what you are about to do,
for this man is a Roman!"

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> The commanding officer came and asked
him, "Tell me, are you a Roman?" He said, "Yes."

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> The commanding officer answered, "I
bought my citizenship for a great price." Paul said, "But I was born a
Roman."

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Immediately those who were about to
examine him departed from him, and the commanding officer also was
afraid when he realized that he was a Roman, because he had bound him.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> But on the next day, desiring to know
the truth about why he was accused by the Jews, he freed him from the
bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all the council to come
together, and brought Paul down and set him before them.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Paul, looking steadfastly at the council,
said, "Brothers, I have lived before God in all good conscience until
this day."

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> The high priest, Ananias, commanded those
who stood by him to strike him on the mouth.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then Paul said to him, "God will strike
you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law,
and command me to be struck contrary to the law?"

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Those who stood by said, "Do you malign
God's high priest?"

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Paul said, "I didn't know, brothers, that
he was high priest. For it is written, 'You shall not speak evil of a
ruler of your people.'"

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But when Paul perceived that the one part
were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council,
"Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the
hope and resurrection of the dead I am being judged!"

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> When he had said this, an argument arose
between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> For the Sadducees say that there is no
resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess all of
these.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> A great clamor arose, and some of the
scribes of the Pharisees part stood up, and contended, saying, "We find
no evil in this man. But if a spirit or angel has spoken to him, let's
not fight against God!"

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> When a great argument arose, the
commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them,
commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force from among them,
and bring him into the barracks.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> The following night, the Lord stood by
him, and said, "Cheer up, Paul, for as you have testified about me at
Jerusalem, so you must testify also at Rome."

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> When it was day, some of the Jews
banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they
would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> There were more than forty people who
had made this conspiracy.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> They came to the chief priests and the
elders, and said, "We have bound ourselves under a great curse, to taste
nothing until we have killed Paul.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Now therefore, you with the council
inform the commanding officer that he should bring him down to you
tomorrow, as though you were going to judge his case more exactly. We
are ready to kill him before he comes near."

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> But Paul's sister's son heard of their
lying in wait, and he came and entered into the barracks and told Paul.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Paul summoned one of the centurions,
and said, "Bring this young man to the commanding officer, for he has
something to tell him."

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So he took him, and brought him to the
commanding officer, and said, "Paul, the prisoner, summoned me and asked
me to bring this young man to you, who has something to tell you."

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> The commanding officer took him by the
hand, and going aside, asked him privately, "What is it that you have to
tell me?"

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> He said, "The Jews have agreed to ask
you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow, as though intending to
inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Therefore don't yield to them, for more
than forty men lie in wait for him, who have bound themselves under a
curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him. Now they
are ready, looking for the promise from you."

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> So the commanding officer let the young
man go, charging him, "Tell no one that you have revealed these things
to me."

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> He called to himself two of the
centurions, and said, "Prepare two hundred soldiers to go as far as
Caesarea, with seventy horsemen, and two hundred men armed with spears,
at the third hour of the night."

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> He asked them to provide animals, that
they might set Paul on one, and bring him safely to Felix the governor.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> He wrote a letter like this:

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> "Claudius Lysias to the most excellent
governor Felix: Greetings.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> "This man was seized by the Jews, and
was about to be killed by them, when I came with the soldiers and
rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Desiring to know the cause why they
accused him, I brought him down to their council.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> I found him to be accused about
questions of their law, but not to be charged with anything worthy of
death or of imprisonment.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> When I was told that the Jews lay in
wait for the man, I sent him to you immediately, charging his accusers
also to bring their accusations against him before you. Farewell."

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> So the soldiers, carrying out their
orders, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> But on the next day they left the
horsemen to go with him, and returned to the barracks.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> When they came to Caesarea and
delivered the letter to the governor, they also presented Paul to him.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> When the governor had read it, he asked
what province he was from. When he understood that he was from Cilicia,
he said,

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> "I will hear you fully when your
accusers also arrive." He commanded that he be kept in Herod's palace.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> After five days, the high priest,
Ananias, came down with certain elders and an orator, one Tertullus.
They informed the governor against Paul.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> When he was called, Tertullus began to
accuse him, saying, "Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace, and that
excellent measures are coming to this nation,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> we accept it in all ways and in all
places, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But, that I don't delay you, I entreat
you to bear with us and hear a few words.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For we have found this man to be a
plague, an instigator of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the
world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> He even tried to profane the temple, and
we arrested him.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> By examining him yourself you may
ascertain all these things of which we accuse him."

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The Jews also joined in the attack,
affirming that these things were so.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> When the governor had beckoned to him
to speak, Paul answered, "Because I know that you have been a judge of
this nation for many years, I cheerfully make my defense,

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> seeing that you can recognize that it
is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> In the temple they didn't find me
disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the synagogues,
or in the city.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Nor can they prove to you the things of
which they now accuse me.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> But this I confess to you, that after
the Way, which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our fathers,
believing all things which are according to the law, and which are
written in the prophets;

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> having hope toward God, which these
also themselves look for, that there will be a resurrection of the dead,
both of the just and unjust.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Herein I also practice always having a
conscience void of offense toward God and men.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Now after some years, I came to bring
gifts for the needy to my nation, and offerings;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> amid which certain Jews from Asia found
me purified in the temple, not with a mob, nor with turmoil.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> They ought to have been here before
you, and to make accusation, if they had anything against me.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Or else let these men themselves say
what injustice they found in me when I stood before the council,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> unless it is for this one thing that I
cried standing among them, 'Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am
being judged before you today!'"

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> But Felix, having more exact knowledge
concerning the Way, deferred them, saying, "When Lysias, the commanding
officer, comes down, I will decide your case."

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> He ordered the centurion that Paul
should be kept in custody, and should have some privileges, and not to
forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> But after some days, Felix came with
Drusilla, his wife, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him
concerning the faith in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> As he reasoned about righteousness,
self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix was terrified, and
answered, "Go your way for this time, and when it is convenient for me,
I will summon you."

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> Meanwhile, he also hoped that money
would be given to him by Paul, that he might release him. Therefore also
he sent for him more often, and talked with him.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> But when two years were fulfilled,
Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favor with
the Jews, Felix left Paul in bonds.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Festus therefore, having come into the
province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Then the high priest and the principal
men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and they begged him,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> asking a favor against him, that he would
summon him to Jerusalem; plotting to kill him on the way.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> However Festus answered that Paul should
be kept in custody at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart
shortly.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> "Let them therefore," said he, "that are
in power among you go down with me, and if there is anything wrong in
the man, let them accuse him."

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> When he had stayed among them more than
ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and on the next day he sat on the
judgment seat, and commanded Paul to be brought.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> When he had come, the Jews who had come
down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many and
grievous charges which they could not prove,

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> while he said in his defense, "Neither
against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar,
have I sinned at all."

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But Festus, desiring to gain favor with
the Jews, answered Paul and said, "Are you willing to go up to
Jerusalem, and be judged by me there concerning these things?"

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> But Paul said, "I am standing before
Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be tried. I have done no wrong
to the Jews, as you also know very well.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> For if I have done wrong, and have
committed anything worthy of death, I don't refuse to die; but if none
of those things is true that they accuse me of, no one can give me up to
them. I appeal to Caesar!"

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Then Festus, when he had conferred with
the council, answered, "You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you shall
go."

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Now when some days had passed, King
Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea, and greeted Festus.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> As he stayed there many days, Festus
laid Paul's case before the king, saying, "There is a certain man left a
prisoner by Felix;

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> about whom, when I was at Jerusalem,
the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, asking for a
sentence against him.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> To whom I answered that it is not the
custom of the Romans to give up any man to destruction, before the
accused has met the accusers face to face, and has had opportunity to
make his defense concerning the matter laid against him.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> When therefore they had come together
here, I didn't delay, but on the next day sat on the judgment seat, and
commanded the man to be brought.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Concerning whom, when the accusers
stood up, they brought no charge of such things as I supposed;

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> but had certain questions against him
about their own religion, and about one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul
affirmed to be alive.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> Being perplexed how to inquire
concerning these things, I asked whether he was willing to go to
Jerusalem and there be judged concerning these matters.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> But when Paul had appealed to be kept
for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to be kept until I
could send him to Caesar."

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> Agrippa said to Festus, "I also would
like to hear the man myself." "Tomorrow," he said, "you shall hear him."

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> So on the next day, when Agrippa and
Bernice had come with great pomp, and they had entered into the place of
hearing with the commanding officers and principal men of the city, at
the command of Festus, Paul was brought in.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> Festus said, "King Agrippa, and all men
who are here present with us, you see this man, about whom all the
multitude of the Jews petitioned me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying
that he ought not to live any longer.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> But when I found that he had committed
nothing worthy of death, and as he himself appealed to the emperor I
determined to send him.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Of whom I have no certain thing to
write to my lord. Therefore I have brought him forth before you, and
especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after examination, I may have
something to write.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> For it seems to me unreasonable, in
sending a prisoner, not to also specify the charges against him."

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Agrippa said to Paul, "You may speak for
yourself." Then Paul stretched out his hand, and made his defense.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> "I think myself happy, King Agrippa, that
I am to make my defense before you this day concerning all the things
that I am accused by the Jews,

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> especially because you are expert in all
customs and questions which are among the Jews. Therefore I beg you to
hear me patiently.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> "Indeed, all the Jews know my way of life
from my youth up, which was from the beginning among my own nation and
at Jerusalem;

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> having known me from the first, if they
are willing to testify, that after the strictest sect of our religion I
lived a Pharisee.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Now I stand here to be judged for the
hope of the promise made by God to our fathers,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> which our twelve tribes, earnestly
serving night and day, hope to attain. Concerning this hope I am accused
by the Jews, King Agrippa!

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Why is it judged incredible with you, if
God does raise the dead?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> "I myself most certainly thought that I
ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> This I also did in Jerusalem. I both
shut up many of the saints in prisons, having received authority from
the chief priests, and when they were put to death I gave my vote
against them.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Punishing them often in all the
synagogues, I tried to make them blaspheme. Being exceedingly enraged
against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> "Whereupon as I traveled to Damascus
with the authority and commission from the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> at noon, O king, I saw on the way a
light from the sky, brighter than the sun, shining around me and those
who traveled with me.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> When we had all fallen to the earth, I
heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, 'Saul, Saul, why are
you persecuting me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.'

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> "I said, 'Who are you, Lord?' "He said,
'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> But arise, and stand on your feet, for
I have appeared to you for this purpose: to appoint you a servant and a
witness both of the things which you have seen, and of the things which
I will reveal to you;

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> delivering you from the people, and
from the Gentiles, to whom I send you,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> to open their eyes, that they may turn
from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may
receive remission of sins and an inheritance among those who are
sanctified by faith in me.'

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> "Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision,

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> but declared first to them of Damascus,
at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the
Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of
repentance.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For this reason the Jews seized me in
the temple, and tried to kill me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Having therefore obtained the help that
is from God, I stand to this day testifying both to small and great,
saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would happen,

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> how the Christ must suffer, and how, by
the resurrection of the dead, he would be first to proclaim light both
to these people and to the Gentiles."

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> As he thus made his defense, Festus
said with a loud voice, "Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is
driving you insane!"

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> But he said, "I am not crazy, most
excellent Festus, but boldly declare words of truth and reasonableness.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> For the king knows of these things, to
whom also I speak freely. For I am persuaded that none of these things
is hidden from him, for this has not been done in a corner.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> King Agrippa, do you believe the
prophets? I know that you believe."

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> Agrippa said to Paul, "With a little
persuasion are you trying to make me a Christian?"

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> Paul said, "I pray to God, that whether
with little or with much, not only you, but also all that hear me this
day, might become such as I am, except for these bonds."

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> The king rose up with the governor, and
Bernice, and those who sat with them.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> When they had withdrawn, they spoke one
to another, saying, "This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds."

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> Agrippa said to Festus, "This man might
have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar."

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> When it was determined that we should
sail for Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a
centurion named Julius, of the Augustan band.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium, which
was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia, we put to sea;
Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> The next day, we touched at Sidon. Julius
treated Paul kindly, and gave him permission to go to his friends and
refresh himself.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Putting to sea from there, we sailed
under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> When we had sailed across the sea which
is off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> There the centurion found a ship of
Alexandria sailing for Italy, and he put us on board.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> When we had sailed slowly many days, and
had come with difficulty opposite Cnidus, the wind not allowing us
further, we sailed under the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> With difficulty sailing along it we came
to a certain place called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> When much time had passed and the voyage
was now dangerous, because the Fast had now already gone by, Paul
admonished them,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and said to them, "Sirs, I perceive
that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the cargo
and the ship, but also of our lives."

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the centurion gave more heed to the
master and to the owner of the ship than to those things which were
spoken by Paul.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Because the haven was not suitable to
winter in, the majority advised going to sea from there, if by any means
they could reach Phoenix, and winter there, which is a port of Crete,
looking northeast and southeast.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> When the south wind blew softly,
supposing that they had obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and
sailed along Crete, close to shore.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> But before long, a stormy wind beat
down from shore, which is called Euroclydon.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> When the ship was caught, and couldn't
face the wind, we gave way to it, and were driven along.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Running under the lee of a small island
called Clauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> After they had hoisted it up, they used
cables to help reinforce the ship. Fearing that they would run aground
on the Syrtis sand bars, they lowered the sea anchor, and so were driven
along.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> As we labored exceedingly with the
storm, the next day they began to throw things overboard.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> On the third day, they threw out the
ship's tackle with their own hands.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> When neither sun nor stars shone on us
for many days, and no small storm pressed on us, all hope that we would
be saved was now taken away.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> When they had been long without food,
Paul stood up in the middle of them, and said, "Sirs, you should have
listened to me, and not have set sail from Crete, and have gotten this
injury and loss.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Now I exhort you to cheer up, for there
will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> For there stood by me this night an
angel, belonging to the God whose I am and whom I serve,

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> saying, 'Don't be afraid, Paul. You
must stand before Caesar. Behold, God has granted you all those who sail
with you.'

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Therefore, sirs, cheer up! For I
believe God, that it will be just as it has been spoken to me.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> But we must run aground on a certain
island."

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> But when the fourteenth night had come,
as we were driven back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the
sailors surmised that they were drawing near to some land.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> They took soundings, and found twenty
fathoms. After a little while, they took soundings again, and found
fifteen fathoms.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> Fearing that we would run aground on
rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern, and wished for
daylight.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> As the sailors were trying to flee out
of the ship, and had lowered the boat into the sea, pretending that they
would lay out anchors from the bow,

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> Paul said to the centurion and to the
soldiers, "Unless these stay in the ship, you can't be saved."

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of
the boat, and let it fall off.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> While the day was coming on, Paul
begged them all to take some food, saying, "This day is the fourteenth
day that you wait and continue fasting, having taken nothing.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Therefore I beg you to take some food,
for this is for your safety; for not a hair will perish from any of your
heads."

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> When he had said this, and had taken
bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all, and he broke it,
and began to eat.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> Then they all cheered up, and they also
took food.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> In all, we were two hundred seventy-six
souls on the ship.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> When they had eaten enough, they
lightened the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> When it was day, they didn't recognize
the land, but they noticed a certain bay with a beach, and they decided
to try to drive the ship onto it.

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> Casting off the anchors, they left them
in the sea, at the same time untying the rudder ropes. Hoisting up the
foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> But coming to a place where two seas
met, they ran the vessel aground. The bow struck and remained immovable,
but the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> The soldiers' counsel was to kill the
prisoners, so that none of them would swim out and escape.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> But the centurion, desiring to save
Paul, stopped them from their purpose, and commanded that those who
could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go toward the
land;

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> and the rest should follow, some on
planks, and some on other things from the ship. So it happened that they
all escaped safely to the land.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> When we had escaped, then they learned
that the island was called Malta.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> The natives showed us uncommon kindness;
for they kindled a fire, and received us all, because of the present
rain, and because of the cold.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> But when Paul had gathered a bundle of
sticks and laid them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat,
and fastened on his hand.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> When the natives saw the creature hanging
from his hand, they said one to another, "No doubt this man is a
murderer, whom, though he has escaped from the sea, yet Justice has not
allowed to live."

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> However he shook off the creature into
the fire, and wasn't harmed.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> But they expected that he would have
swollen or fallen down dead suddenly, but when they watched for a long
time and saw nothing bad happen to him, they changed their minds, and
said that he was a god.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Now in the neighborhood of that place
were lands belonging to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who
received us, and courteously entertained us for three days.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> It happened that the father of Publius
lay sick of fever and dysentery. Paul entered in to him, prayed, and
laying his hands on him, healed him.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Then when this was done, the rest also
who had diseases in the island came, and were cured.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> They also honored us with many honors,
and when we sailed, they put on board the things that we needed.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> After three months, we set sail in a
ship of Alexandria which had wintered in the island, whose sign was "The
Twin Brothers."

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there
three days.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> From there we circled around and
arrived at Rhegium. After one day, a south wind sprang up, and on the
second day we came to Puteoli,

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> where we found brothers, and were
entreated to stay with them for seven days. So we came to Rome.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> From there the brothers, when they
heard of us, came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The
Three Taverns. When Paul saw them, he thanked God, and took courage.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> When we entered into Rome, the
centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but Paul
was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> It happened that after three days Paul
called together those who were the leaders of the Jews. When they had
come together, he said to them, "I, brothers, though I had done nothing
against the people, or the customs of our fathers, still was delivered
prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans,

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> who, when they had examined me, desired
to set me free, because there was no cause of death in me.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> But when the Jews spoke against it, I
was constrained to appeal to Caesar, not that I had anything about which
to accuse my nation.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For this cause therefore I asked to see
you and to speak with you. For because of the hope of Israel I am bound
with this chain."

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> They said to him, "We neither received
letters from Judea concerning you, nor did any of the brothers come here
and report or speak any evil of you.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> But we desire to hear from you what you
think. For, as concerning this sect, it is known to us that everywhere
it is spoken against."

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> When they had appointed him a day, many
people came to him at his lodging. He explained to them, testifying
about the Kingdom of God, and persuading them concerning Jesus, both
from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning until evening.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Some believed the things which were
spoken, and some disbelieved.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> When they didn't agree among
themselves, they departed after Paul had spoken one word, "The Holy
Spirit spoke rightly through Isaiah, the prophet, to our fathers,

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> saying, 'Go to this people, and say, in
hearing, you will hear, but will in no way understand. In seeing, you
will see, but will in no way perceive.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For this people's heart has grown
callous. Their ears are dull of hearing. Their eyes they have closed.
Lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand
with their heart, and would turn again, and I would heal them.'

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> "Be it known therefore to you, that the
salvation of God is sent to the nations. They will also listen."

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> When he had said these words, the Jews
departed, having a great dispute among themselves.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> Paul stayed two whole years in his own
rented house, and received all who were coming to him,

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> preaching the Kingdom of God, and
teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness,
without hindrance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans](rom.md)
