[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jdt)  [Next](bar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Additions to Esther

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the second year of the reign of
Ahasuerus the great, on the first day of the month of Nisan, Mordecai,
the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, of the tribe of
Benjamin, had a dream.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> He was a Jew, and dwelt in the city of
Susa, a great man, who was a servant in the king's court.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> He was also one of the captives, which
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon carried from Jerusalem with Jeconiah
king of Judea; and this was his dream:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Behold a noise of a tumult, with thunder
and earthquakes and uproar in the land:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And behold, two great dragons came forth
ready to fight, and their cry was great.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And at their cry all nations were prepared
to battle, that they might fight against the righteous people.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And lo, a day of darkness and obscurity,
tribulation and anguish, affliction and great uproar, upon the earth.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the whole righteous nation was
troubled, fearing their own evils, and were ready to perish.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then they cried unto God, and upon their
cry, as if from a little fountain, arose the greatest flood and many
overflowing waters.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The light and the sun rose up, and the
lowly were exalted, and devoured the glorious.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Now when Mordecai, who had seen this
dream, and what God had determined to do, was awake, he kept this dream
in mind, and until night by all means desired to understand it.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Mordecai took his rest in the court
with Gabatha and Tharra, the two eunuchs of the king, and keepers of the
palace.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And he heard their plan, and searched out
their purposes, and learned that they were about to lay hands upon
Ahasuerus the king; and so he testified to the king about them.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Then the king examined the two eunuchs, and
after they had confessed, they were strangled.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the king made a record of these things,
and Mordecai also wrote thereof.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> So the king commanded, Mordecai to serve in
the court, and for this he rewarded him.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> However, Haman, the son of Hammedatha the
Agagite, was in great honor with the king, and sought to injure Mordecai
and his people because of the two eunuchs of the king.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now it happened in the days of Ahasuerus
(this is Ahasuerus who reigned from India even to Ethiopia, over one
hundred twenty-seven provinces),

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> that in those days, when the King Ahasuerus
sat on the throne of his kingdom, whose palace was in Susa,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> in the third year of his reign, he made a
feast for all his princes and his servants; and the power of Persia and
Media, the nobles and princes of the provinces, were before him.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> He displayed the riches of his glorious
kingdom and the honor of his excellent majesty for many days, even one
hundred eighty days.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> When these days were fulfilled, the king
made a seven day feast for all the people who were present in Susa, the
palatial city, both great and small, in the court of the garden of the
king's palace.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> There were hangings of white, green, and
blue material, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver
rings and marble pillars. The couches were of gold and silver, on a
pavement of red, white, yellow, and black marble.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> They gave them drinks in golden vessels of
various kinds, including royal wine in abundance, according to the
bounty of the king.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> In accordance with the law, the drinking
was not compulsory; for so the king had instructed all the officials of
his house, that they should do according to every man's wishes.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the
women in the royal house which belonged to King Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> On the seventh day, when the heart of the
king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha,
and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcass, the seven eunuchs who served in the
presence of Ahasuerus the king,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> to bring Vashti the queen before the king
with the royal crown, to show the people and the princes her beauty; for
she was beautiful.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But the queen Vashti refused to come at
the king's commandment by the eunuchs. Therefore the king was very
angry, and his anger burned in him.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then the king said to the wise men, who
knew the times, (for it was the king's custom to consult those who knew
law and judgment;

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> and the next to him were Carshena,
Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven
princes of Persia and Media, who saw the king's face, and sat first in
the kingdom),

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> "What shall we do to the queen Vashti
according to law, because she has not done the bidding of the King
Ahasuerus by the eunuchs?"

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Memucan answered before the king and the
princes, "Vashti the queen has not done wrong to just the king, but also
to all the princes, and to all the people who are in all the provinces
of the King Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For this deed of the queen will become
known to all women, causing them to show contempt for their husbands,
when it is reported, 'King Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be
brought in before him, but she didn't come.'

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Today, the princesses of Persia and Media
who have heard of the queen's deed will tell all the king's princes.
This will cause much contempt and wrath.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> If it please the king, let a royal
commandment go from him, and let it be written among the laws of the
Persians and the Medes, so that it cannot be altered, that Vashti may
never again come before King Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal
estate to another who is better than she.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> When the king's decree, which he shall
make, is published throughout all his kingdom (for it is great), all the
wives will give their husbands honor, both great and small."

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> This advice pleased the king and the
princes, and the king did according to the word of Memucan:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> for he sent letters into all the king's
provinces, into every province according to its writing, and to every
people in their language, that every man should rule his own house,
speaking in the language of his own people.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> After these things, when the wrath of King
Ahasuerus was pacified, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and
what was decreed against her.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Then the king's servants who served him
said, "Let beautiful young virgins be sought for the king.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Let the king appoint officers in all the
provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the
beautiful young virgins to Susa, the palatial city, to the women's
house, to the custody of Hegai the king's eunuch, keeper of the women.
Let cosmetics be given them;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and let the maiden who pleases the king be
queen instead of Vashti." The idea pleased the king, and he did so.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> There was a certain Jew in Susa, the
palatial city, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of
Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> who had been carried away from Jerusalem
with the captives who had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah,
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> He brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther,
his uncle's daughter; for she had neither father nor mother. The maiden
was fair and beautiful; and when her father and mother were dead,
Mordecai took her for his own daughter.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> So it happened, when the king's commandment
and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together
to Susa, the palatial city, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was
taken into the king's house, to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the
women.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The maiden pleased him, and she obtained
kindness from him. He quickly gave her cosmetics and her portions of
food, and the seven choice maidens who were to be given her out of the
king's house. He moved her and her maidens to the best place in the
women's house.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Esther had not made known her people or
her relatives, because Mordecai had instructed her that she should not
make it known.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Mordecai walked every day in front of the
court of the women's house, to find out how Esther did, and what would
become of her.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Each young woman's turn came to go in to
King Ahasuerus after her purification for twelve months (for so were the
days of their purification accomplished, six months with oil of myrrh,
and six months with sweet fragrances and with preparations for
beautifying women).

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> The young woman then came to the king in
this way: whatever she desired was given her to go with her out of the
women's house to the king's house.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> In the evening she went, and on the next
day she returned into the second women's house, to the custody of
Shaashgaz, the king's eunuch, who kept the concubines. She came in to
the king no more, unless the king delighted in her and she was called by
name.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter
of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter,
came to go in to the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the
king's eunuch, the keeper of the women, advised. Esther obtained favor
in the sight of all those who looked at her.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> So Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus
into his royal house in the tenth month, which is the month Tevet, in
the seventh year of his reign.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The king loved Esther more than all the
women, and she obtained favor and kindness in his sight more than all
the virgins; so that he set the royal crown on her head, and made her
queen instead of Vashti.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Then the king made a great feast for all
his princes and his servants, even Esther's feast; and he proclaimed a
holiday in the provinces, and gave gifts according to the king's bounty.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> When the virgins were gathered together
the second time, Mordecai was sitting inside the king's gate.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Esther had not yet made known her
relatives or her people, as Mordecai had commanded her; for Esther
obeyed Mordecai, as she did when she was brought up by him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> In those days, while Mordecai was sitting
inside the king's gate, two of the king's eunuchs, Bigtha and Teresh,
who were doorkeepers, were angry, and sought to lay hands on the King
Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> This matter became known to Mordecai, who
informed Esther the queen; and Esther informed the king in Mordecai's
name.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> When the matter was investigated, and it
was found to be so, they were both hanged on a tree; and it was written
in the Book of the Chronicles in the king's presence.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> After these things King Ahasuerus promoted
Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his
seat above all the princes who were with him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> All the king's servants who were inside the
king's gate bowed down, and paid homage to Haman; for the king had so
commanded concerning him. But Mordecai didn't bow down or pay him
homage.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then the king's servants, who were inside
the king's gate, said to Mordecai, "Why do you disobey the king's
commandment?"

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Now it came to pass, when they spoke daily
to him, and he didn't listen to them, that they told Haman, to see
whether Mordecai's reason would stand; for he had told them that he was
a Jew.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> When Haman saw that Mordecai didn't bow
down, nor pay him homage, Haman was full of wrath.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But he scorned the thought of laying hands
on Mordecai alone, for they had made known to him Mordecai's people.
Therefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews, the people of Mordecai,
throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> In the first month, which is the month
Nisan, in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is,
the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, and
chose the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Haman said to King Ahasuerus, "There is a
certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all
the provinces of your kingdom, and their laws are different than those
of other peoples. They do not keep the king's laws. Therefore it is not
to the king's benefit to allow them to remain.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If it pleases the king, let it be written
that they be destroyed; and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver
into the hands of those who are in charge of the king's business, to
bring it into the king's treasuries."

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The king took his ring from his hand, and
gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> The king said to Haman, "The silver is
given to you, the people also, to do with them as it seems good to you."

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then the king's scribes were called in on
the first month, on the thirteenth day of the month; and all that Haman
commanded was written to the king's satraps, and to the governors who
were over every province, and to the princes of every people, to every
province according its writing, and to every people in their language.
It was written in the name of King Ahasuerus, and it was sealed with the
king's ring.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Letters were sent by couriers into all
the king's provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all
Jews, both young and old, little children and women, in one day, on the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to
plunder their possessions.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> This is a copy of the letters: "The great
king Ahasuerus writes these things to the princes and governors, who are
under him from India unto Ethiopia in one hundred twenty-seven
provinces.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> "After I became lord over many nations and
had dominion over the whole world, not lifted up with presumption of my
authority, but carrying myself always with equity and mildness, I
purposed to settle my subjects continually in a quiet life, and make my
kingdom peaceable and open for passage to the utmost coasts, to renew
peace, which is desired of all men.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> "Now when I asked my counselors how this
might be brought to pass, Haman, who excelled in wisdom among us and was
approved for his constant good will and steadfast fidelity and had the
honor of the second place in the kingdom,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> declared to us that in all nations
throughout the world there was scattered a certain malicious people, who
had laws contrary to all nations and continually despised the
commandments of kings, so that the uniting of our kingdoms, honorably
intended by us, cannot go forward.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Seeing this, we understand that this people
alone is continually in opposition unto all men, differing in the
strange ways of their laws and bringing about evil to our state, working
all the mischief they can, so that our kingdom may not be firmly
established:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> "Therefore have we commanded that all those
who are signified in writing to you by Haman, who is ordained over these
affairs and is next unto us, shall all, with their wives and children,
be utterly destroyed by the sword of their enemies, without all mercy
and pity, by the fourteenth day of the twelfth month Adar of this
present year:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Thus may they, who from of old and now also
are malicious, may in one day with violence go into the grave, and so
ever hereafter cause our affairs to be well settled and without
trouble."

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> A copy of the letter, that the decree
should be given out in every province, was published to all the peoples,
that they should be ready against that day.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> The couriers went forth in haste by the
king's commandment, and the decree was given out in Susa, the palatial
city. The king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city of Susa was
perplexed.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now when Mordecai found out all that was
done, Mordecai tore his clothes and put on sackcloth with ashes and went
out into the midst of the city and wailed loudly and bitterly.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> He came even before the king's gate, for no
one is allowed inside the king's gate clothed with sackcloth.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> In every province, wherever the king's
commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews
with fasting and weeping and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and
ashes.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Esther's maidens and her eunuchs came and
told her this, and the queen was exceedingly grieved. She sent clothing
to Mordecai, to replace his sackcloth; but he did not accept it.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Then Esther called for Hathach, one of the
king's eunuchs, whom he had appointed to attend her, and commanded him
to go to Mordecai, to find out what this was and why it was.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> So Hathach went out to Mordecai, to the
city square which was before the king's gate.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Mordecai told him of all that had happened
to him and the exact sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to
the king's treasuries for the destruction of the Jews.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> He also gave him the copy of the writing of
the decree that was given out in Susa to destroy them, to show it to
Esther, and to declare it to her, and to urge her to go in to the king,
to make supplication to him and to make request before him, for her
people.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Hathach came and told Esther the words of
Mordecai:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> "'Remember,' he says, 'the days of your
humiliation, when I nurtured you in my hand, because Haman, who is
second only to the king, is against us to the death.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And you, invoke the Lord and persuade the
king for us and free us from death.'"

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Then Esther spoke to Hathach, and gave
him a message for Mordecai:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> "All the king's servants and the people
of the king's provinces know that whoever, whether man or woman, comes
to the king into the inner court without being called, there is one law
for him, that he be put to death, except those to whom the king might
hold out the golden scepter that he may live. I have not been called to
come in to the king these thirty days."

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> They told Esther's words to Mordecai.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Then Mordecai asked them to return answer
to Esther: "Don't think to yourself that you will escape in the king's
house any more than all the Jews.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For if you remain silent now, then relief
and deliverance will come to the Jews from another place, but you and
your father's house will perish. Who knows if you haven't come to the
kingdom for such a time as this?"

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Then Esther asked them to answer
Mordecai:

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> "Go, gather together all the Jews who are
present in Susa and fast for me: neither eat nor drink three days, night
or day. I and my maidens will also fast the same way. Then I will go in
to the king, which is against the law; and if I perish, I perish."

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> So Mordecai went his way and did
according to all that Esther had commanded him.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Then Mordecai thought upon all the works
of the Lord and made his prayer unto him, saying,

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> "O Lord, Lord, the King Almighty, the
whole world is in your power and if you have appointed to save Israel,
then no man can contradict you:

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For you have made heaven and earth and
all the wondrous things under the heavens.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> You are Lord of all things; there is no
man who can withstand you, for you are the Lord.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> You know all things and you know, Lord,
that it was neither in contempt nor pride nor for any desire of glory
that I did not bow down to proud Haman.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> For I would have been content, with good
will for the salvation of Israel, to kiss the soles of his feet.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> But I did not, so that I might not prefer
the glory of man above the glory of God: neither will I worship any but
thee, O God; neither will I do so in pride.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And now, O Lord God and King, spare thy
people, for their eyes are upon us to bring us to naught; yes, they
desire to destroy the inheritance which has been yours from the
beginning.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Despise not the portion which you have
delivered out of Egypt for your own self.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Hear my prayer and be merciful to your
inheritance: turn our sorrow into joy, so that we may live, O Lord, and
praise thy name; and destroy not the mouths of those who praise thee, O
Lord."

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> All Israel, in the same way, cried out
most earnestly to the Lord, because their death was before their eyes.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Queen Esther also was in fear of death and
resorted to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And she put away her glorious apparel, and
put on the garments of anguish and mourning; and instead of precious
ointments, she covered her head with ashes and dung; and she humbled her
body greatly, and all the aspects of her beauty she covered with her
torn hair.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And she prayed to the Lord God of Israel,
saying, "O my Lord, you alone are our King. Help me, a desolate woman,
who has no helper but you,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> for my danger is close at hand.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> From my youth I have heard, in the tribe of
my family, how you, O Lord, took Israel from among all peoples, and our
fathers from all their predecessors, for a perpetual inheritance, and
you have performed whatsoever you promised them.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And now we have sinned before you;
therefore you have given us into the hands of our enemies,

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> because we worshiped their gods. O Lord,
you are righteous!

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> "Nevertheless, it does not satisfy them
that we are in bitter captivity, but they have struck a deal with their
idols.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They will abolish the purpose that you with
your mouth have ordained, and destroy your inheritance, and silence the
mouth of those who praise you, and quench the glory of your house and of
your altar,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> and open the mouths of the heathen to
bring forth the praises of the idols, to magnify a fleshly king for
ever.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> "O Lord, don't give your scepter to those
who are nothing, and let them not laugh at our fall; but turn their
schemes upon themselves, and make an example of him who began this
against us.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Remember, O Lord, make yourself known in
the time of our affliction and give me boldness, O King of the nations
and Lord of all power.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Give me eloquent speech in my mouth
before the king; turn his heart to hate him that fights against us, so
that there may be an end of him and of all that are likeminded to him.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> But deliver us with your hand and help
me, for I am desolate and have no other help but you.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> "You know all things, O Lord; you know
that I hate the glory of the unrighteous and abhor the bed of the
uncircumcised and of all the heathen.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> You know my necessity, for I abhor the
sign of my high estate, which is upon my head in the days when I show
myself, and that I abhor it as a menstruous rag, and that I wear it not
when I am in private by myself.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> You know that your handmaid has not eaten
at Haman's table, and that I have not greatly esteemed the king's feast,
nor drunk the wine of the drink offerings.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Neither has your handmaid had any joy,
since the day that I was brought here to the present, except in you, O
Lord God of Abraham.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> O mighty God above all, hear the voice of
the forlorn and deliver us out of the hands of the mischievous and
deliver me out of my fear."

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And on the third day, when she ended her
prayers, she put away her mourning garments and put on her glorious
apparel.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And being gloriously adorned, after she
called upon God, who knows all and saves all, she took two maids with
her;

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> and on the one, she leaned, carrying
herself daintily,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> and the other followed, bearing up her
train.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> She was ruddy through the perfection of her
beauty, and her countenance was cheerful and very amiable, but her heart
was in anguish out of fear.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Then, having passed through all the doors,
she stood before the king, who sat upon his royal throne and was clothed
with all his robes of majesty, all glittering with gold and precious
stones; and he was very dreadful.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Then, lifting up his countenance which
shined with majesty, he looked very fiercely upon her; and the queen
fell down and was pale and fainted and bowed herself upon the head of
the maid who went before her.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Then God changed the spirit of the king
into mildness, who in a fright leaped from his throne and took her in
his arms, till she came to herself again, and comforted her with loving
words and said to her,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> "Esther, what is the matter? I am your
brother, be of good cheer.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> You shall not die, though our commandment
be general. Come near."

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And so he held up his golden scepter, and
laid it upon her neck,

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> and embraced her, and said, "Speak to
me."

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Then she said to him, "I saw you, my
lord, as an angel of God, and my heart was troubled for fear of your
majesty.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For you are wonderful, lord, and your
countenance is full of grace."

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And as she was speaking, she fell down
out of faintness.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Then the king was troubled and all his
servants comforted her. \[Alternate text from the Hebrew, verses
17-18:\]

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Now it happened on the third day that
Esther put on her royal clothing, and stood in the inner court of the
king's house, next to the king's house. The king sat on his royal throne
in the royal house, next to the entrance of the house.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> When the king saw Esther the queen,
standing in the court, she obtained favor in his sight; and the king
held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand. So Esther
came near, and touched the top of the scepter.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Then the king asked her, "What would you
like, Queen Esther? What is your request? It shall be given you even to
half of the kingdom."

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Esther said, "If it seems good to the
king, let the king and Haman come today to the banquet that I have
prepared for him."

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Then the king said, "Bring Haman quickly,
so that it may be done as Esther has said." So the king and Haman came
to the banquet that Esther had prepared.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> The king said to Esther at the banquet of
wine, "What is your petition? It shall be granted you. What is your
request? Even to half of the kingdom it shall be performed."

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Then Esther answered and said, "My
petition and my request is this.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> If I have found favor in the sight of the
king, and if it please the king to grant my petition and to perform my
request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I will prepare
for them, and I will do tomorrow as the king has said."

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Then Haman went out that day joyful and
glad of heart. But when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he
didn't stand up or move for him, he was filled with wrath against
Mordecai.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Nevertheless Haman restrained himself and
went home. There he sent and called for his friends and Zeresh his wife.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Haman recounted to them the glory of his
riches, the multitude of his children, all the things in which the king
had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and
servants of the king.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Haman also said, "Yes, Esther the queen
let no man come in with the king to the banquet that she had prepared
but myself; and tomorrow I am also invited by her together with the
king.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Yet all this avails me nothing, so long
as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate."

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Then Zeresh his wife and all his friends
said to him, "Let a gallows be made fifty cubits high, and in the
morning speak to the king about hanging Mordecai on it. Then go in
merrily with the king to the banquet." This pleased Haman, so he had the
gallows made.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> On that night, the king couldn't sleep.
He commanded the book of records of the chronicles to be brought, and
they were read to the king.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> It was found written that Mordecai had
told of Bigtha and Teresh, two of the king's eunuchs, who were
doorkeepers, who had tried to lay hands on the King Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> The king said, "What honor and dignity
has been bestowed on Mordecai for this?" Then the king's servants who
attended him said, "Nothing has been done for him."

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> The king said, "Who is in the court?" Now
Haman had come into the outer court of the king's house, to speak to the
king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The king's servants said to him, "Behold,
Haman stands in the court." The king said, "Let him come in."

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> So Haman came in. The king said to him,
"What shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor?" Now
Haman said in his heart, "Who would the king delight to honor more than
myself?"

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Haman said to the king, "For the man whom
the king delights to honor,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> let royal clothing be brought which the
king uses to wear, and the horse which the king rides on, and the royal
crown which is set upon his head.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Let the clothing and the horse be
delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble princes, that they
may array the man whom the king delights to honor with them, and have
him ride on horseback through the city square, and proclaim before him,
'Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honor!'"

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Then the king said to Haman, "Hurry and
take the clothing and the horse, as you have said, and do this for
Mordecai the Jew, who sits at the king's gate. Let nothing fail of all
that you have spoken."

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Then Haman took the clothing and the
horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and had him ride through the city square,
and proclaimed before him, "Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
king delights to honor!"

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Mordecai came back to the king's gate,
but Haman hurried to his house, mourning and having his head covered.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Haman recounted to Zeresh his wife and
all his friends everything that had happened to him. Then his wise men
and Zeresh his wife said to him, "If Mordecai, before whom you have
begun to fall, is of Jewish descent, you will not prevail against him,
but you will surely fall before him."

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> While they were yet talking with him,
the king's eunuchs came and hurried to bring Haman to the banquet that
Esther had prepared.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> So the king and Haman came to banquet
with Esther the queen.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> The king said again to Esther, on the
second day at the banquet of wine, "What is your petition, Queen Esther?
It shall be granted you. What is your request? Even to half of the
kingdom it shall be performed."

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Then Esther the queen answered, "If I
have found favor in your sight, O king, and if it please the king, let
my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For we are sold, I and my people, to be
destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for
bondservants and bondmaids, I would have held my peace, although the
adversary could not have compensated for the king's loss."

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the
queen, "Who is he and where is he, who dared presume in his heart to do
so?"

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Esther said, "An adversary and an enemy,
even this wicked Haman!" Then Haman was afraid before the king and the
queen.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> The king arose in his wrath from the
banquet of wine and went into the palace garden. Haman stood up to make
request for his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil
determined against him by the king.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Then the king returned out of the palace
garden into the place of the banquet of wine; and Haman had fallen on
the couch where Esther was. Then the king said, "Will he even assault
the queen in front of me in the house?" As the word went out of the
king's mouth, they covered Haman's face.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Then Harbona, one of the eunuchs who were
with the king said, "Behold, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman
has made for Mordecai, who spoke good for the king, is standing at
Haman's house." The king said, "Hang him on it!"

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> So they hanged Haman on the gallows
that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the king's wrath was pacified.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> On that day, King Ahasuerus gave the
house of Haman, the Jews' enemy, to Esther the queen. Mordecai came
before the king; for Esther had revealed what he was to her.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> The king took off his ring, which he had
taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai. Esther set Mordecai over the
house of Haman.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Esther spoke yet again before the king,
and fell down at his feet and begged him with tears to put away the
mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his plan that he had devised against
the Jews.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then the king held out to Esther the
golden scepter. So Esther arose and stood before the king.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> She said, "If it pleases the king and if
I have found favor in his sight, and if it seems right to the king and I
am pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters
devised by Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to
destroy the Jews who are in all the king's provinces.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For how can I endure to see the evil that
would come to my people? How can I endure to see the destruction of my
relatives?"

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the
queen and to Mordecai the Jew, "See, I have given Esther the house of
Haman, and him they have hanged on the gallows, because he laid his hand
on the Jews.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Write also to the Jews, as it pleases
you, in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring; for the
writing which is written in the king's name and sealed with the king's
ring may not be reversed by any man."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Then the king's scribes were called at
that time, in the third month Sivan, on the twenty-third day of the
month; and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded to
the Jews, and to the satraps, and the governors and princes of the
provinces which are from India to Ethiopia, one hundred twenty-seven
provinces, to every province according to its writing, and to every
people in their language, and to the Jews in their writing, and in their
language.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> He wrote in the name of King Ahasuerus,
and sealed it with the king's ring, and sent letters by courier on
horseback, riding on royal horses that were bread from swift steeds.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> In those letters, the king granted the
Jews who were in every city to gather themselves together, and to defend
their life, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all the power
of the people and province that would assault them, their little ones
and women, and to plunder their possessions,

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> on one day in all the provinces of King
Ahasuerus, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the
month Adar:

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> "The great king Ahasuerus to the princes
and governors of the one hundred twenty seven provinces from India to
Ethiopia and to all our faithful subjects, greeting.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> "Many, the more often they are honored
with the great bounty of their gracious princes, the more proud they
become,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> and they endeavor to hurt, not only our
subjects, but also, being unable to bear abundance, take it in hand to
practice against those that do them good.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And they take, not only thankfulness away
from among men, but also, lifted up with the glorious words of lewd
persons who were never good, they think to escape the justice of God,
who sees all things and hates evil.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> "Oftentimes also, the pleasing words of
those who are trusted to manage their friends' affairs, have caused many
who are in authority to be partakers of innocent blood and have
enwrapped them in remediless calamities--

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> thus beguiling with the falsehood and
deceit of their lewd disposition, the innocence and goodness of princes.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> "Now you may see this, as we have
declared, not so much by ancient histories, but also if you search what
has been wickedly done of late, through the pestilent behavior of those
who are unworthily placed in authority.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And we must take care for the time to
come, that our kingdom may be quiet and peaceable for all men,

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> both by changing our purposes and by
always judging things which are evident with more equal proceeding.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> "For Haman, a Macedonian, the son of
Hammedatha, being indeed a stranger from the Persian blood, and far
distant from our goodness and as a stranger received of us,

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> had obtained so much of the favor that
we show toward every nation, that he was called our father and was
continually honored above all as the person next to the king.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> But he, not bearing his great dignity,
went about to deprive us of our kingdom and life,

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> and, by manifold and cunning deceits,
sought of us the destruction also of Mordecai, who saved our life and
continually procured our good, as also of blameless Esther, partaker of
our kingdom, with their whole nation.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> For by these means he thought, finding
us destitute of friends, to have transferred the kingdom of the Persians
to the Macedonians.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> "But we find that the Jews, whom this
wicked wretch had delivered to utter destruction, are no evildoers, but
live by most just laws,

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> and that they be children of the most
high and most mighty living God, who has ordered the kingdom both unto
us and unto our progenitors, in the most excellent way.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Wherefore, you shall do well not to put
in execution the letters sent to you by Haman the son of Hammedatha,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> for he, who was the worker of these
things, is hanged at the gates of Susa with all his family: God, who
rules all things, speedily rendering vengeance to him according to his
deserts.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> "Therefore you shall publish the copy
of this letter in all places that the Jews may freely live after their
own laws.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And you shall aid them, so that even on
the same day, the thirteenth day of the twelfth month Adar, they may be
avenged on them, who in the time of their affliction would have set upon
them.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> For Almighty God has turned to joy for
them the day wherein the chosen people would have perished.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> You shall therefore among your solemn
feasts keep it a high day with all feasting:

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> that both now and hereafter there may
be safety to us and the well-meaning Persians; but to those who conspire
against us, a memorial of destruction.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Therefore, every city and country
whatsoever, which does not do according to these things, shall be
destroyed without mercy with fire and sword and shall be made not only
unacceptable for men, but also most hateful to wild beasts and fowl for
ever."

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> A copy of the letter, that the decree
should be given out in every province, was published to all the peoples,
so that the Jews would be ready for that day to avenge themselves on
their enemies.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> So the couriers who rode on royal
horses went out, hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment. The
decree was given out in Susa, the palatial city.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Mordecai went out of the presence of
the king in royal clothing of blue and white, and with a great crown of
gold, and with a robe of fine linen and purple; and the city of Susa
shouted and was glad.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> The Jews had light, gladness, joy, and
honor.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> In every province and in every city,
wherever the king's commandment and his decree came, the Jews had
gladness, joy, a feast, and a good day. Many from among the peoples of
the land became Jews; for the fear of the Jews had fallen upon them.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now in the twelfth month, which is the
month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the month, when the king's
commandment and his decree drew near to being put into execution, on the
day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to conquer them, (but it was
turned out the opposite happened, that the Jews conquered those who
hated them),

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> the Jews gathered themselves together in
their cities throughout all the provinces of the King Ahasuerus, to lay
hands on those who wanted to harm them. No one could withstand them,
because the fear of them had fallen on all the people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> All the princes of the provinces, the
satraps, the governors, and those who did the king's business, helped
the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai had fallen on them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> For Mordecai was great in the king's
house and his fame went out throughout all the provinces; for the man
Mordecai grew greater and greater.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The Jews struck all their enemies with
the stroke of the sword, and with slaughter and destruction, and did
what they wanted to those who hated them.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> In Susa, the palatial city, the Jews
killed and destroyed five hundred men.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> They killed Parshandatha, Dalphon,
Aspatha,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Parmashta, Arisai, Aridai, and Vaizatha,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> the ten sons of Haman the son of
Hammedatha, the Jew's enemy, but they did not lay their hand on the
plunder.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> On that day, the number of those who
were slain in Susa, the palatial city, was brought before the king.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> The king said to Esther the queen, "The
Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Susa, the palatial
city, including the ten sons of Haman; what then have they done in the
rest of the king's provinces! Now what is your petition? It shall be
granted you. What is your further request? It shall be done."

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Then Esther said, "If it pleases the
king, let it be granted to the Jews who are in Susa to do tomorrow also
according to this day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged on
the gallows."

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The king commanded this to be done. A
decree was given out in Susa; and they hanged Haman's ten sons.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> The Jews who were in Susa gathered
themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and
killed three hundred men in Susa; but they did not lay their hand on the
spoil.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> The other Jews who were in the king's
provinces gathered themselves together, defended their lives, had rest
from their enemies, and killed seventy-five thousand of those who hated
them; but they did not lay their hand on the plunder.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> This was done on the thirteenth day of
the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of that month they rested and
made it a day of feasting and gladness.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> But the Jews who were in Susa assembled
together on the thirteenth and on the fourteenth days of the month; and,
on the fifteenth day of that month, they rested and made it a day of
feasting and gladness.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Therefore the Jews of the villages, who
live in the unwalled towns, make the fourteenth day of the month Adar a
day of gladness and feasting, a good day, and a day of sending presents
of food to one another.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Mordecai wrote these things and sent
letters to all the Jews who were in all the provinces of the king
Ahasuerus, both near and far,

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> to enjoin them that they should keep
the fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month Adar yearly,

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> as the days in which the Jews had rest
from their enemies, and the month which was turned for them from sorrow
to gladness and from mourning into a good day; that they should make
them days of feasting and gladness and of sending presents of food to
one another and gifts to the needy.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> The Jews accepted the custom which they
had begun, as Mordecai had written to them;

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> because Haman the son of Hammedatha,
the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted against the Jews to
destroy them and had cast "Pur," that is the lot, to consume them and to
destroy them;

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> but when this became known to the king,
he commanded by letters that his wicked plan, which he had devised
against the Jews, should return on his own head, and that he and his
sons should be hanged on the gallows.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> Therefore they called these days
"Purim," from the word "Pur." Therefore, because of all the words of
this letter and of what they had seen concerning this matter and of what
had come to them,

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> the Jews established, and imposed on
themselves and on their descendants and on all those who joined
themselves to them, so that it should not fail, that they would keep
these two days according to what was written and according to its
appointed time every year;

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> and that these days should be
remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every
province, and every city; and that these days of Purim should not fall
from among the Jews, nor the memory of them perish from their seed.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Then Esther the queen, the daughter of
Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority to confirm this
second letter of Purim.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> He sent letters to all the Jews, to the
one hundred twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with
words of peace and truth,

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> to confirm these days of Purim in their
appointed times, as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had decreed,
and as they had imposed upon themselves and their descendants, in the
matter of the fastings and their cry.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The commandment of Esther confirmed
these matters of Purim; and it was written in the book.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> King Ahasuerus laid a tribute on the land
and on the islands of the sea.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> All the acts of his power and of his
might, and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai, to which the
king promoted him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Media and Persia?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For Mordecai the Jew was next to King
Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted by the multitude of
his brothers, seeking the good of his people and speaking peace to all
his descendants.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Then Mordecai said, "God has done these
things.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For I remember a dream which I saw
concerning these matters, and nothing thereof has failed.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> A little fountain became a river, and
there was light and the sun and much water: this river is Esther, whom
the king married and made queen;

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> and the two dragons are myself and Haman.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And the nations were those which were
assembled to destroy the name of the Jews;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> and my nation is this Israel, who cried
to God and were saved, for the Lord has saved his people, and the Lord
has delivered us from all those evils, and God has wrought signs and
great wonders, which have not been done among the Gentiles.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Therefore he has made two lots, one for
the people of God and another for all the Gentiles.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And these two lots came at the hour and
time and day of judgment, before God among all nations.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> So God remembered his people and
justified his inheritance.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Therefore, those days shall be given to
them in the month Adar, the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the same
month, with an assembly and joy and with gladness before God, according
to the generations for ever among his people."

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> In the fourth year of the reign of
Ptolemeus and Cleopatra, Dositheus, who said he was a priest and Levite,
and Ptolemeus his son, brought this letter of Purim, which they said was
the same, and that Lysimachus the son of Ptolemeus, who was in
Jerusalem, had translated it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Baruch](bar)
