[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aes)  [Next](epj) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Baruch

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These are the words of the book, which
Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Maasiah, the son of Zedekiah, the
son of Hasadiah, the son of Hilkiah, wrote in Babylon,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> in the fifth year, and on the seventh day
of the month, since the time when the Chaldeans took Jerusalem and burnt
it with fire.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Baruch read the words of this book in the
hearing of Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and to the ears
of all the people who came to hear the book,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and in the hearing of the nobles, and of
the king's sons, and in the hearing of the elders, and of all the
people, from the lowest to the highest, even of all those who dwelt at
Babylon by the river Sud;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> whereupon they wept, fasted, and prayed
before the Lord.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> They also made a collection of money
according to each man's ability,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and they sent it to Jerusalem to Joachim
the high priest, the son of Hilkiah, son of Salom, and to the priests,
and to all the people who were with him at Jerusalem,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> at the same time when he received the
vessels of the house of the Lord, which had been carried out of the
Temple, to return them into the land of Judah, in the tenth day of the
month Sivan, namely, silver vessels, which Zedekiah, the son of Josiah
king of Judah, had made.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> After that, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
had carried away Jeconiah and the princes and the captives and the
mighty men and the people of the land, from Jerusalem and brought them
to Babylon.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And they said, "Behold, we have sent you
money to buy you burnt offerings and sin offerings and incense, and to
prepare you cereal offerings, to offer upon the altar of the Lord our
God,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> and to pray for the life of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and for the life of Belshazzar his son,
that their days on earth may be as the days of heaven.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And the Lord will give us strength and
lighten our eyes, and we shall live under the shadow of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon and under the shadow of Belshazzar his son, and we shall
serve them for many days and find favor in their sight.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Pray for us also to the Lord our God, for
we have sinned against the Lord our God; and until this day the fury of
the Lord and his wrath has not turned from us.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And you shall read this book, which we
have sent to you, to make confession in the house of the Lord on the
feasts and solemn days.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> "And you shall say, 'To the Lord our God
belongs righteousness, but to us, confusion of face, as has happened
this day, unto those of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.'

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And to our kings and our princes and our
priests and our prophets and our fathers, you shall say:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> 'For we have sinned before the Lord,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> and disobeyed him, and have not heeded
the voice of the Lord our God to walk in the commandments which he gave
us openly.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Since the day that the Lord brought our
forefathers out of the land of Egypt, until this present day, we have
been disobedient to the Lord our God and we have been negligent in not
hearing his voice.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Therefore the evils clung to us and also
the curse, which the Lord appointed by Moses his servant at the time
that he brought our fathers out of the land of Egypt to give us a land
that flows with milk and honey, as is clear on this day.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Nevertheless we have not heeded the voice
of the Lord our God, according to all the words of the prophets, whom he
sent to us,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> but every man followed the imagination of
his own wicked heart, to serve strange gods and to do evil in the sight
of the Lord our God.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> "'Therefore the Lord has made good his
word, which he pronounced against us and against our judges who judged
Israel and against our kings and our princes and against the men of
Israel and Judah,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> to bring upon us great plagues, such as
never happened under the whole heaven, yet came to pass in Jerusalem,
according to the things which were written in the law of Moses,

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> so that a man would eat the flesh of his
own son and the flesh of his own daughter.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Moreover, he has delivered them to be in
subjection to all the kingdoms which surround us, to be as a reproach
and a desolation among all the surrounding peoples, where the Lord has
scattered them.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Thus we were cast down and not exalted
because we sinned against the Lord our God and have not been obedient to
his voice.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> To the Lord our God belongs righteousness,
but to us and to our fathers open shame, as is clear on this day.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For all these plagues have come upon us,
which the Lord has pronounced against us,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> yet have we not prayed before the Lord, so
that we might turn, each one from the imaginations of his wicked heart.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore the Lord watched over us for evil
and the Lord has brought it upon us; for the Lord is righteous in all
his works which he has commanded us.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Yet we have not hearkened to his voice to
walk in the commandments of the Lord which he has set before us.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> "'And now, O Lord God of Israel, who has
brought your people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand and high
arm, and with signs and wonders and great power, and has become renown,
as is clear on this day:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> O Lord our God, we have sinned, we have
been ungodly, we have acted unrighteously, in all your ordinances.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Let your wrath turn from us, for we are
but a few left among the heathen where you have scattered us.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Hear our prayers, O Lord, and our
petitions, and deliver us for your own sake, and give us favor in the
sight of those who have led us away,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> so that all the earth may know that you
are the Lord our God, because Israel and his posterity is called by your
name.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> O Lord, look down from your holy house
and consider us; bow down your ear, O Lord, to hear us.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Open your eyes and behold, for the dead
who are in the graves, whose souls are taken from their bodies, will
give to the Lord neither praise nor righteousness;

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> but the soul which is greatly vexed,
which goes stooping and feeble, and the eyes which fail, and the hungry
soul, will give you praise and righteousness, O Lord.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Therefore we do not make our humble
supplication before you, O Lord our God, for the righteousness of our
fathers and our kings.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> "'For you have sent out your wrath and
indignation upon us, as you have spoken by your servants the prophets,
saying,

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> "Thus says the Lord, 'Bow down your
shoulders to serve the king of Babylon; so shall you remain in the land
which I gave to your fathers.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But if you will not hear the voice of the
Lord, to serve the king of Babylon,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> I will cause to cease, out of the cites
of Judah and from without Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and the voice of
joy, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, and the
whole land shall be desolate of inhabitants.'"

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But we would not heed your voice to serve
the king of Babylon; therefore you have made good the words that you
spoke by your servants the prophets, namely, that the bones of our kings
and the bones of our fathers should be taken out of their place.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And, lo, they are cast out to the heat of
the day and to the frost of the night, and they died in great miseries
by famine, by sword, and by pestilence,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> and the house which is called by your
name you have laid waste, as is clear on this day, because of the
wickedness of the house of Israel and the house of Judah.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> O Lord our God, you have dealt with us
according to all your goodness and all your great mercy,

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> just as you spoke by your servant Moses
in the day when you commanded him to write the law before the children
of Israel, saying,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> "If you will not hear my voice, surely
this very great multitude shall be turned into a small number among the
nations where I will scatter them.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> For I knew that they would not hear me,
because they are a stiff-necked people, but, in the land of their
captivity, they shall remember themselves,

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> and shall know that I am the Lord their
God, for I will give them a heart, and ears to hear,

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> and they shall praise me in the land of
their captivity and think upon my name,

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> and repent from their stiff neck and from
their wicked deeds; for they shall remember the way of their fathers,
who sinned before the Lord.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And I will bring them again into the land
which I promised with an oath to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and they shall be lords of it; and I will increase them and they
shall not be diminished.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And I will make an everlasting covenant
with them to be their God and they shall be my people; and I will no
longer drive my people of Israel out of the land which I have given
them."'"

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> "'O Lord Almighty, God of Israel, the soul
in anguish, the troubled spirit, cries to you.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Hear, O Lord, and have mercy because you
are merciful, and have pity upon us because we have sinned before you.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For you endure for ever and we perish
utterly.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> O Lord Almighty, you God of Israel, hear
now the prayers of the dead Israelites and their children, who have
sinned before you and not heeded the voice of you, their God, and as a
result these plagues cling to us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Remember not the iniquities of our
forefathers, but think upon your power and your name now at this time.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For you are the Lord our God, and you, O
Lord, will we praise.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And for this reason you have put your fear
into our hearts, to the intent that we should call upon your name and
praise you in our captivity, for we have called to mind all the iniquity
of our forefathers who sinned before you.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Behold, we are still this day in our
captivity, where you have scattered us as a reproach and a curse, and to
be subject to payments, according to all the iniquities of our fathers
who departed from the Lord our God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> "'Hear, Israel, the commandments of life;
listen, to understand wisdom.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> How has it happened, Israel, that you are
in your enemies' land, that you have grown old in a strange country,
that you are defiled with the dead,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> that you are counted with those who go
down into the grave?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> You have forsaken the fountain of wisdom.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For if you had walked in the way of God,
you would have dwelled in peace for ever.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Learn, where is wisdom, where is
strength, where is understanding, so that you may know also where is
length of days and life, where is the light of the eyes and peace.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Who has found out her place? Or who has
come into her treasures?

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> What has become of the princes of the
heathen and such as ruled the beasts upon the earth,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> those who had their pastime with the
fowls of the air and those who hoarded up silver and gold, wherein men
trust, and made no end of their acquiring?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For those who wrought in silver, and who
were so careful, and whose works are unsearchable,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> they have vanished and gone down to the
grave, and others have come up in their places.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Young men have seen light and dwelt upon
the earth, but the way of knowledge they have not known,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> nor understood the paths of it, nor laid
hold of it; their children were far off from that way.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> It has not been heard of in Canaan,
neither has it been seen in Teman.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> The Hagarenes, who seek wisdom on the
earth, the merchants of Meran and Teman, the authors of fables and
seekers of understanding; none of these have known the way of wisdom or
remembered her paths.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> O Israel, how great is the house of God?
And how large is the place of his possession?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> It is great and has no end! It is high
and immeasurable!

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> There were the giants, famous from the
beginning, who were of such great stature and of such expertise in war.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> The Lord did not choose these, neither
did he give them the way of knowledge,

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> but they were destroyed because they had
no wisdom, and they perished through their own foolishness.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Who has gone up into heaven, and obtained
her, and brought her down from the clouds?

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Who has gone over the sea, and found her,
and will bring her for pure gold?

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> No man knows her way, nor understands her
path.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> But he who knows all things knows her and
has found her with his understanding: he who prepared the earth
forevermore, who has filled it with four-footed beasts,

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> he who sends forth light and it goes, who
calls it again and it obeys him with fear.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> The stars shine in their watches and
rejoice. When he calls them, they say, "Here we are!" And so with
cheerfulness they show light to him who made them.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> This is our God, and no other shall stand
in comparison with him.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> He has founded all the way of knowledge,
and has given it to Jacob his servant and Israel his beloved.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> Afterward, he revealed himself upon the
earth, and conversed with men.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> "'This is the book of the commandments of
God and the law that endures for ever. All those who keep it shall come
to life, but such as leave it shall die.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Turn you, O Jacob, and take hold of it;
walk in the presence of its light so that you may be illuminated.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Give not your honor to another, nor the
things which are beneficial for you to a strange nation.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> O Israel, happy are we, for the things
which are pleasing to God are made known to us.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Be of good cheer, my people, the memorial
of Israel.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> You were sold to the nations, not for
destruction, but because you moved God to wrath; thus you were delivered
to the enemies.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For you provoked him who made you, by
sacrificing to devils and not to God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> "'You have forgotten the everlasting God,
who brought you up, and you have grieved Jerusalem, who nursed you.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> For when she saw the wrath of God coming
upon you, she said, "Hearken, O you who dwell around Zion. God has
brought upon me great mourning.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For I saw the captivity of my sons and
daughters, which the Everlasting brought upon them.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> With joy I nourished them, but sent them
away with weeping and mourning.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no man rejoice over me, a widow and
forsaken of many; for by the sins of my children, I am left desolate,
because they departed from the law of God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> They knew not his statutes, nor walked in
the ways of his commandments, nor trod in the paths of discipline in his
righteousness.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Let those who dwell around Zion approach
and remember the captivity of my sons and daughters, which the
Everlasting has brought upon them.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For he has brought a nation upon them
from afar, a shameless nation and of a strange language, who neither
reverenced old man, nor pitied child.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> These have carried away the dear beloved
children of the widow, and left her who was alone desolate without
daughters.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But how can I help you?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> For he who brought these plagues upon you
will deliver you from the hands of your enemies.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Go your way, O my children, go your way,
for I am left desolate.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> I have put off the clothing of peace and
put upon me the sackcloth of my prayer; I will cry to the Everlasting in
my days.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Be of good cheer, O my children, cry to
the Lord, and he will deliver you from the power and hand of the
enemies.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For my hope is in the Everlasting, that
he will save you; and joy has come to me from the Holy One, because of
the mercy which shall soon come to you from the Everlasting our Savior.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> For I sent you out with mourning and
weeping, but God will give you to me again with joy and gladness for
ever.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Just as now the neighbors of Zion have
seen your captivity, so shall they soon see your salvation from our God,
which shall come upon you with the great glory and brightness of the
Everlasting.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> My children, suffer patiently the wrath
which has come upon you from God, for your enemy has persecuted you, but
shortly you shall see his destruction and shall tread upon his neck.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> My delicate ones have gone rough ways and
were taken away as a flock caught by the enemies.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Be of good comfort, O my children, and
cry to God, for you shall be remembered by him who brought these things
upon you.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For as it was your mind to go astray from
God, so then, being returned, seek him ten times more.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> For he who has brought these plagues upon
you shall bring you everlasting joy with your salvation."

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> "'Take a good heart, O Jerusalem, for he
who gave you that name will comfort you.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> Miserable are those who afflicted you and
rejoiced at your fall.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> Miserable are the cities which your
children served; miserable is she who received your sons.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> For, just as she rejoiced at your ruin
and was glad of your fall, so shall she be grieved for her own
desolation.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> For I will take away the rejoicing of her
great multitude, and her pride shall be turned into mourning.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> For fire shall come upon her from the
Everlasting, long to endure, and she shall be inhabited by devils for a
great time.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> O Jerusalem, look about you toward the
east and behold the joy that comes to you from God.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Lo, your sons approach, whom you sent
away, they come gathered together from the east to the west by the word
of the Holy One, rejoicing in the glory of God.'"

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> "'Put off, O Jerusalem, the garment of
mourning and affliction, and put on the wholesomeness of the glory that
comes from God for ever.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Cast around you a double garment of the
righteousness which comes from God, and set a diadem on your head of the
glory of the Everlasting.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For God will reveal your brightness to
every country under heaven.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For your name shall be called by God for
ever: "The peace of righteousness" and "The glory of God's worship."

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand on high and
look about toward the east and behold your children, gathered from the
west to the east by the word of the Holy One, rejoicing in the
remembrance of God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For they departed from you on foot and were
led away by their enemies, but God brings them to you exalted with
glory, as children of the kingdom.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For God has appointed that every high hill
and embankment of long duration shall be cast down, and the valleys
filled up, to make the ground level so that Israel may go safely in the
glory of God,

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> moreover, even the woods and every
sweet-smelling tree shall overshadow Israel by the commandment of God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For God shall lead Israel with joy in the
light of his glory with the mercy and righteousness which comes from
him.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle of Jeremiah](epj)
