[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sus.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Bel and the Dragon

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And king Astyages was gathered to his
fathers, and Cyrus of Persia received his kingdom.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And Daniel conversed with the king and was
honored above all his friends.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Now the Babylons had an idol, called Bel,
and every day twelve great measures of fine flour and forty sheep and
six vessels of wine were spent upon him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the king worshipped it and went daily
to adore it; but Daniel worshipped his own God. And the king said to
him, "Why do you not worship Bel?"

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> He answered and said, "Because I may not
worship idols made with hands, but only the living God, who has created
the heaven and the earth and has sovereignty over all flesh."

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Then the king said to him, "Do you not
think that Bel is a living God? Do you not see how much he eats and
drinks every day?"

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Then Daniel smiled and said, "O king, be
not deceived; for this is only clay within and brass without, and did
never eat or drink anything."

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> So the king was angry and called for his
priests, and said to them, "If you do not tell me who it is that devours
these expenses, you shall die!

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But, if you can prove to me that Bel
devours them, then Daniel shall die, for he has spoken blasphemy against
Bel." And Daniel said to the king, "Let it be according to your word."

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Now the priests of Bel were seventy,
besides their wives and children. And the king went with Daniel into the
temple of Bel.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> So Bel's priests said, "Lo, we go out;
but you, O king, set out the meat and prepare the wine, and shut the
door fast and seal it with your own signet;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And tomorrow when you come in, if you do
not find that Bel has eaten all, we will suffer death, or else Daniel,
who speaks falsely against us."

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And they had little concern about it
because under the table they had made a private entrance, whereby they
entered in continually and consumed those things.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> So when they had gone, the king set out
the meats before Bel. Now Daniel had commanded his servants to bring
ashes, and those they strewed throughout the entire temple in the
presence of the king alone; then they went out and shut the door, and
sealed it with the king's signet, and so departed.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Now in the night the priests with their
wives and children came, as they were accustomed to do, and they ate and
drank it all.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> In the early morning the king arose, and
Daniel with him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And the king said, "Daniel, are the seals
whole?" And he said, "Yes, O king, they are whole."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And as soon as he had opened the door,
the king looked upon the table and cried with a loud voice, "Great you
are, O Bel, and with you is no deceit at all!"

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Then Daniel laughed, and held the king
back so that he would not go in, and he said, "Behold now the pavement,
and mark well whose footsteps these are."

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the king said, "I see the footsteps
of men, women, and children." And then the king was angry,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> and he took the priests with their wives
and children, who showed him the private doors where they came in and
consumed such things as were on the table.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Therefore the king slew them, and
delivered Bel into Daniel's power, who destroyed him and his temple.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And in that same place there was a great
dragon, which they of Babylon worshipped.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And the king said to Daniel, "Will you
also say that this is of brass? Lo, he lives, he eats and drinks; you
cannot say that he is no living god; therefore, worship him."

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Then Daniel said to the king, "I will
worship the Lord my God; for he is the living God.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> But give me permission, O king, and I
shall slay this dragon without sword or staff." The king said, "I give
you permission."

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Then Daniel took pitch and fat and hair,
and boiled them together, and made lumps thereof; this he put in the
dragon's mouth, and so the dragon burst apart; and Daniel said, "Lo,
these are the gods you worship."

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> When they of Babylon heard this, they
took great indignation and conspired against the king, saying, "The king
has become a Jew and he has destroyed Bel; he has slain the dragon and
put the priests to death."

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> So they came to the king and said,
"Deliver Daniel to us or else we will destroy you and your house."

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Now when the king saw that they pressed
him severely, being constrained, he delivered Daniel to them;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> they cast him into the lions' den, where
he was for six days.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And in the den there were seven lions,
and they had given them every day two carcasses and two sheep, which
then were not given to them, to the intent that they might devour
Daniel.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Now there was among the Jews a prophet,
called Habbakuk, who had made pottage and had broken bread in a bowl,
and was going into the field, to bring it to the reapers.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> But the angel of the Lord said to
Habbakuk, "Go, carry the dinner that you have into Babylon to Daniel,
who is in the lions' den."

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And Habbakuk said, "Lord, I never saw
Babylon; neither do I know where the den is."

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> Then the angel of the Lord took him by
the crown, and carried him by the hair of his head, and through the
vehemence of his spirit set him in Babylon over the den.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> And Habbakuk cried, saying, "O Daniel,
Daniel, take the dinner which God has sent you."

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> And Daniel said, "You have remembered me,
O God; neither have you forsaken those who seek you and love you."

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> So Daniel arose and ate; and the angel of
the Lord set Habbakuk in his own place again immediately.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Upon the seventh day the king went to
bewail Daniel; and when he came to the den, he looked in, and behold,
Daniel was sitting.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Then the king cried with a loud voice,
saying, "Great are you, Lord God of Daniel, and there is no other beside
you!"

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> And he drew him out, and cast those who
were the cause of his destruction into the den; and they were devoured
in a moment before his face.
