[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ch1)  [Next](ezr.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 2 Chronicles

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Solomon the son of David was strengthened
in his kingdom, and Yahweh his God was with him, and magnified him
exceedingly.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the
captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every
prince in all Israel, the heads of the fathers' \[houses\].

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So Solomon, and all the assembly with him,
went to the high place that was at Gibeon; for there was the Tent of
Meeting of God, which Moses the servant of Yahweh had made in the
wilderness.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> But David had brought the ark of God up
from Kiriath Jearim to the place that David had prepared for it; for he
had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Moreover the bronze altar, that Bezalel the
son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, was there before the tabernacle of
Yahweh: and Solomon and the assembly were seeking counsel there.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Solomon went up there to the bronze altar
before Yahweh, which was at the Tent of Meeting, and offered one
thousand burnt offerings on it.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> In that night God appeared to Solomon, and
said to him, "Ask what I shall give you."

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Solomon said to God, "You have shown great
loving kindness to David my father, and have made me king in his place.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Now, Yahweh God, let your promise to David
my father be established; for you have made me king over a people like
the dust of the earth in multitude.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Now give me wisdom and knowledge, that I
may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge this your
people, that is so great?"

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> God said to Solomon, "Because this was in
your heart, and you have not asked riches, wealth, or honor, nor the
life of those who hate you, neither yet have asked long life; but have
asked wisdom and knowledge for yourself, that you may judge my people,
over whom I have made you king:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> wisdom and knowledge is granted to you. I
will give you riches, wealth, and honor, such as none of the kings have
had who have been before you; neither shall there any after you have the
like."

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> So Solomon came from the high place that
was at Gibeon, from before the Tent of Meeting, to Jerusalem; and he
reigned over Israel.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen:
and he had one thousand four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand
horsemen, that he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> The king made silver and gold to be in
Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycamore trees that
are in the lowland, for abundance.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The horses which Solomon had were brought
out of Egypt and from Kue; the king's merchants purchased them from Kue.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> They brought up and brought out of Egypt
a chariot for six hundred pieces of silver, and a horse for one hundred
fifty: and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of Syria,
did they bring them out by their means.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now Solomon purposed to build a house for
the name of Yahweh, and a house for his kingdom.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Solomon counted out seventy thousand men to
bear burdens, and eighty thousand men who were stone cutters in the
mountains, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre,
saying, "As you dealt with David my father, and sent him cedars to build
him a house in which to dwell, \[even so deal with me\].

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Behold, I am about to build a house for the
name of Yahweh my God, to dedicate it to him, and to burn before him
incense of sweet spices, and for the continual show bread, and for the
burnt offerings morning and evening, on the Sabbaths, and on the new
moons, and on the set feasts of Yahweh our God. This is \[an ordinance\]
forever to Israel.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> "The house which I build is great; for our
God is great above all gods.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But who is able to build him a house, since
heaven and the heaven of heavens can't contain him? who am I then, that
I should build him a house, except just to burn incense before him?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> "Now therefore send me a man skillful to
work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple,
and crimson, and blue, and who knows how to engrave \[all kinds of\]
engravings, \[to be\] with the skillful men who are with me in Judah and
in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> "Send me also cedar trees, fir trees, and
algum trees, out of Lebanon; for I know that your servants know how to
cut timber in Lebanon: and behold, my servants shall be with your
servants,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> even to prepare me timber in abundance; for
the house which I am about to build shall be great and wonderful.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Behold, I will give to your servants, the
cutters who cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and
twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine,
and twenty thousand baths of oil."

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in
writing, which he sent to Solomon, "Because Yahweh loves his people, he
has made you king over them."

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Huram continued, "Blessed be Yahweh, the
God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who has given to David the
king a wise son, endowed with discretion and understanding, that should
build a house for Yahweh, and a house for his kingdom.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Now I have sent a skillful man, endowed
with understanding, of Huram my father's,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> the son of a woman of the daughters of
Dan; and his father was a man of Tyre, skillful to work in gold, and in
silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue,
and in fine linen, and in crimson, also to engrave any kind of
engraving, and to devise any device; that there may be a place appointed
to him with your skillful men, and with the skillful men of my lord
David your father.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> "Now therefore the wheat and the barley,
the oil and the wine, which my lord has spoken of, let him send to his
servants:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as
much as you shall need; and we will bring it to you in floats by sea to
Joppa; and you shall carry it up to Jerusalem."

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Solomon numbered all the foreigners who
were in the land of Israel, after the numbering with which David his
father had numbered them; and they were found one hundred fifty-three
thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> He set seventy thousand of them to bear
burdens, and eighty thousand who were stone cutters in the mountains,
and three thousand six hundred overseers to set the people at work.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then Solomon began to build the house of
Yahweh at Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where \[Yahweh\] appeared to David
his father, which he prepared in the place that David had appointed, in
the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> He began to build in the second \[day\] of
the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Now these are the foundations which Solomon
laid for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after
the first measure was sixty cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> The porch that was before \[the house\],
its length, according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits,
and the height one hundred twenty; and he overlaid it within with pure
gold.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> The greater house he made a ceiling with
fir wood, which he overlaid with fine gold, and ornamented it with palm
trees and chains.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He garnished the house with precious stones
for beauty: and the gold was gold of Parvaim.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He overlaid also the house, the beams, the
thresholds, and its walls, and its doors, with gold; and engraved
cherubim on the walls.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> He made the most holy house: its length,
according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits, and its
breadth twenty cubits; and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to
six hundred talents.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The weight of the nails was fifty shekels
of gold. He overlaid the upper rooms with gold.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In the most holy house he made two
cherubim of image work; and they overlaid them with gold.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The wings of the cherubim were twenty
cubits long: the wing of the one \[cherub\] was five cubits, reaching to
the wall of the house; and the other wing was \[likewise\] five cubits,
reaching to the wing of the other cherub.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> The wing of the other cherub was five
cubits, reaching to the wall of the house; and the other wing was five
cubits \[also\], joining to the wing of the other cherub.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The wings of these cherubim spread
themselves forth twenty cubits: and they stood on their feet, and their
faces were toward the house.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> He made the veil of blue, and purple, and
crimson, and fine linen, and ornamented it with cherubim.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Also he made before the house two pillars
of thirty-five cubits high, and the capital that was on the top of each
of them was five cubits.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> He made chains in the oracle, and put
\[them\] on the tops of the pillars; and he made one hundred
pomegranates, and put them on the chains.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> He set up the pillars before the temple,
one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and called the name of
that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then he made an altar of brass, twenty
cubits its length, and twenty cubits its breadth, and ten cubits its
height.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Also he made the molten sea of ten cubits
from brim to brim, round in compass; and its height was five cubits; and
a line of thirty cubits encircled it.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Under it was the likeness of oxen, which
encircled it, for ten cubits, encircling the sea. The oxen were in two
rows, cast when it was cast.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> It stood on twelve oxen, three looking
toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking
toward the south, and three looking toward the east: and the sea was set
on them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> It was a handbreadth thick; and its brim
was worked like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily: it
received and held three thousand baths.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> He made also ten basins, and put five on
the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them; such things as
belonged to the burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea was for
the priests to wash in.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> He made the ten lampstands of gold
according to the ordinance concerning them; and he set them in the
temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He made also ten tables, and placed them in
the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. He made one
hundred basins of gold.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Furthermore he made the court of the
priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the
doors of them with brass.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> He set the sea on the right side \[of the
house\] eastward, toward the south.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and
the basins. So Huram made an end of doing the work that he did for king
Solomon in the house of God:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> the two pillars, and the bowls, and the
two capitals which were on the top of the pillars, and the two networks
to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the
pillars,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> and the four hundred pomegranates for the
two networks; two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the
two bowls of the capitals that were on the pillars.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> He made also the bases, and the basins
made he on the bases;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> one sea, and the twelve oxen under it.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The pots also, and the shovels, and the
forks, and all its vessels, did Huram his father make for king Solomon
for the house of Yahweh of bright brass.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In the plain of the Jordan did the king
cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredah.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Thus Solomon made all these vessels in
great abundance: for the weight of the brass could not be found out.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Solomon made all the vessels that were in
the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables with the show
bread on them;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> and the lampstands with their lamps, to
burn according to the ordinance before the oracle, of pure gold;

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> and the flowers, and the lamps, and the
tongs, of gold, and that perfect gold;

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> and the snuffers, and the basins, and the
spoons, and the fire pans, of pure gold: and as for the entry of the
house, the inner doors of it for the most holy place, and the doors of
the main hall of the temple were of gold.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Thus all the work that Solomon did for the
house of Yahweh was finished. Solomon brought in the things that David
his father had dedicated, even the silver, and the gold, and all the
vessels, and put them in the treasuries of the house of God.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Then Solomon assembled the elders of
Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers'
\[houses\] of the children of Israel, to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark
of the covenant of Yahweh out of the city of David, which is Zion.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And all the men of Israel assembled
themselves to the king at the feast, which was \[in\] the seventh month.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> All the elders of Israel came: and the
Levites took up the ark;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> and they brought up the ark, and the Tent
of Meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tent; these did
the priests the Levites bring up.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> King Solomon and all the congregation of
Israel, that were assembled to him, were before the ark, sacrificing
sheep and cattle, that could not be counted nor numbered for multitude.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The priests brought in the ark of the
covenant of Yahweh to its place, into the oracle of the house, to the
most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For the cherubim spread forth their wings
over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its
poles above.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> The poles were so long that the ends of the
poles were seen from the ark before the oracle; but they were not seen
outside: and there it is to this day.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> There was nothing in the ark except the
two tables which Moses put \[there\] at Horeb, when Yahweh made a
covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> It happened, when the priests were come
out of the holy place, (for all the priests who were present had
sanctified themselves, and did not keep their divisions;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> also the Levites who were the singers,
all of them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and their
brothers, arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals and stringed instruments
and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them one hundred
twenty priests sounding with trumpets;)

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> it happened, when the trumpeters and
singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and
thanking Yahweh; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets
and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised Yahweh, \[saying\],
"For he is good; for his loving kindness endures forever!" that then the
house was filled with a cloud, even the house of Yahweh,

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> so that the priests could not stand to
minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of Yahweh filled the
house of God.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Then Solomon said, "Yahweh has said that he
would dwell in the thick darkness.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> But I have built you a house of habitation,
and a place for you to dwell in forever."

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> The king turned his face, and blessed all
the assembly of Israel: and all the assembly of Israel stood.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> He said, "Blessed be Yahweh, the God of
Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father, and has with his
hands fulfilled it, saying,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> 'Since the day that I brought forth my
people out of the land of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes
of Israel to build a house in, that my name might be there; neither
chose I any man to be prince over my people Israel:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> but I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name
might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel.'

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Now it was in the heart of David my father
to build a house for the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But Yahweh said to David my father,
'Whereas it was in your heart to build a house for my name, you did well
that it was in your heart:

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> nevertheless you shall not build the house;
but your son who shall come forth out of your body, he shall build the
house for my name.'

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> "Yahweh has performed his word that he
spoke; for I have risen up in the place of David my father, and sit on
the throne of Israel, as Yahweh promised, and have built the house for
the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> There I have set the ark, in which is the
covenant of Yahweh, which he made with the children of Israel."

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> He stood before the altar of Yahweh in
the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his hands

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> (for Solomon had made a bronze scaffold,
five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had
set it in the midst of the court; and on it he stood, and kneeled down
on his knees before all the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his
hands toward heaven;)

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> and he said, "Yahweh, the God of Israel,
there is no God like you, in heaven, or on earth; you who keep covenant
and loving kindness with your servants, who walk before you with all
their heart;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> who have kept with your servant David my
father that which you promised him: yes, you spoke with your mouth, and
have fulfilled it with your hand, as it is this day.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> "Now therefore, Yahweh, the God of
Israel, keep with your servant David my father that which you have
promised him, saying, 'There shall not fail you a man in my sight to sit
on the throne of Israel, if only your children take heed to their way,
to walk in my law as you have walked before me.'

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Now therefore, Yahweh, the God of Israel,
let your word be verified, which you spoke to your servant David.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> "But will God indeed dwell with men on
the earth? Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens can't contain you;
how much less this house which I have built!

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Yet have respect for the prayer of your
servant, and to his supplication, Yahweh my God, to listen to the cry
and to the prayer which your servant prays before you;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> that your eyes may be open toward this
house day and night, even toward the place where you have said that you
would put your name; to listen to the prayer which your servant shall
pray toward this place.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Listen to the petitions of your servant,
and of your people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place: yes,
hear from your dwelling place, even from heaven; and when you hear,
forgive.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> "If a man sin against his neighbor, and
an oath is laid on him to cause him to swear, and he comes and swears
before your altar in this house;

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> then hear from heaven, and do, and judge
your servants, bringing retribution to the wicked, to bring his way on
his own head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> "If your people Israel be struck down
before the enemy, because they have sinned against you, and shall turn
again and confess your name, and pray and make supplication before you
in this house;

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> then hear from heaven, and forgive the
sin of your people Israel, and bring them again to the land which you
gave to them and to their fathers.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> "When the sky is shut up, and there is no
rain, because they have sinned against you; if they pray toward this
place, and confess your name, and turn from their sin, when you afflict
them:

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> then hear in heaven, and forgive the sin
of your servants, and of your people Israel, when you teach them the
good way in which they should walk; and send rain on your land, which
you have given to your people for an inheritance.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> "If there is famine in the land, if there
is pestilence, if there is blight or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if
their enemies besiege them in the land of their cities; whatever plague
or whatever sickness there is;

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> whatever prayer and supplication be made
by any man, or by all your people Israel, who shall know every man his
own plague and his own sorrow, and shall spread forth his hands toward
this house:

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> then hear from heaven, your dwelling
place and forgive, and render to every man according to all his ways,
whose heart you know; (for you, even you only, know the hearts of the
children of men;)

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> that they may fear you, to walk in your
ways, so long as they live in the land which you gave to our fathers.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> "Moreover concerning the foreigner, who
is not of your people Israel, when he shall come from a far country for
your great name's sake, and your mighty hand, and your outstretched arm;
when they shall come and pray toward this house:

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> then hear from heaven, even from your
dwelling place, and do according to all that the foreigner calls to you
for; that all the peoples of the earth may know your name, and fear you,
as does your people Israel, and that they may know that this house which
I have built is called by your name.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> "If your people go out to battle against
their enemies, by whatever way you shall send them, and they pray to you
toward this city which you have chosen, and the house which I have built
for your name;

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> then hear from heaven their prayer and
their supplication, and maintain their cause.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> "If they sin against you (for there is no
man who doesn't sin), and you are angry with them, and deliver them to
the enemy, so that they carry them away captive to a land far off or
near;

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> yet if they shall repent themselves in
the land where they are carried captive, and turn again, and make
supplication to you in the land of their captivity, saying, 'We have
sinned, we have done perversely, and have dealt wickedly;'

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> if they return to you with all their
heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, where they
have carried them captive, and pray toward their land, which you gave to
their fathers, and the city which you have chosen, and toward the house
which I have built for your name:

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> then hear from heaven, even from your
dwelling place, their prayer and their petitions, and maintain their
cause, and forgive your people who have sinned against you.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> "Now, my God, let, I beg you, your eyes
be open, and let your ears be attentive, to the prayer that is made in
this place.

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> "Now therefore arise, Yahweh God, into
your resting place, you, and the ark of your strength: let your priests,
Yahweh God, be clothed with salvation, and let your saints rejoice in
goodness.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> "Yahweh God, don't turn away the face of
your anointed: remember \[your\] loving kindnesses to David your
servant."

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now when Solomon had made an end of
praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering
and the sacrifices; and the glory of Yahweh filled the house.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The priests could not enter into the house
of Yahweh, because the glory of Yahweh filled Yahweh's house.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> All the children of Israel looked on, when
the fire came down, and the glory of Yahweh was on the house; and they
bowed themselves with their faces to the ground on the pavement, and
worshiped, and gave thanks to Yahweh, \[saying\], "For he is good; for
his loving kindness endures for ever."

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then the king and all the people offered
sacrifice before Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> King Solomon offered a sacrifice of
twenty-two thousand head of cattle, and a hundred and twenty thousand
sheep. So the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> The priests stood, according to their
positions; the Levites also with instruments of music of Yahweh, which
David the king had made to give thanks to Yahweh, when David praised by
their ministry, saying "For his loving kindness endures for ever." The
priests sounded trumpets before them; and all Israel stood.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Moreover Solomon made the middle of the
court holy that was before the house of Yahweh; for there he offered the
burnt offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the bronze
altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offering,
and the meal offering, and the fat.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> So Solomon held the feast at that time
seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great assembly, from the
entrance of Hamath to the brook of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> On the eighth day they held a solemn
assembly: for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the
feast seven days.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> On the three and twentieth day of the
seventh month he sent the people away to their tents, joyful and glad of
heart for the goodness that Yahweh had shown to David, and to Solomon,
and to Israel his people.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Thus Solomon finished the house of
Yahweh, and the king's house: and he successfully completed all that
came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of Yahweh, and in his own
house.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Yahweh appeared to Solomon by night, and
said to him, "I have heard your prayer, and have chosen this place to
myself for a house of sacrifice.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> "If I shut up the sky so that there is no
rain, or if I command the locust to devour the land, or if I send
pestilence among my people;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> if my people, who are called by my name,
shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin,
and will heal their land.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Now my eyes shall be open, and my ears
attentive, to the prayer that is made in this place.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For now have I chosen and made this house
holy, that my name may be there forever; and my eyes and my heart shall
be there perpetually.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> "As for you, if you will walk before me
as David your father walked, and do according to all that I have
commanded you, and will keep my statutes and my ordinances;

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> then I will establish the throne of your
kingdom, according as I covenanted with David your father, saying,
'There shall not fail you a man to be ruler in Israel.'

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> But if you turn away, and forsake my
statutes and my commandments which I have set before you, and shall go
and serve other gods, and worship them;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> then I will pluck them up by the roots
out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have
made holy for my name, I will cast out of my sight, and I will make it a
proverb and a byword among all peoples.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> This house, which is so high, everyone
who passes by it shall be astonished, and shall say, 'Why has Yahweh
done thus to this land, and to this house?'

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> They shall answer, 'Because they
abandoned Yahweh, the God of their fathers, who brought them forth out
of the land of Egypt, and took other gods, worshiped them, and served
them. Therefore he has brought all this evil on them.'"

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> It happened at the end of twenty years, in
which Solomon had built the house of Yahweh, and his own house,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> that the cities which Huram had given to
Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell
there.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Solomon went to Hamath Zobah, and prevailed
against it.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> He built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all
the storage cities, which he built in Hamath.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Also he built Beth Horon the upper, and
Beth Horon the lower, fortified cities, with walls, gates, and bars;

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and Baalath, and all the storage cities
that Solomon had, and all the cities for his chariots, and the cities
for his horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build for his pleasure
in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> As for all the people who were left of the
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, who were not of Israel;

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> of their children who were left after them
in the land, whom the children of Israel didn't consume, of them Solomon
conscripted forced labor to this day.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But of the children of Israel did Solomon
make no servants for his work; but they were men of war, and chief of
his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> These were the chief officers of king
Solomon, even two-hundred fifty, who ruled over the people.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Solomon brought up the daughter of
Pharaoh out of the city of David to the house that he had built for her;
for he said, "My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of
Israel, because the places where the ark of Yahweh has come are holy."

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then Solomon offered burnt offerings to
Yahweh on the altar of Yahweh, which he had built before the porch,

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> even as the duty of every day required,
offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the Sabbaths, and on
the new moons, and on the set feasts, three times in the year, \[even\]
in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the
feast of tents.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> He appointed, according to the ordinance
of David his father, the divisions of the priests to their service, and
the Levites to their offices, to praise, and to minister before the
priests, as the duty of every day required; the doorkeepers also by
their divisions at every gate: for so had David the man of God
commanded.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> They didn't depart from the commandment
of the king to the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or
concerning the treasures.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Now all the work of Solomon was prepared
to the day of the foundation of the house of Yahweh, and until it was
finished. \[So\] the house of Yahweh was completed.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then went Solomon to Ezion Geber, and to
Eloth, on the seashore in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Huram sent him ships and servants who had
knowledge of the sea by the hands of his servants; and they came with
the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and fetched from there four hundred
fifty talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame
of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem,
with a very great train, and camels that bore spices, and gold in
abundance, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she
talked with him of all that was in her heart.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Solomon told her all her questions; and
there was not anything hidden from Solomon which he didn't tell her.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> When the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom
of Solomon, and the house that he had built,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> and the food of his table, and the sitting
of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their
clothing, his cup bearers also, and their clothing, and his ascent by
which he went up to the house of Yahweh; there was no more spirit in
her.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> She said to the king, "It was a true report
that I heard in my own land of your acts, and of your wisdom.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> However I didn't believe their words, until
I came, and my eyes had seen it; and behold, the half of the greatness
of your wisdom was not told me: you exceed the fame that I heard.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Happy are your men, and happy are these
your servants, who stand continually before you, and hear your wisdom.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Blessed be Yahweh your God, who delighted
in you, to set you on his throne, to be king for Yahweh your God:
because your God loved Israel, to establish them forever, therefore made
he you king over them, to do justice and righteousness."

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> She gave the king one hundred and twenty
talents of gold, and spices in great abundance, and precious stones:
neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave to king
Solomon.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The servants also of Huram, and the
servants of Solomon, who brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees
and precious stones.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> The king made of the algum trees terraces
for the house of Yahweh, and for the king's house, and harps and
stringed instruments for the singers: and there were none like these
seen before in the land of Judah.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba
all her desire, whatever she asked, besides that which she had brought
to the king. So she turned, and went to her own land, she and her
servants.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Now the weight of gold that came to
Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> besides that which the traders and
merchants brought: and all the kings of Arabia and the governors of the
country brought gold and silver to Solomon.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> King Solomon made two hundred bucklers of
beaten gold; six hundred \[shekels\] of beaten gold went to one buckler.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> \[he made\] three hundred shields of
beaten gold; three hundred \[shekels\] of gold went to one shield: and
the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Moreover the king made a great throne of
ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And there were six steps to the throne,
with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and stays
on either side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside
the stays.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Twelve lions stood there on the one side
and on the other on the six steps: there was nothing like it made in any
kingdom.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> All king Solomon's drinking vessels were
of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were
of pure gold: silver was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For the king had ships that went to
Tarshish with the servants of Huram; once every three years came the
ships of Tarshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and
peacocks.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of
the earth in riches and wisdom.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> All the kings of the earth sought the
presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> They brought every man his tribute,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and clothing, armor, and spices,
horses, and mules, a rate year by year.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Solomon had four thousand stalls for
horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, that he stationed in
the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> He ruled over all the kings from the
River even to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> The king made silver to be in Jerusalem
as stones, and he made cedars to be as the sycamore trees that are in
the lowland, for abundance.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> They brought horses for Solomon out of
Egypt, and out of all lands.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Now the rest of the acts of Solomon,
first and last, aren't they written in the history of Nathan the
prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions
of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Nebat?

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all
Israel forty years.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Solomon slept with his fathers, and he
was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned
in his place.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Rehoboam went to Shechem; for all Israel
were come to Shechem to make him king.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> It happened, when Jeroboam the son of
Nebat heard of it, (for he was in Egypt, where he had fled from the
presence of king Solomon), that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> They sent and called him; and Jeroboam
and all Israel came, and they spoke to Rehoboam, saying,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> "Your father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make you the grievous service of your father, and his heavy
yoke which he put on us, lighter, and we will serve you."

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> He said to them, "Come again to me after
three days." The people departed.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> King Rehoboam took counsel with the old
men, who had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying,
"What counsel do you give me to return answer to this people?"

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> They spoke to him, saying, "If you are
kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to them, then
they will be your servants forever."

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But he forsook the counsel of the old men
which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men who had
grown up with him, who stood before him.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He said to them, "What counsel do you
give, that we may return answer to this people, who have spoken to me,
saying, 'Make the yoke that your father did put on us lighter?'"

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> The young men who had grown up with him
spoke to him, saying, "Thus you shall tell the people who spoke to you,
saying, 'Your father made our yoke heavy, but make it lighter on us;'
thus you shall say to them, 'My little finger is thicker than my
father's waist.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Now whereas my father burdened you with
a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with
whips, but I \[will chastise you\] with scorpions.'"

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> So Jeroboam and all the people came to
Rehoboam the third day, as the king asked, saying, "Come to me again the
third day."

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> The king answered them roughly; and
king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> and spoke to them after the counsel of
the young men, saying, "My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add
to it. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with
scorpions."

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> So the king didn't listen to the
people; for it was brought about of God, that Yahweh might establish his
word, which he spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of
Nebat.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> When all Israel saw that the king
didn't listen to them, the people answered the king, saying, "What
portion have we in David? Neither have we inheritance in the son of
Jesse! Every man to your tents, Israel! Now see to your own house,
David." So all Israel departed to their tents.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But as for the children of Israel who
lived in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who
was over the men subject to forced labor; and the children of Israel
stoned him to death with stones. King Rehoboam made speed to get himself
up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> So Israel rebelled against the house of
David to this day.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> When Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he
assembled the house of Judah and Benjamin, one hundred eighty thousand
chosen men, who were warriors, to fight against Israel, to bring the
kingdom again to Rehoboam.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> But the word of Yahweh came to Shemaiah
the man of God, saying,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> "Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon,
king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> 'Thus says Yahweh, "You shall not go up,
nor fight against your brothers! Return every man to his house; for this
thing is of me."'" So they listened to the words of Yahweh, and returned
from going against Jeroboam.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Rehoboam lived in Jerusalem, and built
cities for defense in Judah.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> He built Bethlehem, and Etam, and Tekoa,

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Beth Zur, and Soco, and Adullam,

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> and Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> and Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron,
which are in Judah and in Benjamin, fortified cities.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> He fortified the strongholds, and put
captains in them, and stores of food, and oil and wine.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> In every city \[he put\] shields and
spears, and made them exceeding strong. Judah and Benjamin belonged to
him.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> The priests and the Levites who were in
all Israel resorted to him out of all their border.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> For the Levites left their suburbs and
their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his
sons cast them off, that they should not execute the priest's office to
Yahweh;

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> and he appointed him priests for the
high places, and for the male goats, and for the calves which he had
made.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> After them, out of all the tribes of
Israel, such as set their hearts to seek Yahweh, the God of Israel, came
to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Yahweh, the God of their fathers.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> So they strengthened the kingdom of
Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, three years; for
they walked three years in the way of David and Solomon.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Rehoboam took him a wife, Mahalath the
daughter of Jerimoth the son of David, \[and of\] Abihail the daughter
of Eliab the son of Jesse;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and she bore him sons: Jeush, and
Shemariah, and Zaham.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> After her he took Maacah the daughter
of Absalom; and she bore him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Rehoboam loved Maacah the daughter of
Absalom above all his wives and his concubines: (for he took eighteen
wives, and sixty concubines, and became the father of twenty-eight sons
and sixty daughters.)

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Rehoboam appointed Abijah the son of
Maacah to be chief, \[even\] the prince among his brothers; for \[he was
minded\] to make him king.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> He dealt wisely, and dispersed of all
his sons throughout all the lands of Judah and Benjamin, to every
fortified city: and he gave them food in abundance. He sought \[for
them\] many wives.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> It happened, when the kingdom of Rehoboam
was established, and he was strong, that he forsook the law of Yahweh,
and all Israel with him.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> It happened in the fifth year of king
Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because
they had trespassed against Yahweh,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> with twelve hundred chariots, and sixty
thousand horsemen. The people were without number who came with him out
of Egypt: the Lubim, the Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> He took the fortified cities which
pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Now Shemaiah the prophet came to
Rehoboam, and to the princes of Judah, who were gathered together to
Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said to them, "Thus says Yahweh, 'You
have forsaken me, therefore have I also left you in the hand of
Shishak.'"

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Then the princes of Israel and the king
humbled themselves; and they said, "Yahweh is righteous."

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> When Yahweh saw that they humbled
themselves, the word of Yahweh came to Shemaiah, saying, "They have
humbled themselves. I will not destroy them; but I will grant them some
deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out on Jerusalem by the
hand of Shishak.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Nevertheless they shall be his servants,
that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the
countries."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> So Shishak king of Egypt came up against
Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of Yahweh, and the
treasures of the king's house. He took it all away. He also took away
the shields of gold which Solomon had made.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> King Rehoboam made in their place
shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the
guard, who kept the door of the king's house.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> It was so, that as often as the king
entered into the house of Yahweh, the guard came and bore them, and
brought them back into the guard room.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> When he humbled himself, the wrath of
Yahweh turned from him, so as not to destroy him altogether: and
moreover in Judah there were good things \[found\].

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> So king Rehoboam strengthened himself
in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city
which Yahweh had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name
there: and his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> He did that which was evil, because he
didn't set his heart to seek Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and
last, aren't they written in the histories of Shemaiah the prophet and
of Iddo the seer, after the way of genealogies? There were wars between
Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and
was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his
place.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam
began Abijah to reign over Judah.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Three years reigned he in Jerusalem: and
his mother's name was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. There was
war between Abijah and Jeroboam.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Abijah joined battle with an army of
valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: and Jeroboam
set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen
men, who were mighty men of valor.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Abijah stood up on Mount Zemaraim, which
is in the hill country of Ephraim, and said, "Hear me, Jeroboam and all
Israel:

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Ought you not to know that Yahweh, the
God of Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel to David forever, even to
him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the
servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up, and rebelled against his
lord.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> There were gathered to him worthless men,
base fellows, who strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of
Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not
withstand them.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> "Now you think to withstand the kingdom
of Yahweh in the hand of the sons of David; and you are a great
multitude, and there are with you the golden calves which Jeroboam made
you for gods.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Haven't you driven out the priests of
Yahweh, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and made priests for
yourselves after the ways of the peoples of \[other\] lands? so that
whoever comes to consecrate himself with a young bull and seven rams,
the same may be a priest of \[those who are\] no gods.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> "But as for us, Yahweh is our God, and
we have not forsaken him; and \[we have\] priests ministering to Yahweh,
the sons of Aaron, and the Levites in their work:

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> and they burn to Yahweh every morning
and every evening burnt offerings and sweet incense: the show bread also
\[set they\] in order on the pure table; and the lampstand of gold with
its lamps, to burn every evening: for we keep the instruction of Yahweh
our God; but you have forsaken him.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Behold, God is with us at our head, and
his priests with the trumpets of alarm to sound an alarm against you.
Children of Israel, don't fight against Yahweh, the God of your fathers;
for you shall not prosper."

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> But Jeroboam caused an ambush to come
about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambush was behind
them.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> When Judah looked back, behold, the
battle was before and behind them; and they cried to Yahweh, and the
priests sounded with the trumpets.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and
as the men of Judah shouted, it happened, that God struck Jeroboam and
all Israel before Abijah and Judah.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> The children of Israel fled before
Judah; and God delivered them into their hand.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Abijah and his people killed them with
a great slaughter: so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred
thousand chosen men.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Thus the children of Israel were
brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because
they relied on Yahweh, the God of their fathers.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took
cities from him, Bethel with its towns, and Jeshanah with its towns, and
Ephron with its towns.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Neither did Jeroboam recover strength
again in the days of Abijah: and Yahweh struck him, and he died.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But Abijah grew mighty, and took to
himself fourteen wives, and became the father of twenty-two sons, and
sixteen daughters.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> The rest of the acts of Abijah, and his
ways, and his sayings, are written in the commentary of the prophet
Iddo.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> So Abijah slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in the city of David; and Asa his son reigned in his
place. In his days the land was quiet ten years.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Asa did that which was good and right in
the eyes of Yahweh his God:

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> for he took away the foreign altars, and
the high places, and broke down the pillars, and cut down the Asherim,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> and commanded Judah to seek Yahweh, the
God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Also he took away out of all the cities
of Judah the high places and the sun images: and the kingdom was quiet
before him.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He built fortified cities in Judah; for
the land was quiet, and he had no war in those years, because Yahweh had
given him rest.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For he said to Judah, "Let us build these
cities, and make walls around them, with towers, gates, and bars. The
land is yet before us, because we have sought Yahweh our God; we have
sought him, and he has given us rest on every side." So they built and
prospered.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Asa had an army that bore bucklers and
spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that
bore shields and drew bows, two hundred eighty thousand: all these were
mighty men of valor.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> There came out against them Zerah the
Ethiopian with an army of a million troops, and three hundred chariots;
and he came to Mareshah.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Then Asa went out to meet him, and they
set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Asa cried to Yahweh his God, and said,
"Yahweh, there is none besides you to help, between the mighty and him
who has no strength. Help us, Yahweh our God; for we rely on you, and in
your name are we come against this multitude. Yahweh, you are our God.
Don't let man prevail against you."

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So Yahweh struck the Ethiopians before
Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Asa and the people who were with him
pursued them to Gerar: and there fell of the Ethiopians so many that
they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before
Yahweh, and before his army; and they carried away very much booty.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> They struck all the cities around
Gerar; for the fear of Yahweh came on them: and they despoiled all the
cities; for there was much spoil in them.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> They struck also the tents of
livestock, and carried away sheep in abundance, and camels, and returned
to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> The Spirit of God came on Azariah the son
of Oded:

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> and he went out to meet Asa, and said to
him, "Hear me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin! Yahweh is with you,
while you are with him; and if you seek him, he will be found by you;
but if you forsake him, he will forsake you.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Now for a long time Israel was without
the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> But when in their distress they turned to
Yahweh, the God of Israel, and sought him, he was found by them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> In those times there was no peace to him
who went out, nor to him who came in; but great troubles were on all the
inhabitants of the lands.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> They were broken in pieces, nation
against nation, and city against city; for God troubled them with all
adversity.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> But you be strong, and don't let your
hands be slack; for your work shall be rewarded."

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> When Asa heard these words, and the
prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the
abominations out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the
cities which he had taken from the hill country of Ephraim; and he
renewed the altar of Yahweh, that was before the porch of Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> He gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and
those who lived with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of
Simeon: for they fell to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw
that Yahweh his God was with him.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> So they gathered themselves together at
Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> They sacrificed to Yahweh in that day,
of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred head of cattle and
seven thousand sheep.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> They entered into the covenant to seek
Yahweh, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and with all
their soul;

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> and that whoever would not seek Yahweh,
the God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great,
whether man or woman.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> They swore to Yahweh with a loud voice,
and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> All Judah rejoiced at the oath; for
they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole
desire; and he was found of them: and Yahweh gave them rest all around.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Also Maacah, the mother of Asa the
king, he removed from being queen, because she had made an abominable
image for an Asherah; and Asa cut down her image, and made dust of it,
and burnt it at the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> But the high places were not taken away
out of Israel: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> He brought into the house of God the
things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated,
silver, and gold, and vessels.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> There was no more war to the five and
thirtieth year of the reign of Asa.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> In the six and thirtieth year of the
reign of Asa, Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built
Ramah, that he might not allow anyone to go out or come in to Asa king
of Judah.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Then Asa brought out silver and gold out
of the treasures of the house of Yahweh and of the king's house, and
sent to Ben Hadad king of Syria, who lived at Damascus, saying,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> "Let there be a treaty between me and
you, as there was between my father and your father. Behold, I have sent
you silver and gold. Go, break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel,
that he may depart from me."

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Ben Hadad listened to king Asa, and sent
the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they struck
Ijon, and Dan, and Abel Maim, and all the storage cities of Naphtali.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> It happened, when Baasha heard of it,
that he left off building Ramah, and let his work cease.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Then Asa the king took all Judah; and
they carried away the stones of Ramah, and its timber, with which Baasha
had built; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> At that time Hanani the seer came to Asa
king of Judah, and said to him, "Because you have relied on the king of
Syria, and have not relied on Yahweh your God, therefore is the army of
the king of Syria escaped out of your hand.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Weren't the Ethiopians and the Lubim a
huge army, with chariots and horsemen exceeding many? Yet, because you
relied on Yahweh, he delivered them into your hand.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For the eyes of Yahweh run back and forth
throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them
whose heart is perfect toward him. Herein you have done foolishly; for
from henceforth you shall have wars."

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Then Asa was angry with the seer, and
put him in the prison; for he was in a rage with him because of this
thing. Asa oppressed some of the people at the same time.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Behold, the acts of Asa, first and
last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and
Israel.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> In the thirty-ninth year of his reign
Asa was diseased in his feet; his disease was exceeding great: yet in
his disease he didn't seek Yahweh, but to the physicians.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Asa slept with his fathers, and died in
the one and fortieth year of his reign.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> They buried him in his own tombs, which
he had dug out for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed
which was filled with sweet odors and various kinds \[of spices\]
prepared by the perfumers' art: and they made a very great burning for
him.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his place,
and strengthened himself against Israel.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> He placed forces in all the fortified
cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the
cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Yahweh was with Jehoshaphat, because he
walked in the first ways of his father David, and didn't seek the Baals,

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> but sought to the God of his father, and
walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Therefore Yahweh established the kingdom
in his hand; and all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat tribute; and he had
riches and honor in abundance.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> His heart was lifted up in the ways of
Yahweh: and furthermore he took away the high places and the Asherim out
of Judah.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Also in the third year of his reign he
sent his princes, even Ben Hail, and Obadiah, and Zechariah, and
Nethanel, and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah;

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> and with them the Levites, even Shemaiah,
and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and
Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, the Levites; and
with them Elishama and Jehoram, the priests.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> They taught in Judah, having the book of
the law of Yahweh with them; and they went about throughout all the
cities of Judah, and taught among the people.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> The fear of Yahweh fell on all the
kingdoms of the lands that were around Judah, so that they made no war
against Jehoshaphat.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Some of the Philistines brought
Jehoshaphat presents, and silver for tribute; the Arabians also brought
him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand
and seven hundred male goats.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Jehoshaphat grew great exceedingly; and
he built in Judah castles and cities of store.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> He had many works in the cities of
Judah; and men of war, mighty men of valor, in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> This was the numbering of them
according to their fathers' houses: Of Judah, the captains of thousands:
Adnah the captain, and with him mighty men of valor three hundred
thousand;

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> and next to him Jehohanan the captain,
and with him two hundred eighty thousand;

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> and next to him Amasiah the son of
Zichri, who willingly offered himself to Yahweh; and with him two
hundred thousand mighty men of valor.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Of Benjamin: Eliada a mighty man of
valor, and with him two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield;

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> and next to him Jehozabad and with him
one hundred eighty thousand ready prepared for war.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> These were those who waited on the
king, besides those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout
all Judah.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in
abundance; and he joined affinity with Ahab.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> After certain years he went down to Ahab
to Samaria. Ahab killed sheep and cattle for him in abundance, and for
the people who were with him, and moved him to go up \[with him\] to
Ramoth Gilead.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Ahab king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat
king of Judah, "Will you go with me to Ramoth Gilead?" He answered him,
"I am as you are, and my people as your people. We will be with you in
the war."

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel,
"Please inquire first for the word of Yahweh."

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Then the king of Israel gathered the
prophets together, four hundred men, and said to them, "Shall we go to
Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?" They said, "Go up; for God
will deliver it into the hand of the king."

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But Jehoshaphat said, "Isn't there here a
prophet of Yahweh besides, that we may inquire of him?"

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat,
"There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Yahweh; but I hate him,
for he never prophesies good concerning me, but always evil. He is
Micaiah the son of Imla." Jehoshaphat said, "Don't let the king say so."

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Then the king of Israel called an
officer, and said, "Get Micaiah the son of Imla quickly."

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah sat each on his throne, arrayed in their robes, and
they were sitting in an open place at the entrance of the gate of
Samaria; and all the prophets were prophesying before them.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him
horns of iron, and said, "Thus says Yahweh, 'With these you shall push
the Syrians, until they are consumed.'"

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> All the prophets prophesied so, saying,
"Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper; for Yahweh will deliver it into
the hand of the king."

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> The messenger who went to call Micaiah
spoke to him, saying, "Behold, the words of the prophets \[declare\]
good to the king with one mouth. Let your word therefore, please be like
one of theirs, and speak good."

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Micaiah said, "As Yahweh lives, what my
God says, that will I speak."

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> When he had come to the king, the king
said to him, "Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall
I forbear?" He said, "Go up, and prosper. They shall be delivered into
your hand."

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The king said to him, "How many times
shall I adjure you that you speak to me nothing but the truth in the
name of Yahweh?"

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> He said, "I saw all Israel scattered on
the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. Yahweh said, 'These have
no master. Let them return every man to his house in peace.'"

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat,
"Didn't I tell you that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but
evil?"

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> \[Micaiah\] said, "Therefore hear the
word of Yahweh: I saw Yahweh sitting on his throne, and all the army of
heaven standing on his right hand and on his left.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Yahweh said, 'Who shall entice Ahab
king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead?' One spoke
saying in this way, and another saying in that way.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> A spirit came out, stood before Yahweh,
and said, 'I will entice him.' "Yahweh said to him, 'How?'

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> "He said, 'I will go forth, and will be
a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.' "He said, 'You will
entice him, and will prevail also. Go forth, and do so.'

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> "Now therefore, behold, Yahweh has put
a lying spirit in the mouth of these your prophets; and Yahweh has
spoken evil concerning you."

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came
near, and struck Micaiah on the cheek, and said, "Which way did the
Spirit of Yahweh go from me to speak to you?"

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Micaiah said, "Behold, you shall see on
that day, when you shall go into an inner room to hide yourself."

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> The king of Israel said, "Take Micaiah,
and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the
king's son;

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> and say, 'Thus says the king, "Put this
fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with
water of affliction, until I return in peace."'"

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Micaiah said, "If you return at all in
peace, Yahweh has not spoken by me." He said, "Listen, you peoples, all
of you!"

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah went up to Ramoth Gilead.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat,
"I will disguise myself, and go into the battle; but you put on your
robes." So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went into the
battle.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Now the king of Syria had commanded the
captains of his chariots, saying, "Fight neither with small nor great,
except only with the king of Israel."

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> It happened, when the captains of the
chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, "It is the king of Israel!"
Therefore they turned around to fight against him. But Jehoshaphat cried
out, and Yahweh helped him; and God moved them to depart from him.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> It happened, when the captains of the
chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back
from pursuing him.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> A certain man drew his bow at random,
and struck the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. Therefore
he said to the driver of the chariot, "Turn your hand, and carry me out
of the army; for I am severely wounded."

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> The battle increased that day. However
the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot against the Syrians
until the evening; and about the time of the going down of the sun, he
died.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to
his house in peace to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out
to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, "Should you help the wicked,
and love those who hate Yahweh? Because of this, wrath is on you from
before Yahweh.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Nevertheless there are good things found
in you, in that you have put away the Asheroth out of the land, and have
set your heart to seek God."

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Jehoshaphat lived at Jerusalem: and he
went out again among the people from Beersheba to the hill country of
Ephraim, and brought them back to Yahweh, the God of their fathers.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> He set judges in the land throughout all
the fortified cities of Judah, city by city,

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> and said to the judges, "Consider what
you do: for you don't judge for man, but for Yahweh; and \[he is\] with
you in the judgment.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Now therefore let the fear of Yahweh be
on you. Take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with Yahweh our
God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes."

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Moreover in Jerusalem Jehoshaphat
appointed Levites and priests, and of the heads of the fathers'
\[houses\] of Israel, for the judgment of Yahweh, and for controversies.
They returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> He commanded them, saying, "Thus you
shall do in the fear of Yahweh, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Whenever any controversy shall come to
you from your brothers who dwell in their cities, between blood and
blood, between law and commandment, statutes and ordinances, you shall
warn them, that they not be guilty towards Yahweh, and so wrath come on
you and on your brothers. Do this, and you shall not be guilty.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Behold, Amariah the chief priest is
over you in all matters of Yahweh; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the
ruler of the house of Judah, in all the king's matters: also the Levites
shall be officers before you. Deal courageously, and may Yahweh be with
the good."

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> It happened after this, that the children
of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and with them some of the Ammonites,
came against Jehoshaphat to battle.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Then some came who told Jehoshaphat,
saying, "A great multitude is coming against you from beyond the sea
from Syria. Behold, they are in Hazazon Tamar" (that is, En Gedi).

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Jehoshaphat was alarmed, and set himself
to seek to Yahweh. He proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Judah gathered themselves together, to
seek help from Yahweh. They came out of all the cities of Judah to seek
Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of
Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of Yahweh, before the new court;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> and he said, "Yahweh, the God of our
fathers, aren't you God in heaven? Aren't you ruler over all the
kingdoms of the nations? Power and might are in your hand, so that no
one is able to withstand you.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Didn't you, our God, drive out the
inhabitants of this land before your people Israel, and give it to the
seed of Abraham your friend forever?

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> They lived in it, and have built you a
sanctuary in it for your name, saying,

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> 'If evil comes on us--the sword,
judgment, pestilence, or famine--we will stand before this house, and
before you, (for your name is in this house), and cry to you in our
affliction, and you will hear and save.'

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Now, behold, the children of Ammon and
Moab and Mount Seir, whom you would not let Israel invade, when they
came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned aside from them, and
didn't destroy them;

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> behold, how they reward us, to come to
cast us out of your possession, which you have given us to inherit.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Our God, will you not judge them? For
we have no might against this great company that comes against us;
neither know we what to do, but our eyes are on you."

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> All Judah stood before Yahweh, with
their little ones, their wives, and their children.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Then the Spirit of Yahweh came on
Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the
son of Mattaniah, the Levite, of the sons of Asaph, in the midst of the
assembly;

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> and he said, "Listen, all Judah, and
you inhabitants of Jerusalem, and you king Jehoshaphat. Thus says Yahweh
to you, 'Don't be afraid, neither be dismayed by reason of this great
multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God's.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Tomorrow go down against them. Behold,
they are coming up by the ascent of Ziz. You shall find them at the end
of the valley, before the wilderness of Jeruel.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> You will not need to fight this battle.
Set yourselves, stand still, and see the salvation of Yahweh with you, O
Judah and Jerusalem. Don't be afraid, nor be dismayed. Go out against
them tomorrow, for Yahweh is with you.'"

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his
face to the ground; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell
down before Yahweh, worshipping Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> The Levites, of the children of the
Kohathites and of the children of the Korahites, stood up to praise
Yahweh, the God of Israel, with an exceeding loud voice.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> They rose early in the morning, and
went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth,
Jehoshaphat stood and said, "Listen to me, Judah, and you inhabitants of
Jerusalem! Believe in Yahweh your God, so you shall be established!
Believe his prophets, so you shall prosper."

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> When he had taken counsel with the
people, he appointed those who should sing to Yahweh, and give praise in
holy array, as they went out before the army, and say, Give thanks to
Yahweh; for his loving kindness endures forever.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> When they began to sing and to praise,
Yahweh set ambushers against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount
Seir, who had come against Judah; and they were struck.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> For the children of Ammon and Moab
stood up against the inhabitants of Mount Seir, utterly to kill and
destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir,
everyone helped to destroy another.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> When Judah came to the place
overlooking the wilderness, they looked at the multitude; and behold,
they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and there were none who
escaped.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> When Jehoshaphat and his people came to
take the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches
and dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for
themselves, more than they could carry away: and they were three days in
taking the spoil, it was so much.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> On the fourth day they assembled
themselves in the valley of Beracah; for there they blessed Yahweh:
therefore the name of that place was called The valley of Beracah to
this day.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Then they returned, every man of Judah
and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to
Jerusalem with joy; for Yahweh had made them to rejoice over their
enemies.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> They came to Jerusalem with stringed
instruments and harps and trumpets to the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> The fear of God was on all the kingdoms
of the countries, when they heard that Yahweh fought against the enemies
of Israel.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet;
for his God gave him rest all around.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was
thirty-five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty-five
years in Jerusalem: and his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of
Shilhi.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> He walked in the way of Asa his father,
and didn't turn aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of
Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> However the high places were not taken
away; neither as yet had the people set their hearts to the God of their
fathers.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> Now the rest of the acts of
Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the history of
Jehu the son of Hanani, which is inserted in the book of the kings of
Israel.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> After this did Jehoshaphat king of
Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel; the same did very
wickedly:

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> and he joined himself with him to make
ships to go to Tarshish; and they made the ships in Ezion Geber.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> Then Eliezer the son of Dodavahu of
Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, "Because you have
joined yourself with Ahaziah, Yahweh has destroyed your works." The
ships were broken, so that they were not able to go to Tarshish.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the city of David: and Jehoram his son
reigned in his place.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> He had brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat:
Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and
Shephatiah; all these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Their father gave them great gifts, of
silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fortified cities in
Judah: but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Now when Jehoram was risen up over the
kingdom of his father, and had strengthened himself, he killed all his
brothers with the sword, and various also of the princes of Israel.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> He walked in the way of the kings of
Israel, as did the house of Ahab; for he had the daughter of Ahab as
wife: and he did that which was evil in the sight of Yahweh.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> However Yahweh would not destroy the
house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and
as he promised to give a lamp to him and to his children always.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> In his days Edom revolted from under the
hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Then Jehoram passed over with his
captains, and all his chariots with him: and he rose up by night, and
struck the Edomites who surrounded him, along with the captains of the
chariots.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> So Edom revolted from under the hand of
Judah to this day: then did Libnah revolt at the same time from under
his hand, because he had forsaken Yahweh, the God of his fathers.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Moreover he made high places in the
mountains of Judah, and made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play the
prostitute, and led Judah astray.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> A letter came to him from Elijah the
prophet, saying, "Thus says Yahweh, the God of David your father,
'Because you have not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat your father, nor
in the ways of Asa king of Judah,

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> but have walked in the way of the kings
of Israel, and have made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play
the prostitute, like the house of Ahab did, and also have slain your
brothers of your father's house, who were better than yourself:

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> behold, Yahweh will strike with a great
plague your people, and your children, and your wives, and all your
substance;

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> and you shall have great sickness by
disease of your bowels, until your bowels fall out by reason of the
sickness, day by day.'"

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Yahweh stirred up against Jehoram the
spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians who are beside the
Ethiopians:

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> and they came up against Judah, and
broke into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the
king's house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never
a son left him, except Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> After all this Yahweh struck him in his
bowels with an incurable disease.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> It happened, in process of time, at the
end of two years, that his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness,
and he died of severe diseases. His people made no burning for him, like
the burning of his fathers.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Thirty-two years old was he when he
began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years: and he departed
without being desired; and they buried him in the city of David, but not
in the tombs of the kings.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> The inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah
his youngest son king in his place; for the band of men who came with
the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of
Jehoram king of Judah reigned.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Forty-two years old was Ahaziah when he
began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem: and his mother's
name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> He also walked in the ways of the house
of Ahab; for his mother was his counselor to do wickedly.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> He did that which was evil in the sight
of Yahweh, as did the house of Ahab; for they were his counselors after
the death of his father, to his destruction.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> He walked also after their counsel, and
went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael
king of Syria at Ramoth Gilead: and the Syrians wounded Joram.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> He returned to be healed in Jezreel of
the wounds which they had given him at Ramah, when he fought against
Hazael king of Syria. Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down
to see Jehoram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Now the destruction of Ahaziah was of
God, in that he went to Joram: for when he was come, he went out with
Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom Yahweh had anointed to cut
off the house of Ahab.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> It happened, when Jehu was executing
judgment on the house of Ahab, that he found the princes of Judah, and
the sons of the brothers of Ahaziah, ministering to Ahaziah, and killed
them.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He sought Ahaziah, and they caught him
(now he was hiding in Samaria), and they brought him to Jehu, and killed
him; and they buried him, for they said, "He is the son of Jehoshaphat,
who sought Yahweh with all his heart." The house of Ahaziah had no power
to hold the kingdom.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah
saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal seed of
the house of Judah.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the
king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him away from among the
king's sons who were slain, and put him and his nurse in the bedroom. So
Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the
priest (for she was the sister of Ahaziah), hid him from Athaliah, so
that she didn't kill him.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> He was with them hidden in the house of
God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> In the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened
himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham,
and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and
Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into
covenant with him.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> They went about in Judah, and gathered
the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the heads of fathers'
\[houses\] of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> All the assembly made a covenant with the
king in the house of God. He said to them, "Behold, the king's son shall
reign, as Yahweh has spoken concerning the sons of David.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> This is the thing that you shall do. A
third part of you, who come in on the Sabbath, of the priests and of the
Levites, shall be porters of the thresholds.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> A third part shall be at the king's
house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation. All the people
shall be in the courts of Yahweh's house.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But let no one come into the house of
Yahweh, except the priests, and those who minister of the Levites. They
shall come in, for they are holy, but all the people shall follow
Yahweh's instructions.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> The Levites shall surround the king,
every man with his weapons in his hand. Whoever comes into the house,
let him be slain. Be with the king when he comes in, and when he goes
out."

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> So the Levites and all Judah did
according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded: and they took every
man his men, those who were to come in on the Sabbath; with those who
were to go out on the Sabbath; for Jehoiada the priest didn't dismiss
the shift.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Jehoiada the priest delivered to the
captains of hundreds the spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had
been king David's, which were in the house of God.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> He set all the people, every man with
his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left
side of the house, along by the altar and the house, around the king.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Then they brought out the king's son,
and put the crown on him, and \[gave him\] the testimony, and made him
king: and Jehoiada and his sons anointed him; and they said, "Long live
the king!"

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> When Athaliah heard the noise of the
people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the
house of Yahweh:

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> and she looked, and, behold, the king
stood by his pillar at the entrance, and the captains and the trumpets
by the king; and all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew trumpets;
the singers also played musical instruments, and led the singing of
praise. Then Athaliah tore her clothes, and said, "Treason! treason!"

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Jehoiada the priest brought out the
captains of hundreds who were set over the army, and said to them,
"Bring her out between the ranks; and whoever follows her, let him be
slain with the sword." For the priest said, "Don't kill her in the
Yahweh's house."

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> So they made way for her. She went to
the entrance of the horse gate to the king's house; and they killed her
there.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Jehoiada made a covenant between
himself, and all the people, and the king, that they should be Yahweh's
people.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> All the people went to the house of
Baal, and broke it down, and broke his altars and his images in pieces,
and killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Jehoiada appointed the officers of the
house of Yahweh under the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David
had distributed in the house of Yahweh, to offer the burnt offerings of
Yahweh, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with
singing, according to the order of David.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> He set the porters at the gates of the
house of Yahweh, that no one who was unclean in anything should enter
in.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> He took the captains of hundreds, and
the nobles, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the
land, and brought down the king from the house of Yahweh: and they came
through the upper gate to the king's house, and set the king on the
throne of the kingdom.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> So all the people of the land rejoiced,
and the city was quiet. Athaliah they had slain with the sword.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Joash was seven years old when he began
to reign; and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem: and his mother's name
was Zibiah, of Beersheba.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Joash did that which was right in the
eyes of Yahweh all the days of Jehoiada the priest.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Jehoiada took for him two wives; and he
became the father of sons and daughters.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> It happened after this, that Joash was
minded to restore the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> He gathered together the priests and the
Levites, and said to them, "Go out to the cities of Judah, and gather
money to repair the house of your God from all Israel from year to year.
See that you expedite this matter." However the Levites didn't do it
right away.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> The king called for Jehoiada the chief,
and said to him, "Why haven't you required of the Levites to bring in
the tax of Moses the servant of Yahweh, and of the assembly of Israel,
out of Judah and out of Jerusalem, for the tent of the testimony?"

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked
woman, had broken up the house of God; and also all the dedicated things
of the house of Yahweh did they bestow on the Baals.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> So the king commanded, and they made a
chest, and set it outside at the gate of the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They made a proclamation through Judah
and Jerusalem, to bring in for Yahweh the tax that Moses the servant of
God laid on Israel in the wilderness.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> All the princes and all the people
rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made
an end.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> It was so, that whenever the chest was
brought to the king's officers by the hand of the Levites, and when they
saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the chief priest's
officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to its
place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> The king and Jehoiada gave it to such
as did the work of the service of the house of Yahweh; and they hired
masons and carpenters to restore the house of Yahweh, and also such as
worked iron and brass to repair the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> So the workmen worked, and the work of
repairing went forward in their hands, and they set up the house of God
in its state, and strengthened it.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> When they had made an end, they brought
the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, of which were made
vessels for the house of Yahweh, even vessels with which to minister and
to offer, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. They offered burnt
offerings in the house of Yahweh continually all the days of Jehoiada.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> But Jehoiada grew old and was full of
days, and he died; one hundred thirty years old was he when he died.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> They buried him in the city of David
among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, and toward God and
his house.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Now after the death of Jehoiada came
the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king
listened to them.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> They forsook the house of Yahweh, the
God of their fathers, and served the Asherim and the idols: and wrath
came on Judah and Jerusalem for this their guiltiness.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring
them again to Yahweh; and they testified against them: but they would
not give ear.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> The Spirit of God came on Zechariah the
son of Jehoiada the priest; and he stood above the people, and said to
them, "Thus says God, 'Why do you disobey the commandments of Yahweh, so
that you can't prosper? Because you have forsaken Yahweh, he has also
forsaken you.'"

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> They conspired against him, and stoned
him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house
of Yahweh.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Thus Joash the king didn't remember the
kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but killed his son.
When he died, he said, "May Yahweh look at it, and repay it."

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> It happened at the end of the year,
that the army of the Syrians came up against him: and they came to Judah
and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among
the people, and sent all the spoil of them to the king of Damascus.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For the army of the Syrians came with a
small company of men; and Yahweh delivered a very great army into their
hand, because they had forsaken Yahweh, the God of their fathers. So
they executed judgment on Joash.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> When they were departed for him (for
they left him very sick), his own servants conspired against him for the
blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and killed him on his bed, and
he died; and they buried him in the city of David, but they didn't bury
him in the tombs of the kings.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> These are those who conspired against
him: Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of
Shimrith the Moabitess.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Now concerning his sons, and the
greatness of the burdens \[laid\] on him, and the rebuilding of the
house of God, behold, they are written in the commentary of the book of
the kings. Amaziah his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem: and his
mother's name was Jehoaddan, of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> He did that which was right in the eyes
of Yahweh, but not with a perfect heart.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Now it happened, when the kingdom was
established to him, that he killed his servants who had killed the king
his father.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But he didn't put their children to
death, but did according to that which is written in the law in the book
of Moses, as Yahweh commanded, saying, "The fathers shall not die for
the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers; but every
man shall die for his own sin."

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together,
and ordered them according to their fathers' houses, under captains of
thousands and captains of hundreds, even all Judah and Benjamin: and he
numbered them from twenty years old and upward, and found them three
hundred thousand chosen men, able to go forth to war, who could handle
spear and shield.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> He hired also one hundred thousand mighty
men of valor out of Israel for one hundred talents of silver.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> A man of God came to him, saying, "O
king, don't let the army of Israel go with you; for Yahweh is not with
Israel, with all the children of Ephraim.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> But if you will go, take action, be
strong for the battle. God will overthrow you before the enemy; for God
has power to help, and to overthrow."

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Amaziah said to the man of God, "But what
shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of
Israel?" The man of God answered, "Yahweh is able to give you much more
than this."

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Then Amaziah separated them, \[to
wit\], the army that had come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again:
therefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they
returned home in fierce anger.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Amaziah took courage, and led forth his
people, and went to the Valley of Salt, and struck of the children of
Seir ten thousand.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> \[other\] ten thousand did the children
of Judah carry away alive, and brought them to the top of the rock, and
cast them down from the top of the rock, so that they all were broken in
pieces.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> But the men of the army whom Amaziah
sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell on the
cities of Judah, from Samaria even to Beth Horon, and struck of them
three thousand, and took much spoil.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Now it happened, after that Amaziah was
come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the
children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself
before them, and burned incense to them.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Therefore the anger of Yahweh was
kindled against Amaziah, and he sent to him a prophet, who said to him,
"Why have you sought after the gods of the people, which have not
delivered their own people out of your hand?"

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> It happened, as he talked with him,
that \[the king\] said to him, "Have we made you one of the king's
counselors? Stop! Why should you be struck down?" Then the prophet
stopped, and said, "I know that God has determined to destroy you,
because you have done this, and have not listened to my counsel."

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Then Amaziah king of Judah consulted
his advisers, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu,
king of Israel, saying, "Come, let us look one another in the face."

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah
king of Judah, saying, "The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the
cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, 'Give your daughter to my son as his
wife; then a wild animal that was in Lebanon passed by, and trampled
down the thistle.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> You say to yourself that you have
struck Edom; and your heart lifts you up to boast. Now stay at home. Why
should you meddle with trouble, that you should fall, even you, and
Judah with you?'"

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> But Amaziah would not listen; for it
was of God, that he might deliver them into the hand \[of their
enemies\], because they had sought after the gods of Edom.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> So Joash king of Israel went up; and he
and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Beth
Shemesh, which belongs to Judah.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> Judah was defeated by Israel; and they
fled every man to his tent.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> Joash king of Israel took Amaziah king
of Judah, the son of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth Shemesh, and
brought him to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the
gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> \[He took\] all the gold and silver,
and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-Edom,
and the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned
to Samaria.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah
lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen
years.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah,
first and last, behold, aren't they written in the book of the kings of
Judah and Israel?

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Now from the time that Amaziah did turn
away from following Yahweh they made a conspiracy against him in
Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent after him to Lachish,
and killed him there.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> They brought him on horses, and buried
him with his fathers in the city of Judah.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> All the people of Judah took Uzziah, who
was sixteen years old, and made him king in the place of his father
Amaziah.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah,
after that the king slept with his fathers.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Sixteen years old was Uzziah when he
began to reign; and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem: and his
mother's name was Jechiliah, of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> He did that which was right in the eyes
of Yahweh, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> He set himself to seek God in the days of
Zechariah, who had understanding in the vision of God: and as long as he
sought Yahweh, God made him to prosper.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> He went forth and warred against the
Philistines, and broke down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh,
and the wall of Ashdod; and he built cities in \[the country of\]
Ashdod, and among the Philistines.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> God helped him against the Philistines,
and against the Arabians who lived in Gur Baal, and the Meunim.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> The Ammonites gave tribute to Uzziah: and
his name spread abroad even to the entrance of Egypt; for he grew
exceeding strong.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem
at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning \[of the
wall\], and fortified them.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> He built towers in the wilderness, and
dug out many cisterns, for he had much livestock; in the lowland also,
and in the plain: \[and he had\] farmers and vineyard keepers in the
mountains and in the fruitful fields; for he loved farming.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Moreover Uzziah had an army of fighting
men, who went out to war by bands, according to the number of their
reckoning made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under the
hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> The whole number of the heads of
fathers' \[houses\], even the mighty men of valor, was two thousand and
six hundred.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Under their hand was an army, three
hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, who made war with
mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Uzziah prepared for them, even for all
the army, shields, and spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, and bows,
and stones for slinging.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> He made in Jerusalem engines, invented
by skillful men, to be on the towers and on the battlements, with which
to shoot arrows and great stones. His name spread far abroad; for he was
marvelously helped, until he was strong.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> But when he was strong, his heart was
lifted up, so that he did corruptly, and he trespassed against Yahweh
his God; for he went into the temple of Yahweh to burn incense on the
altar of incense.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Azariah the priest went in after him,
and with him eighty priests of Yahweh, who were valiant men:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> and they resisted Uzziah the king, and
said to him, "It isn't for you, Uzziah, to burn incense to Yahweh, but
for the priests the sons of Aaron, who are consecrated to burn incense.
Go out of the sanctuary; for you have trespassed; neither shall it be
for your honor from Yahweh God."

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Then Uzziah was angry; and he had a
censer in his hand to burn incense; and while he was angry with the
priests, the leprosy broke forth in his forehead before the priests in
the house of Yahweh, beside the altar of incense.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Azariah the chief priest, and all the
priests, looked on him, and behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and
they thrust him out quickly from there; yes, himself hurried also to go
out, because Yahweh had struck him.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> Uzziah the king was a leper to the day
of his death, and lived in a separate house, being a leper; for he was
cut off from the house of Yahweh: and Jotham his son was over the king's
house, judging the people of the land.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah,
first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> So Uzziah slept with his fathers; and
they buried him with his fathers in the field of burial which belonged
to the kings; for they said, "He is a leper." Jotham his son reigned in
his place.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Jotham was twenty-five years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: and his
mother's name was Jerushah the daughter of Zadok.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> He did that which was right in the eyes
of Yahweh, according to all that his father Uzziah had done: however he
didn't enter into the temple of Yahweh. The people did yet corruptly.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> He built the upper gate of the house of
Yahweh, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Moreover he built cities in the hill
country of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> He fought also with the king of the
children of Ammon, and prevailed against them. The children of Ammon
gave him the same year one hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand
measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children
of Ammon render to him, in the second year also, and in the third.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> So Jotham became mighty, because he
ordered his ways before Yahweh his God.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and
all his wars, and his ways, behold, they are written in the book of the
kings of Israel and Judah.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> He was five and twenty years old when he
began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Jotham slept with his fathers, and they
buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Ahaz was twenty years old when he began
to reign; and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem: and he didn't do
that which was right in the eyes of Yahweh, like David his father;

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> but he walked in the ways of the kings of
Israel, and made also molten images for the Baals.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Moreover he burnt incense in the valley
of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his children in the fire, according to
the abominations of the nations whom Yahweh cast out before the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> He sacrificed and burnt incense in the
high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Therefore Yahweh his God delivered him
into the hand of the king of Syria; and they struck him, and carried
away of his a great multitude of captives, and brought them to Damascus.
He was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who struck
him with a great slaughter.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> For Pekah the son of Remaliah killed in
Judah one hundred twenty thousand in one day, all of them valiant men;
because they had forsaken Yahweh, the God of their fathers.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, killed
Maaseiah the king's son, and Azrikam the ruler of the house, and Elkanah
who was next to the king.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The children of Israel carried away
captive of their brothers two hundred thousand, women, sons, and
daughters, and took also away much spoil from them, and brought the
spoil to Samaria.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> But a prophet of Yahweh was there, whose
name was Oded: and he went out to meet the army that came to Samaria,
and said to them, "Behold, because Yahweh, the God of your fathers, was
angry with Judah, he has delivered them into your hand, and you have
slain them in a rage which has reached up to heaven.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Now you purpose to keep under the
children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondservants and bondmaids for
yourselves. Aren't there even with you trespasses of your own against
Yahweh your God?

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Now hear me therefore, and send back
the captives, that you have taken captive from your brothers; for the
fierce wrath of Yahweh is on you."

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Then some of the heads of the children
of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of
Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of
Hadlai, stood up against those who came from the war,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> and said to them, "You shall not bring
in the captives here: for you purpose that which will bring on us a
trespass against Yahweh, to add to our sins and to our trespass; for our
trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel."

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> So the armed men left the captives and
the spoil before the princes and all the assembly.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> The men who have been mentioned by name
rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all who were
naked among them, dressed them, gave them sandals, and gave them
something to eat and to drink, anointed them, carried all the feeble of
them on donkeys, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to
their brothers. Then they returned to Samaria.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> At that time king Ahaz sent to the
kings of Assyria to help him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> For again the Edomites had come and
struck Judah, and carried away captives.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> The Philistines also had invaded the
cities of the lowland, and of the South of Judah, and had taken Beth
Shemesh, and Aijalon, and Gederoth, and Soco with its towns, and Timnah
with its towns, Gimzo also and its towns: and they lived there.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> For Yahweh brought Judah low because of
Ahaz king of Israel; for he had dealt wantonly in Judah, and trespassed
severely against Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Tilgath Pilneser king of Assyria came
to him, and distressed him, but didn't strengthen him.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For Ahaz took away a portion out of the
house of Yahweh, and out of the house of the king and of the princes,
and gave it to the king of Assyria: but it didn't help him.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> In the time of his distress did he
trespass yet more against Yahweh, this same king Ahaz.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> For he sacrificed to the gods of
Damascus, which struck him; and he said, "Because the gods of the kings
of Syria helped them, so I will sacrifice to them, that they may help
me." But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Ahaz gathered together the vessels of
the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and
shut up the doors of the house of Yahweh; and he made him altars in
every corner of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> In every city of Judah he made high
places to burn incense to other gods, and provoked to anger Yahweh, the
God of his fathers.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Now the rest of his acts, and all his
ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings
of Judah and Israel.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they
buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem; for they didn't bring him
into the tombs of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in
his place.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Hezekiah began to reign when he was
twenty-five years old; and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem:
and his mother's name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> He did that which was right in the eyes
of Yahweh, according to all that David his father had done.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> He in the first year of his reign, in the
first month, opened the doors of the house of Yahweh, and repaired them.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> He brought in the priests and the
Levites, and gathered them together into the broad place on the east,

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> and said to them, "Listen to me, you
Levites! Now sanctify yourselves, and sanctify the house of Yahweh, the
God of your fathers, and carry out the filthiness out of the holy place.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> For our fathers have trespassed, and done
that which was evil in the sight of Yahweh our God, and have forsaken
him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of Yahweh, and
turned their backs.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Also they have shut up the doors of the
porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered
burnt offerings in the holy place to the God of Israel.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Therefore the wrath of Yahweh was on
Judah and Jerusalem, and he has delivered them to be tossed back and
forth, to be an astonishment, and a hissing, as you see with your eyes.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> For, behold, our fathers have fallen by
the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity
for this.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Now it is in my heart to make a
covenant with Yahweh, the God of Israel, that his fierce anger may turn
away from us.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> My sons, don't be negligent now; for
Yahweh has chosen you to stand before him, to minister to him, and that
you should be his ministers, and burn incense."

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Then the Levites arose, Mahath, the son
of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites;
and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of
Jehallelel; and of the Gershonites, Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the
son of Joah;

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> and of the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri
and Jeuel; and of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and of the sons of Heman, Jehuel and
Shimei; and of the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> They gathered their brothers, and
sanctified themselves, and went in, according to the commandment of the
king by the words of Yahweh, to cleanse the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> The priests went in to the inner part
of the house of Yahweh, to cleanse it, and brought out all the
uncleanness that they found in the temple of Yahweh into the court of
the house of Yahweh. The Levites took it, to carry it out abroad to the
brook Kidron.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Now they began on the first \[day\] of
the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month came
they to the porch of Yahweh; and they sanctified the house of Yahweh in
eight days: and on the sixteenth day of the first month they made an
end.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Then they went in to Hezekiah the king
within \[the palace\], and said, "We have cleansed all the house of
Yahweh, and the altar of burnt offering, with all its vessels, and the
table of show bread, with all its vessels.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Moreover all the vessels, which king
Ahaz in his reign did cast away when he trespassed, have we prepared and
sanctified; and behold, they are before the altar of Yahweh."

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Then Hezekiah the king arose early, and
gathered the princes of the city, and went up to the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> They brought seven bulls, and seven
rams, and seven lambs, and seven male goats, for a sin offering for the
kingdom and for the sanctuary and for Judah. He commanded the priests
the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> So they killed the bulls, and the
priests received the blood, and sprinkled it on the altar: and they
killed the rams, and sprinkled the blood on the altar: they killed also
the lambs, and sprinkled the blood on the altar.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> They brought near the male goats for
the sin offering before the king and the assembly; and they laid their
hands on them:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> and the priests killed them, and they
made a sin offering with their blood on the altar, to make atonement for
all Israel; for the king commanded \[that\] the burnt offering and the
sin offering \[should be made\] for all Israel.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> He set the Levites in the house of
Yahweh with cymbals, with stringed instruments, and with harps,
according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king's seer, and
Nathan the prophet; for the commandment was of Yahweh by his prophets.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> The Levites stood with the instruments
of David, and the priests with the trumpets.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt
offering on the altar. When the burnt offering began, the song of Yahweh
began also, and the trumpets, together with the instruments of David
king of Israel.

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> All the assembly worshiped, and the
singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded; all this \[continued\] until
the burnt offering was finished.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> When they had made an end of offering,
the king and all who were present with him bowed themselves and
worshiped.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> Moreover Hezekiah the king and the
princes commanded the Levites to sing praises to Yahweh with the words
of David, and of Asaph the seer. They sang praises with gladness, and
they bowed their heads and worshiped.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> Then Hezekiah answered, "Now you have
consecrated yourselves to Yahweh; come near and bring sacrifices and
thank offerings into the house of Yahweh." The assembly brought in
sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a willing heart
\[brought\] burnt offerings.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> The number of the burnt offerings which
the assembly brought was seventy bulls, one hundred rams, and two
hundred lambs: all these were for a burnt offering to Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> The consecrated things were six hundred
head of cattle and three thousand sheep.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> But the priests were too few, so that
they could not flay all the burnt offerings: therefore their brothers
the Levites helped them, until the work was ended, and until the priests
had sanctified themselves; for the Levites were more upright in heart to
sanctify themselves than the priests.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> Also the burnt offerings were in
abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings, and with the drink
offerings for every burnt offering. So the service of the house of
Yahweh was set in order.

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people,
because of that which God had prepared for the people: for the thing was
done suddenly.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah,
and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to
the house of Yahweh at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover to Yahweh, the
God of Israel.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> For the king had taken counsel, and his
princes, and all the assembly in Jerusalem, to keep the Passover in the
second month.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For they could not keep it at that time,
because the priests had not sanctified themselves in sufficient number,
neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> The thing was right in the eyes of the
king and of all the assembly.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> So they established a decree to make
proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that
they should come to keep the Passover to Yahweh, the God of Israel, at
Jerusalem: for they had not kept it in great numbers in such sort as it
is written.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> So the couriers went with the letters
from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and
according to the commandment of the king, saying, "You children of
Israel, turn again to Yahweh, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel,
that he may return to the remnant that have escaped of you out of the
hand of the kings of Assyria.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Don't be like your fathers, and like your
brothers, who trespassed against Yahweh, the God of their fathers, so
that he gave them up to desolation, as you see.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Now don't be stiff-necked, as your
fathers were; but yield yourselves to Yahweh, and enter into his
sanctuary, which he has sanctified forever, and serve Yahweh your God,
that his fierce anger may turn away from you.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> For if you turn again to Yahweh, your
brothers and your children shall find compassion before those who led
them captive, and shall come again into this land: for Yahweh your God
is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if
you return to him."

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> So the couriers passed from city to
city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh, even to Zebulun: but
they ridiculed them, and mocked them.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Nevertheless certain men of Asher and
Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Also on Judah came the hand of God to
give them one heart, to do the commandment of the king and of the
princes by the word of Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Many people assembled at Jerusalem to
keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great
assembly.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> They arose and took away the altars
that were in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense took they away,
and cast them into the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Then they killed the Passover on the
fourteenth \[day\] of the second month: and the priests and the Levites
were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought burnt offerings
into the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> They stood in their place after their
order, according to the law of Moses the man of God: the priests
sprinkled the blood \[which they received\] of the hand of the Levites.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> For there were many in the assembly who
had not sanctified themselves: therefore the Levites were in charge of
killing the Passovers for everyone who was not clean, to sanctify them
to Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> For a multitude of the people, even
many of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed
themselves, yet they ate the Passover otherwise than it is written. For
Hezekiah had prayed for them, saying, "May the good Yahweh pardon
everyone

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> who sets his heart to seek God, Yahweh,
the God of his fathers, even if they aren't clean according to the
purification of the sanctuary."

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Yahweh listened to Hezekiah, and healed
the people.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> The children of Israel who were present
at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great
gladness; and the Levites and the priests praised Yahweh day by day,
\[singing\] with loud instruments to Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Hezekiah spoke comfortably to all the
Levites who had good understanding \[in the service\] of Yahweh. So they
ate throughout the feast for the seven days, offering sacrifices of
peace offerings, and making confession to Yahweh, the God of their
fathers.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> The whole assembly took counsel to keep
other seven days; and they kept \[other\] seven days with gladness.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to
the assembly for offerings one thousand bulls and seven thousand sheep;
and the princes gave to the assembly a thousand bulls and ten thousand
sheep: and a great number of priests sanctified themselves.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> All the assembly of Judah, with the
priests and the Levites, and all the assembly who came out of Israel,
and the foreigners who came out of the land of Israel, and who lived in
Judah, rejoiced.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> So there was great joy in Jerusalem;
for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was
not the like in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> Then the priests the Levites arose and
blessed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer came up
to his holy habitation, even to heaven.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Now when all this was finished, all
Israel who were present went out to the cities of Judah, and broke in
pieces the pillars, and cut down the Asherim, and broke down the high
places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and
Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the children of
Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the
priests and the Levites after their divisions, every man according to
his service, both the priests and the Levites, for burnt offerings and
for peace offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in
the gates of the camp of Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> \[He appointed\] also the king's portion
of his substance for the burnt offerings, \[to wit\], for the morning
and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths,
and for the new moons, and for the set feasts, as it is written in the
law of Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Moreover he commanded the people who
lived in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites,
that they might give themselves to the law of Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> As soon as the commandment came abroad,
the children of Israel gave in abundance the first fruits of grain, new
wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field; and the
tithe of all things brought they in abundantly.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> The children of Israel and Judah, who
lived in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of cattle
and sheep, and the tithe of dedicated things which were consecrated to
Yahweh their God, and laid them by heaps.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> In the third month they began to lay the
foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> When Hezekiah and the princes came and
saw the heaps, they blessed Yahweh, and his people Israel.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and
the Levites concerning the heaps.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Azariah the chief priest, of the house
of Zadok, answered him and said, "Since people began to bring the
offerings into the house of Yahweh, we have eaten and had enough, and
have left plenty: for Yahweh has blessed his people; and that which is
left is this great store."

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> Then Hezekiah commanded them to prepare
rooms in the house of Yahweh; and they prepared them.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> They brought in the offerings and the
tithes and the dedicated things faithfully: and over them Conaniah the
Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was second.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and
Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath,
and Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his
brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler
of the house of God.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the
porter at the east \[gate\], was over the freewill offerings of God, to
distribute the offerings of Yahweh, and the most holy things.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Under him were Eden, and Miniamin, and
Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the
priests, in their office of trust, to give to their brothers by
divisions, as well to the great as to the small:

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> besides those who were reckoned by
genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, even everyone who
entered into the house of Yahweh, as the duty of every day required, for
their service in their offices according to their divisions;

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> and those who were reckoned by
genealogy of the priests by their fathers' houses, and the Levites from
twenty years old and upward, in their offices by their divisions;

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> and those who were reckoned by
genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and
their daughters, through all the congregation: for in their office of
trust they sanctified themselves in holiness.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Also for the sons of Aaron the priests,
who were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every city,
there were men who were mentioned by name, to give portions to all the
males among the priests, and to all who were reckoned by genealogy among
the Levites.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> Hezekiah did so throughout all Judah;
and he worked that which was good and right and faithful before Yahweh
his God.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> In every work that he began in the
service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to
seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> After these things, and this
faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah,
and encamped against the fortified cities, and thought to win them for
himself.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> When Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib was
come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem,

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> he took counsel with his princes and his
mighty men to stop the waters of the springs which were outside of the
city; and they helped him.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> So many people gathered together, and
they stopped all the springs, and the brook that flowed through the
midst of the land, saying, "Why should the kings of Assyria come, and
find much water?"

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> He took courage, and built up all the
wall that was broken down, and raised \[it\] up to the towers, and the
other wall outside, and strengthened Millo \[in\] the city of David, and
made weapons and shields in abundance.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> He set captains of war over the people,
and gathered them together to him in the broad place at the gate of the
city, and spoke comfortably to them, saying,

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> "Be strong and courageous, don't be
afraid nor dismayed for the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude
who is with him; for there is a greater with us than with him.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> With him is an arm of flesh; but with us
is Yahweh our God to help us, and to fight our battles." The people
rested themselves on the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> After this did Sennacherib king of
Assyria send his servants to Jerusalem, (now he was before Lachish, and
all his power with him), to Hezekiah king of Judah, and to all Judah who
were at Jerusalem, saying,

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Thus says Sennacherib king of Assyria,
"In whom do you trust, that you remain under siege in Jerusalem?

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Doesn't Hezekiah persuade you, to give
you over to die by famine and by thirst, saying, 'Yahweh our God will
deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?'

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Hasn't the same Hezekiah taken away his
high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying,
'You shall worship before one altar, and on it you shall burn incense?'

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Don't you know what I and my fathers
have done to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations
of the lands in any way able to deliver their land out of my hand?

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Who was there among all the gods of
those nations which my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his
people out of my hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out
of my hand?

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Now therefore don't let Hezekiah
deceive you, nor persuade you in this way, neither believe him; for no
god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of my
hand, and out of the hand of my fathers. How much less will your God
deliver you out of my hand?"

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> His servants spoke yet more against
Yahweh God, and against his servant Hezekiah.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> He also wrote letters insulting Yahweh,
the God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, "As the gods of the
nations of the lands, which have not delivered their people out of my
hand, so shall the God of Hezekiah not deliver his people out of my
hand."

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> They cried with a loud voice in the
Jews' language to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to
frighten them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> They spoke of the God of Jerusalem, as
of the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of men's
hands.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Hezekiah the king, and Isaiah the
prophet the son of Amoz, prayed because of this, and cried to heaven.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> Yahweh sent an angel, who cut off all
the mighty men of valor, and the leaders and captains, in the camp of
the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land.
When he had come into the house of his god, those who came forth from
his own bowels killed him there with the sword.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> Thus Yahweh saved Hezekiah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of
Assyria, and from the hand of all \[others\], and guided them on every
side.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> Many brought gifts to Yahweh to
Jerusalem, and precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah; so that he was
exalted in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> In those days Hezekiah was sick even to
death: and he prayed to Yahweh; and he spoke to him, and gave him a
sign.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> But Hezekiah didn't render again
according to the benefit done to him; for his heart was lifted up:
therefore there was wrath on him, and on Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled
himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, so that the wrath of Yahweh didn't come on them in the days
of Hezekiah.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> Hezekiah had exceeding much riches and
honor: and he provided him treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for
precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all kinds of
goodly vessels;

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> storehouses also for the increase of
grain and new wine and oil; and stalls for all kinds of animals, and
flocks in folds.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Moreover he provided him cities, and
possessions of flocks and herds in abundance; for God had given him very
much substance.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> This same Hezekiah also stopped the
upper spring of the waters of Gihon, and brought them straight down on
the west side of the city of David. Hezekiah prospered in all his works.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> However in \[the business of\] the
ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent to him to inquire of the
wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he
might know all that was in his heart.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah,
and his good deeds, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the
prophet the son of Amoz, in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in the ascent of the tombs of the sons of David: and all
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his death.
Manasseh his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Manasseh was twelve years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> He did that which was evil in the sight
of Yahweh, after the abominations of the nations whom Yahweh cast out
before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> For he built again the high places which
Hezekiah his father had broken down; and he reared up altars for the
Baals, and made Asheroth, and worshiped all the army of the sky, and
served them.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> He built altars in the house of Yahweh,
of which Yahweh said, "My name shall be in Jerusalem forever."

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> He built altars for all the army of the
sky in the two courts of the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> He also made his children to pass through
the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom; and he practiced sorcery,
and used enchantments, and practiced sorcery, and dealt with those who
had familiar spirits, and with wizards: he worked much evil in the sight
of Yahweh, to provoke him to anger.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> He set the engraved image of the idol,
which he had made, in the house of God, of which God said to David and
to Solomon his son, "In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, will I put my name forever:

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> neither will I any more remove the foot
of Israel from off the land which I have appointed for your fathers, if
only they will observe to do all that I have commanded them, even all
the law and the statutes and the ordinances given by Moses."

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Manasseh seduced Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that they did evil more than did the
nations whom Yahweh destroyed before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Yahweh spoke to Manasseh, and to his
people; but they gave no heed.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Therefore Yahweh brought on them the
captains of the army of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh in
chains, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> When he was in distress, he begged
Yahweh his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> He prayed to him; and he was entreated
by him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem
into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that Yahweh was God.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Now after this he built an outer wall
to the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to
the entrance at the fish gate; and he encircled Ophel \[with it\], and
raised it up to a very great height: and he put valiant captains in all
the fortified cities of Judah.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> He took away the foreign gods, and the
idol out of the house of Yahweh, and all the altars that he had built in
the mountain of the house of Yahweh, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out
of the city.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> He built up the altar of Yahweh, and
offered thereon sacrifices of peace offerings and of thanksgiving, and
commanded Judah to serve Yahweh, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Nevertheless the people sacrificed
still in the high places, but only to Yahweh their God.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh,
and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers who spoke to him
in the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel, behold, they are written among
the acts of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> His prayer also, and how \[God\] was
entreated of him, and all his sin and his trespass, and the places in
which he built high places, and set up the Asherim and the engraved
images, before he humbled himself: behold, they are written in the
history of Hozai.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and
they buried him in his own house: and Amon his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> Amon was twenty-two years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned two years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> He did that which was evil in the sight
of Yahweh, as did Manasseh his father; and Amon sacrificed to all the
engraved images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> He didn't humble himself before Yahweh,
as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but this same Amon
trespassed more and more.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> His servants conspired against him, and
put him to death in his own house.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> But the people of the land killed all
those who had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land
made Josiah his son king in his place.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Josiah was eight years old when he began
to reign; and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> He did that which was right in the eyes
of Yahweh, and walked in the ways of David his father, and didn't turn
aside to the right hand or to the left.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> For in the eighth year of his reign,
while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his
father; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem
from the high places, and the Asherim, and the engraved images, and the
molten images.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> They broke down the altars of the Baals
in his presence; and the incense altars that were on high above them he
cut down; and the Asherim, and the engraved images, and the molten
images, he broke in pieces, and made dust of them, and strewed it on the
graves \[of those\] who had sacrificed to them.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> He burnt the bones of the priests on
their altars, and purged Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> \[So did he\] in the cities of Manasseh
and Ephraim and Simeon, even to Naphtali, around in their ruins.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> He broke down the altars, and beat the
Asherim and the engraved images into powder, and cut down all the
incense altars throughout all the land of Israel, and returned to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> Now in the eighteenth year of his reign,
when he had purged the land and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of
Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of
Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of Yahweh his God.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> They came to Hilkiah the high priest, and
delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the
Levites, the keepers of the threshold, had gathered of the hand of
Manasseh and Ephraim, and of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah
and Benjamin, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> They delivered it into the hand of the
workmen who had the oversight of the house of Yahweh; and the workmen
who labored in the house of Yahweh gave it to mend and repair the house;

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> even to the carpenters and to the
builders gave they it, to buy cut stone, and timber for couplings, and
to make beams for the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> The men did the work faithfully: and
the overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons
of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites,
to set it forward; and \[others of\] the Levites, all who were skillful
with instruments of music.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Also they were over the bearers of
burdens, and set forward all who did the work in every kind of service:
and of the Levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> When they brought out the money that
was brought into the house of Yahweh, Hilkiah the priest found the book
of the law of Yahweh \[given\] by Moses.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> Hilkiah answered Shaphan the scribe, "I
have found the book of the law in the house of Yahweh." Hilkiah
delivered the book to Shaphan.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Shaphan carried the book to the king,
and moreover brought back word to the king, saying, "All that was
committed to your servants, they are doing.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> They have emptied out the money that
was found in the house of Yahweh, and have delivered it into the hand of
the overseers, and into the hand of the workmen."

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Shaphan the scribe told the king,
saying, "Hilkiah the priest has delivered me a book." Shaphan read
therein before the king.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> It happened, when the king had heard
the words of the law, that he tore his clothes.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> The king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam
the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe,
and Asaiah the king's servant, saying,

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> "Go inquire of Yahweh for me, and for
those who are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the
book that is found; for great is the wrath of Yahweh that is poured out
on us, because our fathers have not kept the word of Yahweh, to do
according to all that is written in this book."

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> So Hilkiah, and they whom the king
\[had commanded\], went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum
the son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she
lived in Jerusalem in the second quarter;) and they spoke to her to that
effect.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> She said to them, "Thus says Yahweh,
the God of Israel: 'Tell the man who sent you to me,

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> "Thus says Yahweh, 'Behold, I will
bring evil on this place, and on its inhabitants, even all the curses
that are written in the book which they have read before the king of
Judah.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Because they have forsaken me, and have
burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with
all the works of their hands; therefore is my wrath poured out on this
place, and it shall not be quenched.'"'

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> But to the king of Judah, who sent you
to inquire of Yahweh, thus you shall tell him, 'Thus says Yahweh, the
God of Israel: "As touching the words which you have heard,

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> because your heart was tender, and you
humbled yourself before God, when you heard his words against this
place, and against its inhabitants, and have humbled yourself before me,
and have torn your clothes, and wept before me; I also have heard you,"
says Yahweh.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> "Behold, I will gather you to your
fathers, and you shall be gathered to your grave in peace, neither shall
your eyes see all the evil that I will bring on this place, and on its
inhabitants."'" They brought back word to the king.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> Then the king sent and gathered
together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> The king went up to the house of
Yahweh, and all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
the priests, and the Levites, and all the people, both great and small:
and he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that
was found in the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> The king stood in his place, and made a
covenant before Yahweh, to walk after Yahweh, and to keep his
commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart,
and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant that were
written in this book.

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> He caused all who were found in
Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand \[to it\]. The inhabitants of Jerusalem
did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> Josiah took away all the abominations
out of all the countries that pertained to the children of Israel, and
made all who were found in Israel to serve, even to serve Yahweh their
God. All his days they didn't depart from following Yahweh, the God of
their fathers.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Josiah kept a Passover to Yahweh in
Jerusalem: and they killed the Passover on the fourteenth \[day\] of the
first month.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> He set the priests in their offices, and
encouraged them to the service of the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> He said to the Levites who taught all
Israel, who were holy to Yahweh, "Put the holy ark in the house which
Solomon the son of David king of Israel built. There shall no more be a
burden on your shoulders. Now serve Yahweh your God, and his people
Israel.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Prepare yourselves after your fathers'
houses by your divisions, according to the writing of David king of
Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Stand in the holy place according to the
divisions of the fathers' houses of your brothers the children of the
people, and \[let there be for each\] a portion of a fathers' house of
the Levites.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> Kill the Passover, and sanctify
yourselves, and prepare for your brothers, to do according to the word
of Yahweh by Moses."

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> Josiah gave to the children of the
people, of the flock, lambs and young goats, all of them for the
Passover offerings, to all who were present, to the number of thirty
thousand, and three thousand bulls: these were of the king's substance.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> His princes gave for a freewill offering
to the people, to the priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah and Zechariah
and Jehiel, the rulers of the house of God, gave to the priests for the
Passover offerings two thousand and six hundred \[small livestock\], and
three hundred head of cattle.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanel,
his brothers, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, the chiefs of the
Levites, gave to the Levites for the Passover offerings five thousand
\[small livestock\], and five hundred head of cattle.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> So the service was prepared, and the
priests stood in their place, and the Levites by their divisions,
according to the king's commandment.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> They killed the Passover, and the
priests sprinkled \[the blood which they received\] of their hand, and
the Levites flayed them.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> They removed the burnt offerings, that
they might give them according to the divisions of the fathers' houses
of the children of the people, to offer to Yahweh, as it is written in
the book of Moses. So did they with the cattle.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> They roasted the Passover with fire
according to the ordinance: and the holy offerings boiled they in pots,
and in caldrons, and in pans, and carried them quickly to all the
children of the people.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Afterward they prepared for themselves,
and for the priests, because the priests the sons of Aaron \[were
busied\] in offering the burnt offerings and the fat until night:
therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the
sons of Aaron.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> The singers the sons of Asaph were in
their place, according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and
Heman, and Jeduthun the king's seer; and the porters were at every gate:
they didn't need to depart from their service; for their brothers the
Levites prepared for them.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> So all the service of Yahweh was
prepared the same day, to keep the Passover, and to offer burnt
offerings on the altar of Yahweh, according to the commandment of king
Josiah.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> The children of Israel who were present
kept the Passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven
days.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> There was no Passover like that kept in
Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did any of the kings
of Israel keep such a Passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the
Levites, and all Judah and Israel who were present, and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> In the eighteenth year of the reign of
Josiah was this Passover kept.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> After all this, when Josiah had
prepared the temple, Neco king of Egypt went up to fight against
Carchemish by the Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him.

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> But he sent ambassadors to him, saying,
"What have I to do with you, you king of Judah? I come not against you
this day, but against the house with which I have war. God has commanded
me to make haste. Beware that it is God who is with me, that he not
destroy you."

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his
face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and
didn't listen to the words of Neco from the mouth of God, and came to
fight in the valley of Megiddo.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> The archers shot at king Josiah; and
the king said to his servants, "Take me away, because I am seriously
wounded!"

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> So his servants took him out of the
chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had, and brought him
to Jerusalem; and he died, and was buried in the tombs of his fathers.
All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all
the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations
to this day; and they made them an ordinance in Israel: and behold, they
are written in the lamentations.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and
his good deeds, according to that which is written in the law of Yahweh,

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> and his acts, first and last, behold,
they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz
the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father's place in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Joahaz was twenty-three years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> The king of Egypt deposed him at
Jerusalem, and fined the land one hundred talents of silver and a talent
of gold.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> The king of Egypt made Eliakim his
brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to
Jehoiakim. Neco took Joahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Jehoiakim was Twenty-five years old when
he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did
that which was evil in the sight of Yahweh his God.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon, and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the
vessels of the house of Yahweh to Babylon, and put them in his temple at
Babylon.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim,
and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him,
behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah:
and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Jehoiachin was eight years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem:
and he did that which was evil in the sight of Yahweh.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> At the return of the year king
Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels
of the house of Yahweh, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah
and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when
he began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> and he did that which was evil in the
sight of Yahweh his God; he didn't humble himself before Jeremiah the
prophet \[speaking\] from the mouth of Yahweh.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> He also rebelled against king
Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiffened his
neck, and hardened his heart against turning to Yahweh, the God of
Israel.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Moreover all the chiefs of the priests,
and the people, trespassed very greatly after all the abominations of
the nations; and they polluted the house of Yahweh which he had made
holy in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> Yahweh, the God of their fathers, sent
to them by his messengers, rising up early and sending, because he had
compassion on his people, and on his dwelling place:

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> but they mocked the messengers of God,
and despised his words, and scoffed at his prophets, until the wrath of
Yahweh arose against his people, until there was no remedy.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Therefore he brought on them the king
of the Chaldeans, who killed their young men with the sword in the house
of their sanctuary, and had no compassion on young man or virgin, old
man or gray-headed: he gave them all into his hand.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> All the vessels of the house of God,
great and small, and the treasures of the house of Yahweh, and the
treasures of the king, and of his princes, all these he brought to
Babylon.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> They burnt the house of God, and broke
down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all its palaces with fire, and
destroyed all the goodly vessels of it.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> He carried those who had escaped from
the sword away to Babylon; and they were servants to him and his sons
until the reign of the kingdom of Persia:

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> to fulfill the word of Yahweh by the
mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed its Sabbaths: \[for\] as
long as it lay desolate it kept Sabbath, to fulfill seventy years.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Now in the first year of Cyrus king of
Persia, that the word of Yahweh by the mouth of Jeremiah might be
accomplished, Yahweh stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so
that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and \[put it\]
also in writing, saying,

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> "Thus says Cyrus king of Persia,
'Yahweh, the God of heaven, has given all the kingdoms of the earth to
me; and he has commanded me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is
in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, Yahweh his God
be with him, and let him go up.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra](ezr.md)
