[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pro)  [Next](sol) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Ecclesiastes

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of the Preacher, the son of
David, king in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> "Vanity of vanities," says the Preacher;
"Vanity of vanities, all is vanity."

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> What does man gain from all his labor in
which he labors under the sun?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> One generation goes, and another generation
comes; but the earth remains forever.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The sun also rises, and the sun goes down,
and hurries to its place where it rises.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> The wind goes toward the south, and turns
around to the north. It turns around continually as it goes, and the
wind returns again to its courses.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All the rivers run into the sea, yet the
sea is not full. To the place where the rivers flow, there they flow
again.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> All things are full of weariness beyond
uttering. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> That which has been is that which shall be;
and that which has been done is that which shall be done: and there is
no new thing under the sun.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Is there a thing of which it may be said,
"Behold, this is new?" It has been long ago, in the ages which were
before us.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> There is no memory of the former; neither
shall there be any memory of the latter that are to come, among those
that shall come after.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I, the Preacher, was king over Israel in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> I applied my heart to seek and to search
out by wisdom concerning all that is done under the sky. It is a heavy
burden that God has given to the sons of men to be afflicted with.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I have seen all the works that are done
under the sun; and behold, all is vanity and a chasing after wind.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> That which is crooked can't be made
straight; and that which is lacking can't be counted.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I said to myself, "Behold, I have
obtained for myself great wisdom above all who were before me in
Jerusalem. Yes, my heart has had great experience of wisdom and
knowledge."

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to
know madness and folly. I perceived that this also was a chasing after
wind.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For in much wisdom is much grief; and he
who increases knowledge increases sorrow.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I said in my heart, "Come now, I will test
you with mirth: therefore enjoy pleasure;" and behold, this also was
vanity.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I said of laughter, "It is foolishness;"
and of mirth, "What does it accomplish?"

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> I searched in my heart how to cheer my
flesh with wine, my heart yet guiding me with wisdom, and how to lay
hold of folly, until I might see what it was good for the sons of men
that they should do under heaven all the days of their lives.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> I made myself great works. I built myself
houses. I planted myself vineyards.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> I made myself gardens and parks, and I
planted trees in them of all kinds of fruit.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> I made myself pools of water, to water from
it the forest where trees were reared.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I bought male servants and female servants,
and had servants born in my house. I also had great possessions of herds
and flocks, above all who were before me in Jerusalem;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I also gathered silver and gold for myself,
and the treasure of kings and of the provinces. I got myself male and
female singers, and the delights of the sons of men--musical
instruments, and that of all sorts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> So I was great, and increased more than all
who were before me in Jerusalem. My wisdom also remained with me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Whatever my eyes desired, I didn't keep
from them. I didn't withhold my heart from any joy, for my heart
rejoiced because of all my labor, and this was my portion from all my
labor.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Then I looked at all the works that my
hands had worked, and at the labor that I had labored to do; and behold,
all was vanity and a chasing after wind, and there was no profit under
the sun.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I turned myself to consider wisdom,
madness, and folly: for what can the king's successor do? Just that
which has been done long ago.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as
far as light excels darkness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The wise man's eyes are in his head, and
the fool walks in darkness--and yet I perceived that one event happens
to them all.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then I said in my heart, "As it happens
to the fool, so will it happen even to me; and why was I then more
wise?" Then I said in my heart that this also is vanity.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For of the wise man, even as of the fool,
there is no memory for ever, since in the days to come all will have
been long forgotten. Indeed, the wise man must die just like the fool!

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> So I hated life, because the work that is
worked under the sun was grievous to me; for all is vanity and a chasing
after wind.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> I hated all my labor in which I labored
under the sun, because I must leave it to the man who comes after me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Who knows whether he will be a wise man
or a fool? Yet he will have rule over all of my labor in which I have
labored, and in which I have shown myself wise under the sun. This also
is vanity.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Therefore I began to cause my heart to
despair concerning all the labor in which I had labored under the sun.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For there is a man whose labor is with
wisdom, with knowledge, and with skillfulness; yet he shall leave it for
his portion to a man who has not labored for it. This also is vanity and
a great evil.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For what has a man of all his labor, and
of the striving of his heart, in which he labors under the sun?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> For all his days are sorrows, and his
travail is grief; yes, even in the night his heart takes no rest. This
also is vanity.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> There is nothing better for a man than
that he should eat and drink, and make his soul enjoy good in his labor.
This also I saw, that it is from the hand of God.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For who can eat, or who can have
enjoyment, more than I?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For to the man who pleases him, God gives
wisdom, knowledge, and joy; but to the sinner he gives travail, to
gather and to heap up, that he may give to him who pleases God. This
also is vanity and a chasing after wind.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> For everything there is a season, and a
time for every purpose under heaven:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> a time to be born, and a time to die; a
time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time
to break down, and a time to build up;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time
to mourn, and a time to dance;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> a time to cast away stones, and a time to
gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
embracing;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> a time to seek, and a time to lose; a time
to keep, and a time to cast away;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> a time to tear, and a time to sew; a time
to keep silence, and a time to speak;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> a time to love, and a time to hate; a time
for war, and a time for peace.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What profit has he who works in that in
which he labors?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> I have seen the burden which God has
given to the sons of men to be afflicted with.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> He has made everything beautiful in its
time. He has also set eternity in their hearts, yet so that man can't
find out the work that God has done from the beginning even to the end.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> I know that there is nothing better for
them than to rejoice, and to do good as long as they live.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Also that every man should eat and drink,
and enjoy good in all his labor, is the gift of God.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I know that whatever God does, it shall
be forever. Nothing can be added to it, nor anything taken from it; and
God has done it, that men should fear before him.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> That which is has been long ago, and that
which is to be has been long ago: and God seeks again that which is
passed away.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Moreover I saw under the sun, in the
place of justice, that wickedness was there; and in the place of
righteousness, that wickedness was there.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> I said in my heart, "God will judge the
righteous and the wicked; for there is a time there for every purpose
and for every work."

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I said in my heart, "As for the sons of
men, God tests them, so that they may see that they themselves are like
animals.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> For that which happens to the sons of men
happens to animals. Even one thing happens to them. As the one dies, so
the other dies. Yes, they have all one breath; and man has no advantage
over the animals: for all is vanity.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> All go to one place. All are from the
dust, and all turn to dust again.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who knows the spirit of man, whether it
goes upward, and the spirit of the animal, whether it goes downward to
the earth?"

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Therefore I saw that there is nothing
better, than that a man should rejoice in his works; for that is his
portion: for who can bring him to see what will be after him?

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then I returned and saw all the oppressions
that are done under the sun: and behold, the tears of those who were
oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their
oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Therefore I praised the dead who have been
long dead more than the living who are yet alive.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Yes, better than them both is him who has
not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Then I saw all the labor and achievement
that is the envy of a man's neighbor. This also is vanity and a striving
after wind.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> The fool folds his hands together and ruins
himself.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Better is a handful, with quietness, than
two handfuls with labor and chasing after wind.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Then I returned and saw vanity under the
sun.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> There is one who is alone, and he has
neither son nor brother. There is no end to all of his labor, neither
are his eyes satisfied with wealth. "For whom then, do I labor, and
deprive my soul of enjoyment?" This also is vanity. Yes, it is a
miserable business.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Two are better than one, because they have
a good reward for their labor.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For if they fall, the one will lift up
his fellow; but woe to him who is alone when he falls, and doesn't have
another to lift him up.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Again, if two lie together, then they
have warmth; but how can one keep warm alone?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> If a man prevails against one who is
alone, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly
broken.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Better is a poor and wise youth than an
old and foolish king who doesn't know how to receive admonition any
more.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For out of prison he came forth to be
king; yes, even in his kingdom he was born poor.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> I saw all the living who walk under the
sun, that they were with the youth, the other, who succeeded him.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> There was no end of all the people, even
of all them over whom he was--yet those who come after shall not rejoice
in him. Surely this also is vanity and a chasing after wind.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Guard your steps when you go to God's
house; for to draw near to listen is better than to give the sacrifice
of fools, for they don't know that they do evil.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Don't be rash with your mouth, and don't
let your heart be hasty to utter anything before God; for God is in
heaven, and you on earth. Therefore let your words be few.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For as a dream comes with a multitude of
cares, so a fool's speech with a multitude of words.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> When you vow a vow to God, don't defer to
pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools. Pay that which you vow.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> It is better that you should not vow, than
that you should vow and not pay.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Don't allow your mouth to lead you into
sin. Don't protest before the messenger that this was a mistake. Why
should God be angry at your voice, and destroy the work of your hands?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For in the multitude of dreams there are
vanities, as well as in many words: but you must fear God.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> If you see the oppression of the poor, and
the violent taking away of justice and righteousness in a district,
don't marvel at the matter: for one official is eyed by a higher one;
and there are officials over them.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Moreover the profit of the earth is for
all. The king profits from the field.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He who loves silver shall not be
satisfied with silver; nor he who loves abundance, with increase: this
also is vanity.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> When goods increase, those who eat them
are increased; and what advantage is there to its owner, except to feast
on them with his eyes?

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> The sleep of a laboring man is sweet,
whether he eats little or much; but the abundance of the rich will not
allow him to sleep.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> There is a grievous evil which I have
seen under the sun: wealth kept by its owner to his harm.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Those riches perish by misfortune, and if
he has fathered a son, there is nothing in his hand.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> As he came forth from his mother's womb,
naked shall he go again as he came, and shall take nothing for his
labor, which he may carry away in his hand.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> This also is a grievous evil, that in all
points as he came, so shall he go. And what profit does he have who
labors for the wind?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> All his days he also eats in darkness, he
is frustrated, and has sickness and wrath.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Behold, that which I have seen to be good
and proper is for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy good in all his
labor, in which he labors under the sun, all the days of his life which
God has given him; for this is his portion.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Every man also to whom God has given
riches and wealth, and has given him power to eat of it, and to take his
portion, and to rejoice in his labor--this is the gift of God.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For he shall not often reflect on the
days of his life; because God occupies him with the joy of his heart.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> There is an evil which I have seen under
the sun, and it is heavy on men:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> a man to whom God gives riches, wealth, and
honor, so that he lacks nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet
God gives him no power to eat of it, but an alien eats it. This is
vanity, and it is an evil disease.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If a man fathers a hundred children, and
lives many years, so that the days of his years are many, but his soul
is not filled with good, and moreover he has no burial; I say, that a
stillborn child is better than he:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> for it comes in vanity, and departs in
darkness, and its name is covered with darkness.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Moreover it has not seen the sun nor known
it. This has rest rather than the other.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Yes, though he live a thousand years twice
told, and yet fails to enjoy good, don't all go to one place?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> All the labor of man is for his mouth, and
yet the appetite is not filled.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For what advantage has the wise more than
the fool? What has the poor man, that knows how to walk before the
living?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Better is the sight of the eyes than the
wandering of the desire. This also is vanity and a chasing after wind.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Whatever has been, its name was given
long ago; and it is known what man is; neither can he contend with him
who is mightier than he.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> For there are many words that create
vanity. What does that profit man?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> For who knows what is good for man in
life, all the days of his vain life which he spends like a shadow? For
who can tell a man what will be after him under the sun?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> A good name is better than fine perfume;
and the day of death better than the day of one's birth.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> It is better to go to the house of mourning
than to go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of all men, and
the living should take this to heart.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Sorrow is better than laughter; for by the
sadness of the face the heart is made good.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> The heart of the wise is in the house of
mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> It is better to hear the rebuke of the
wise, than for a man to hear the song of fools.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For as the crackling of thorns under a pot,
so is the laughter of the fool. This also is vanity.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Surely extortion makes the wise man
foolish; and a bribe destroys the understanding.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Better is the end of a thing than its
beginning. The patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Don't be hasty in your spirit to be angry,
for anger rests in the bosom of fools.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Don't say, "Why were the former days
better than these?" For you do not ask wisely about this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Wisdom is as good as an inheritance. Yes,
it is more excellent for those who see the sun.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For wisdom is a defense, even as money is
a defense; but the excellency of knowledge is that wisdom preserves the
life of him who has it.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Consider the work of God, for who can
make that straight, which he has made crooked?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> In the day of prosperity be joyful, and
in the day of adversity consider; yes, God has made the one side by side
with the other, to the end that man should not find out anything after
him.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> All this have I seen in my days of
vanity: there is a righteous man who perishes in his righteousness, and
there is a wicked man who lives long in his evildoing.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Don't be overly righteous, neither make
yourself overly wise. Why should you destroy yourself?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Don't be too wicked, neither be foolish.
Why should you die before your time?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> It is good that you should take hold of
this. Yes, also from that don't withdraw your hand; for he who fears God
will come forth from them all.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Wisdom is a strength to the wise man more
than ten rulers who are in a city.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Surely there is not a righteous man on
earth, who does good and doesn't sin.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Also don't take heed to all words that
are spoken, lest you hear your servant curse you;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> for often your own heart knows that you
yourself have likewise cursed others.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> All this have I proved in wisdom. I said,
"I will be wise;" but it was far from me.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> That which is, is far off and exceedingly
deep. Who can find it out?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> I turned around, and my heart sought to
know and to search out, and to seek wisdom and the scheme of things, and
to know that wickedness is stupidity, and that foolishness is madness.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> I find more bitter than death the woman
whose heart is snares and traps, whose hands are chains. Whoever pleases
God shall escape from her; but the sinner will be ensnared by her.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> "Behold, I have found this," says the
Preacher, "one to another, to find out the scheme;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> which my soul still seeks; but I have not
found. One man among a thousand have I found; but I have not found a
woman among all those.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Behold, this only have I found: that God
made man upright; but they search for many schemes."

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Who is like the wise man? And who knows the
interpretation of a thing? A man's wisdom makes his face shine, and the
hardness of his face is changed.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I say, "Keep the king's command!" because
of the oath to God.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Don't be hasty to go out of his presence.
Don't persist in an evil thing, for he does whatever pleases him,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> for the king's word is supreme. Who can say
to him, "What are you doing?"

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Whoever keeps the commandment shall not
come to harm, and his wise heart will know the time and procedure.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For there is a time and procedure for every
purpose, although the misery of man is heavy on him.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For he doesn't know that which will be; for
who can tell him how it will be?

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> There is no man who has power over the
spirit to contain the spirit; neither does he have power over the day of
death. There is no discharge in war; neither shall wickedness deliver
those who practice it.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> All this have I seen, and applied my mind
to every work that is done under the sun. There is a time in which one
man has power over another to his hurt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> So I saw the wicked buried. Indeed they
came also from holiness. They went and were forgotten in the city where
they did this. This also is vanity.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because sentence against an evil work is
not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully
set in them to do evil.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Though a sinner commits crimes a hundred
times, and lives long, yet surely I know that it will be better with
those who fear God, who are reverent before him.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> But it shall not be well with the wicked,
neither shall he lengthen days like a shadow; because he doesn't fear
God.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> There is a vanity which is done on the
earth, that there are righteous men to whom it happens according to the
work of the wicked. Again, there are wicked men to whom it happens
according to the work of the righteous. I said that this also is vanity.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then I commended mirth, because a man has
no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be
joyful: for that will accompany him in his labor all the days of his
life which God has given him under the sun.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> When I applied my heart to know wisdom,
and to see the business that is done on the earth (for also there is
that neither day nor night sees sleep with his eyes),

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> then I saw all the work of God, that man
can't find out the work that is done under the sun, because however much
a man labors to seek it out, yet he won't find it. Yes even though a
wise man thinks he can comprehend it, he won't be able to find it.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> For all this I laid to my heart, even to
explore all this: that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are
in the hand of God; whether it is love or hatred, man doesn't know it;
all is before them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> All things come alike to all. There is one
event to the righteous and to the wicked; to the good, to the clean, to
the unclean, to him who sacrifices, and to him who doesn't sacrifice. As
is the good, so is the sinner; he who takes an oath, as he who fears an
oath.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> This is an evil in all that is done under
the sun, that there is one event to all: yes also, the heart of the sons
of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live,
and after that they go to the dead.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For to him who is joined with all the
living there is hope; for a living dog is better than a dead lion.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For the living know that they will die, but
the dead don't know anything, neither do they have any more a reward;
for the memory of them is forgotten.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Also their love, their hatred, and their
envy has perished long ago; neither have they any more a portion forever
in anything that is done under the sun.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Go your way--eat your bread with joy, and
drink your wine with a merry heart; for God has already accepted your
works.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Let your garments be always white, and
don't let your head lack oil.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Live joyfully with the wife whom you love
all the days of your life of vanity, which he has given you under the
sun, all your days of vanity: for that is your portion in life, and in
your labor in which you labor under the sun.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Whatever your hand finds to do, do it
with your might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom, in Sheol, where you are going.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> I returned, and saw under the sun, that
the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet
bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor
to men of skill; but time and chance happen to them all.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> For man also doesn't know his time. As
the fish that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught
in the snare, even so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when
it falls suddenly on them.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> I have also seen wisdom under the sun in
this way, and it seemed great to me.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> There was a little city, and few men
within it; and a great king came against it, besieged it, and built
great bulwarks against it.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Now a poor wise man was found in it, and
he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same
poor man.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Then I said, "Wisdom is better than
strength." Nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words
are not heard.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> The words of the wise heard in quiet are
better than the cry of him who rules among fools.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Wisdom is better than weapons of war; but
one sinner destroys much good.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Dead flies cause the oil of the perfumer
to send forth an evil odor; so does a little folly outweigh wisdom and
honor.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> A wise man's heart is at his right hand,
but a fool's heart at his left.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Yes also, when the fool walks by the way,
his understanding fails him, and he says to everyone that he is a fool.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> If the spirit of the ruler rises up
against you, don't leave your place; for gentleness lays great offenses
to rest.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> There is an evil which I have seen under
the sun, the sort of error which proceeds from the ruler.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Folly is set in great dignity, and the
rich sit in a low place.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> I have seen servants on horses, and
princes walking like servants on the earth.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> He who digs a pit may fall into it; and
whoever breaks through a wall may be bitten by a snake.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Whoever carves out stones may be injured
by them. Whoever splits wood may be endangered thereby.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> If the axe is blunt, and one doesn't
sharpen the edge, then he must use more strength; but skill brings
success.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> If the snake bites before it is
charmed, then is there no profit for the charmer's tongue.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The words of a wise man's mouth are
gracious; but a fool is swallowed by his own lips.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> The beginning of the words of his mouth
is foolishness; and the end of his talk is mischievous madness.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> A fool also multiplies words. Man
doesn't know what will be; and that which will be after him, who can
tell him?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The labor of fools wearies every one of
them; for he doesn't know how to go to the city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Woe to you, land, when your king is a
child, and your princes eat in the morning!

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Happy are you, land, when your king is
the son of nobles, and your princes eat in due season, for strength, and
not for drunkenness!

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> By slothfulness the roof sinks in; and
through idleness of the hands the house leaks.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> A feast is made for laughter, and wine
makes the life glad; and money is the answer for all things.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Don't curse the king, no, not in your
thoughts; and don't curse the rich in your bedroom: for a bird of the
sky may carry your voice, and that which has wings may tell the matter.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Cast your bread on the waters; for you
shall find it after many days.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Give a portion to seven, yes, even to
eight; for you don't know what evil will be on the earth.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> If the clouds are full of rain, they
empty themselves on the earth; and if a tree falls toward the south, or
toward the north, in the place where the tree falls, there shall it be.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> He who observes the wind won't sow; and
he who regards the clouds won't reap.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> As you don't know what is the way of the
wind, nor how the bones grow in the womb of her who is with child; even
so you don't know the work of God who does all.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> In the morning sow your seed, and in the
evening don't withhold your hand; for you don't know which will prosper,
whether this or that, or whether they both will be equally good.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant
thing it is for the eyes to see the sun.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Yes, if a man lives many years, let him
rejoice in them all; but let him remember the days of darkness, for they
shall be many. All that comes is vanity.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Rejoice, young man, in your youth, and
let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth, and walk in the ways
of your heart, and in the sight of your eyes; but know that for all
these things God will bring you into judgment.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Therefore remove sorrow from your
heart, and put away evil from your flesh; for youth and the dawn of life
are vanity.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Remember also your Creator in the days of
your youth, before the evil days come, and the years draw near, when you
will say, "I have no pleasure in them;"

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Before the sun, the light, the moon, and
the stars are darkened, and the clouds return after the rain;

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> in the day when the keepers of the house
shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders
cease because they are few, and those who look out of the windows are
darkened,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> and the doors shall be shut in the
street; when the sound of the grinding is low, and one shall rise up at
the voice of a bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought
low;

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> yes, they shall be afraid of heights, and
terrors will be in the way; and the almond tree shall blossom, and the
grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail; because man goes
to his everlasting home, and the mourners go about the streets:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> before the silver cord is severed, or the
golden bowl is broken, or the pitcher is broken at the spring, or the
wheel broken at the cistern,

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> and the dust returns to the earth as it
was, and the spirit returns to God who gave it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> "Vanity of vanities," says the Preacher.
"All is vanity!"

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Further, because the Preacher was wise,
he still taught the people knowledge. Yes, he pondered, sought out, and
set in order many proverbs.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The Preacher sought to find out
acceptable words, and that which was written blamelessly, words of
truth.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> The words of the wise are like goads;
and like nails well fastened are words from the masters of assemblies,
which are given from one shepherd.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Furthermore, my son, be admonished: of
making many books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the
flesh.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> This is the end of the matter. All has
been heard. Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole
duty of man.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> For God will bring every work into
judgment, with every hidden thing, whether it is good, or whether it is
evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon](sol)
