[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](neh)  [Next](job.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Esther

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it happened in the days of Ahasuerus
(this is Ahasuerus who reigned from India even to Ethiopia, over one
hundred twenty-seven provinces),

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> that in those days, when the King Ahasuerus
sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the palace,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> in the third year of his reign, he made a
feast for all his princes and his servants; the power of Persia and
Media, the nobles and princes of the provinces, being before him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> He displayed the riches of his glorious
kingdom and the honor of his excellent majesty many days, even one
hundred eighty days.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> When these days were fulfilled, the king
made a seven day feast for all the people who were present in Shushan
the palace, both great and small, in the court of the garden of the
king's palace.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> There were hangings of white, green, and
blue material, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver
rings and marble pillars. The couches were of gold and silver, on a
pavement of red, white, yellow, and black marble.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> They gave them drinks in golden vessels of
various kinds, including royal wine in abundance, according to the
bounty of the king.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> In accordance with the law, the drinking
was not compulsory; for so the king had instructed all the officials of
his house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the
women in the royal house which belonged to King Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> On the seventh day, when the heart of the
king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha,
and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcass, the seven eunuchs who served in the
presence of Ahasuerus the king,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> to bring Vashti the queen before the king
with the royal crown, to show the people and the princes her beauty; for
she was beautiful.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But the queen Vashti refused to come at
the king's commandment by the eunuchs. Therefore the king was very
angry, and his anger burned in him.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Then the king said to the wise men, who
knew the times, (for it was the king's custom to consult those who knew
law and judgment;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and the next to him were Carshena,
Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven
princes of Persia and Media, who saw the king's face, and sat first in
the kingdom),

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> "What shall we do to the queen Vashti
according to law, because she has not done the bidding of the King
Ahasuerus by the eunuchs?"

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Memucan answered before the king and the
princes, "Vashti the queen has not done wrong to just the king, but also
to all the princes, and to all the people who are in all the provinces
of the King Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For this deed of the queen will become
known to all women, causing them to show contempt for their husbands,
when it is reported, 'King Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be
brought in before him, but she didn't come.'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Today, the princesses of Persia and Media
who have heard of the queen's deed will tell all the king's princes.
This will cause much contempt and wrath.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> "If it please the king, let a royal
commandment go from him, and let it be written among the laws of the
Persians and the Medes, so that it cannot be altered, that Vashti may
never again come before King Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal
estate to another who is better than she.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> When the king's decree which he shall
make is published throughout all his kingdom (for it is great), all the
wives will give their husbands honor, both great and small."

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> This advice pleased the king and the
princes, and the king did according to the word of Memucan:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> for he sent letters into all the king's
provinces, into every province according to its writing, and to every
people in their language, that every man should rule his own house,
speaking in the language of his own people.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> After these things, when the wrath of King
Ahasuerus was pacified, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and
what was decreed against her.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Then the king's servants who served him
said, "Let beautiful young virgins be sought for the king.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Let the king appoint officers in all the
provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the
beautiful young virgins to the citadel of Susa, to the women's house, to
the custody of Hegai the king's eunuch, keeper of the women. Let
cosmetics be given them;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> and let the maiden who pleases the king be
queen instead of Vashti." The thing pleased the king, and he did so.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> There was a certain Jew in the citadel of
Susa, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the
son of Kish, a Benjamite,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who had been carried away from Jerusalem
with the captives who had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah,
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther,
his uncle's daughter; for she had neither father nor mother. The maiden
was fair and beautiful; and when her father and mother were dead,
Mordecai took her for his own daughter.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> So it happened, when the king's commandment
and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together
to the citadel of Susa, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was taken
into the king's house, to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The maiden pleased him, and she obtained
kindness from him. He quickly gave her cosmetics and her portions of
food, and the seven choice maidens who were to be given her out of the
king's house. He moved her and her maidens to the best place in the
women's house.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Esther had not made known her people nor
her relatives, because Mordecai had instructed her that she should not
make it known.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Mordecai walked every day in front of the
court of the women's house, to find out how Esther did, and what would
become of her.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Each young woman's turn came to go in to
King Ahasuerus after her purification for twelve months (for so were the
days of their purification accomplished, six months with oil of myrrh,
and six months with sweet fragrances and with preparations for
beautifying women).

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The young woman then came to the king
like this: whatever she desired was given her to go with her out of the
women's house to the king's house.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> In the evening she went, and on the next
day she returned into the second women's house, to the custody of
Shaashgaz, the king's eunuch, who kept the concubines. She came in to
the king no more, unless the king delighted in her, and she was called
by name.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter
of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter,
came to go in to the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the
king's eunuch, the keeper of the women, advised. Esther obtained favor
in the sight of all those who looked at her.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> So Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus
into his royal house in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in
the seventh year of his reign.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The king loved Esther more than all the
women, and she obtained favor and kindness in his sight more than all
the virgins; so that he set the royal crown on her head, and made her
queen instead of Vashti.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Then the king made a great feast for all
his princes and his servants, even Esther's feast; and he proclaimed a
holiday in the provinces, and gave gifts according to the king's bounty.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> When the virgins were gathered together
the second time, Mordecai was sitting in the king's gate.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Esther had not yet made known her
relatives nor her people, as Mordecai had commanded her; for Esther
obeyed Mordecai, like she did when she was brought up by him.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> In those days, while Mordecai was sitting
in the king's gate, two of the king's eunuchs, Bigthan and Teresh, who
were doorkeepers, were angry, and sought to lay hands on the King
Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> This thing became known to Mordecai, who
informed Esther the queen; and Esther informed the king in Mordecai's
name.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> When this matter was investigated, and it
was found to be so, they were both hanged on a tree; and it was written
in the book of the chronicles in the king's presence.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> After these things King Ahasuerus promoted
Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his
seat above all the princes who were with him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> All the king's servants who were in the
king's gate bowed down, and paid homage to Haman; for the king had so
commanded concerning him. But Mordecai didn't bow down or pay him
homage.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Then the king's servants, who were in the
king's gate, said to Mordecai, "Why do you disobey the king's
commandment?"

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Now it came to pass, when they spoke daily
to him, and he didn't listen to them, that they told Haman, to see
whether Mordecai's reason would stand; for he had told them that he was
a Jew.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> When Haman saw that Mordecai didn't bow
down, nor pay him homage, Haman was full of wrath.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But he scorned the thought of laying hands
on Mordecai alone, for they had made known to him Mordecai's people.
Therefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews who were throughout the
whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even Mordecai's people.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> In the first month, which is the month
Nisan, in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is,
the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, and
chose the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Haman said to King Ahasuerus, "There is a
certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all
the provinces of your kingdom, and their laws are different than other
people's. They don't keep the king's laws. Therefore it is not for the
king's profit to allow them to remain.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> If it pleases the king, let it be written
that they be destroyed; and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver
into the hands of those who are in charge of the king's business, to
bring it into the king's treasuries."

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The king took his ring from his hand, and
gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The king said to Haman, "The silver is
given to you, the people also, to do with them as it seems good to you."

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Then the king's scribes were called in on
the first month, on the thirteenth day of the month; and all that Haman
commanded was written to the king's satraps, and to the governors who
were over every province, and to the princes of every people, to every
province according its writing, and to every people in their language.
It was written in the name of King Ahasuerus, and it was sealed with the
king's ring.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Letters were sent by couriers into all
the king's provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all
Jews, both young and old, little children and women, in one day, even on
the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to
plunder their possessions.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> A copy of the letter, that the decree
should be given out in every province, was published to all the peoples,
that they should be ready against that day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The couriers went forth in haste by the
king's commandment, and the decree was given out in the citadel of Susa.
The king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city of Shushan was
perplexed.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now when Mordecai found out all that was
done, Mordecai tore his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and
went out into the midst of the city, and wailed loudly and a bitterly.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> He came even before the king's gate, for no
one is allowed inside the king's gate clothed with sackcloth.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> In every province, wherever the king's
commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the
Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth
and ashes.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Esther's maidens and her eunuchs came and
told her this, and the queen was exceedingly grieved. She sent clothing
to Mordecai, to replace his sackcloth; but he didn't receive it.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then Esther called for Hathach, one of the
king's eunuchs, whom he had appointed to attend her, and commanded him
to go to Mordecai, to find out what this was, and why it was.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> So Hathach went out to Mordecai, to city
square which was before the king's gate.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Mordecai told him of all that had happened
to him, and the exact sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to
the king's treasuries for the destruction of the Jews.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He also gave him the copy of the writing of
the decree that was given out in Shushan to destroy them, to show it to
Esther, and to declare it to her, and to urge her to go in to the king,
to make supplication to him, and to make request before him, for her
people.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Hathach came and told Esther the words of
Mordecai.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then Esther spoke to Hathach, and gave
him a message to Mordecai:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> "All the king's servants, and the people
of the king's provinces, know, that whoever, whether man or woman, comes
to the king into the inner court without being called, there is one law
for him, that he be put to death, except those to whom the king might
hold out the golden scepter, that he may live. I have not been called to
come in to the king these thirty days."

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> They told to Mordecai Esther's words.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Then Mordecai asked them return answer to
Esther, "Don't think to yourself that you will escape in the king's
house any more than all the Jews.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if you remain silent now, then relief
and deliverance will come to the Jews from another place, but you and
your father's house will perish. Who knows if you haven't come to the
kingdom for such a time as this?"

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Then Esther asked them to answer
Mordecai,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> "Go, gather together all the Jews who are
present in Shushan, and fast for me, and neither eat nor drink three
days, night or day. I and my maidens will also fast the same way. Then I
will go in to the king, which is against the law; and if I perish, I
perish."

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> So Mordecai went his way, and did
according to all that Esther had commanded him.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now it happened on the third day that
Esther put on her royal clothing, and stood in the inner court of the
king's house, next to the king's house. The king sat on his royal throne
in the royal house, next to the entrance of the house.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> When the king saw Esther the queen standing
in the court, she obtained favor in his sight; and the king held out to
Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand. So Esther came near, and
touched the top of the scepter.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then the king asked her, "What would you
like, queen Esther? What is your request? It shall be given you even to
the half of the kingdom."

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Esther said, "If it seems good to the king,
let the king and Haman come today to the banquet that I have prepared
for him."

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Then the king said, "Bring Haman quickly,
so that it may be done as Esther has said." So the king and Haman came
to the banquet that Esther had prepared.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The king said to Esther at the banquet of
wine, "What is your petition? It shall be granted you. What is your
request? Even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed."

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Then Esther answered and said, "My petition
and my request is this.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> If I have found favor in the sight of the
king, and if it please the king to grant my petition and to perform my
request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I will prepare
for them, and I will do tomorrow as the king has said."

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then Haman went out that day joyful and
glad of heart, but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he
didn't stand up nor move for him, he was filled with wrath against
Mordecai.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Nevertheless Haman restrained himself,
and went home. There, he sent and called for his friends and Zeresh his
wife.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Haman recounted to them the glory of his
riches, the multitude of his children, all the things in which the king
had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and
servants of the king.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Haman also said, "Yes, Esther the queen
let no man come in with the king to the banquet that she had prepared
but myself; and tomorrow I am also invited by her together with the
king.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Yet all this avails me nothing, so long
as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate."

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Then Zeresh his wife and all his friends
said to him, "Let a gallows be made fifty cubits high, and in the
morning speak to the king about hanging Mordecai on it. Then go in
merrily with the king to the banquet." This pleased Haman, so he had the
gallows made.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> On that night, the king couldn't sleep. He
commanded the book of records of the chronicles to be brought, and they
were read to the king.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> It was found written that Mordecai had told
of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's eunuchs, who were doorkeepers,
who had tried to lay hands on the King Ahasuerus.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> The king said, "What honor and dignity has
been bestowed on Mordecai for this?" Then the king's servants who
attended him said, "Nothing has been done for him."

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> The king said, "Who is in the court?" Now
Haman had come into the outer court of the king's house, to speak to the
king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> The king's servants said to him, "Behold,
Haman stands in the court." The king said, "Let him come in."

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> So Haman came in. The king said to him,
"What shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor?" Now
Haman said in his heart, "Who would the king delight to honor more than
myself?"

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Haman said to the king, "For the man whom
the king delights to honor,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> let royal clothing be brought which the
king uses to wear, and the horse that the king rides on, and on the head
of which a crown royal is set.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Let the clothing and the horse be delivered
to the hand of one of the king's most noble princes, that they may array
the man whom the king delights to honor with them, and have him ride on
horseback through the city square, and proclaim before him, 'Thus shall
it be done to the man whom the king delights to honor!'"

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Then the king said to Haman, "Hurry and
take the clothing and the horse, as you have said, and do this for
Mordecai the Jew, who sits at the king's gate. Let nothing fail of all
that you have spoken."

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then Haman took the clothing and the
horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and had him ride through the city square,
and proclaimed before him, "Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
king delights to honor!"

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Mordecai came back to the king's gate,
but Haman hurried to his house, mourning and having his head covered.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Haman recounted to Zeresh his wife and
all his friends everything that had happened to him. Then his wise men
and Zeresh his wife said to him, "If Mordecai, before whom you have
begun to fall, is of Jewish descent, you will not prevail against him,
but you will surely fall before him."

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> While they were yet talking with him, the
king's eunuchs came, and hurried to bring Haman to the banquet that
Esther had prepared.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> So the king and Haman came to banquet with
Esther the queen.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The king said again to Esther on the second
day at the banquet of wine, "What is your petition, queen Esther? It
shall be granted you. What is your request? Even to the half of the
kingdom it shall be performed."

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Then Esther the queen answered, "If I have
found favor in your sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my
life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For we are sold, I and my people, to be
destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for
bondservants and bondmaids, I would have held my peace, although the
adversary could not have compensated for the king's loss."

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the
queen, "Who is he, and where is he who dared presume in his heart to do
so?"

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Esther said, "An adversary and an enemy,
even this wicked Haman!" Then Haman was afraid before the king and the
queen.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The king arose in his wrath from the
banquet of wine and went into the palace garden. Haman stood up to make
request for his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil
determined against him by the king.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Then the king returned out of the palace
garden into the place of the banquet of wine; and Haman had fallen on
the couch where Esther was. Then the king said, "Will he even assault
the queen in front of me in the house?" As the word went out of the
king's mouth, they covered Haman's face.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Then Harbonah, one of the eunuchs who were
with the king said, "Behold, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman
has made for Mordecai, who spoke good for the king, is standing at
Haman's house." The king said, "Hang him on it!"

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> So they hanged Haman on the gallows that
he had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the king's wrath pacified.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> On that day, King Ahasuerus gave the house
of Haman, the Jews' enemy, to Esther the queen. Mordecai came before the
king; for Esther had told what he was to her.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> The king took off his ring, which he had
taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai. Esther set Mordecai over the
house of Haman.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Esther spoke yet again before the king, and
fell down at his feet, and begged him with tears to put away the
mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device that he had devised
against the Jews.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Then the king held out to Esther the golden
scepter. So Esther arose, and stood before the king.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> She said, "If it pleases the king, and if I
have found favor in his sight, and the thing seem right to the king, and
I am pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters
devised by Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to
destroy the Jews who are in all the king's provinces.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For how can I endure to see the evil that
would come to my people? How can I endure to see the destruction of my
relatives?"

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Then King Ahasuerus said to Esther the
queen and to Mordecai the Jew, "See, I have given Esther the house of
Haman, and him they have hanged on the gallows, because he laid his hand
on the Jews.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Write also to the Jews, as it pleases you,
in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring; for the writing
which is written in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring,
may not be reversed by any man."

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Then the king's scribes were called at that
time, in the third month Sivan, on the twenty-third day of the month;
and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded to the Jews,
and to the satraps, and the governors and princes of the provinces which
are from India to Ethiopia, one hundred twenty-seven provinces, to every
province according to its writing, and to every people in their
language, and to the Jews in their writing, and in their language.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> He wrote in the name of King Ahasuerus,
and sealed it with the king's ring, and sent letters by courier on
horseback, riding on royal horses that were bread from swift steeds.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> In those letters, the king granted the
Jews who were in every city to gather themselves together, and to defend
their life, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all the power
of the people and province that would assault them, their little ones
and women, and to plunder their possessions,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> on one day in all the provinces of King
Ahasuerus, on the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the
month Adar.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> A copy of the letter, that the decree
should be given out in every province, was published to all the peoples,
that the Jews should be ready for that day to avenge themselves on their
enemies.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> So the couriers who rode on royal horses
went out, hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment. The decree
was given out in the citadel of Susa.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Mordecai went out of the presence of the
king in royal clothing of blue and white, and with a great crown of
gold, and with a robe of fine linen and purple; and the city of Susa
shouted and was glad.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The Jews had light, gladness, joy, and
honor.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> In every province, and in every city,
wherever the king's commandment and his decree came, the Jews had
gladness, joy, a feast, and a good day. Many from among the peoples of
the land became Jews; for the fear of the Jews was fallen on them.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now in the twelfth month, which is the
month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the month, when the king's
commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution, on the day
that the enemies of the Jews hoped to conquer them, (but it was turned
out the opposite happened, that the Jews conquered those who hated
them),

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> the Jews gathered themselves together in
their cities throughout all the provinces of the King Ahasuerus, to lay
hands on those who wanted to harm them. No one could withstand them,
because the fear of them had fallen on all the people.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> All the princes of the provinces, the
satraps, the governors, and those who did the king's business helped the
Jews, because the fear of Mordecai had fallen on them.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For Mordecai was great in the king's house,
and his fame went out throughout all the provinces; for the man Mordecai
grew greater and greater.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> The Jews struck all their enemies with the
stroke of the sword, and with slaughter and destruction, and did what
they wanted to those who hated them.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> In the citadel of Susa, the Jews killed and
destroyed five hundred men.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> They killed Parshandatha, Dalphon, Aspatha,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Poratha, Adalia, Aridatha,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Parmashta, Arisai, Aridai, and Vaizatha,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> the ten sons of Haman the son of
Hammedatha, the Jew's enemy, but they didn't lay their hand on the
plunder.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> On that day, the number of those who were
slain in the citadel of Susa was brought before the king.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> The king said to Esther the queen, "The
Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in the citadel of Susa,
including the ten sons of Haman; what then have they done in the rest of
the king's provinces! Now what is your petition? It shall be granted
you. What is your further request? It shall be done."

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Then Esther said, "If it pleases the
king, let it be granted to the Jews who are in Shushan to do tomorrow
also according to this day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged
on the gallows."

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> The king commanded this to be done. A
decree was given out in Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> The Jews who were in Shushan gathered
themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and
killed three hundred men in Shushan; but they didn't lay their hand on
the spoil.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> The other Jews who were in the king's
provinces gathered themselves together, defended their lives, had rest
from their enemies, and killed seventy-five thousand of those who hated
them; but they didn't lay their hand on the plunder.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> This was done on the thirteenth day of
the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of that month they rested and
made it a day of feasting and gladness.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But the Jews who were in Shushan
assembled together on the thirteenth and on the fourteenth days of the
month; and on the fifteenth day of that month, they rested, and made it
a day of feasting and gladness.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Therefore the Jews of the villages, who
live in the unwalled towns, make the fourteenth day of the month Adar a
day of gladness and feasting, a good day, and a day of sending presents
of food to one another.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Mordecai wrote these things, and sent
letters to all the Jews who were in all the provinces of the king
Ahasuerus, both near and far,

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> to enjoin them that they should keep the
fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month Adar yearly,

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> as the days in which the Jews had rest
from their enemies, and the month which was turned to them from sorrow
to gladness, and from mourning into a good day; that they should make
them days of feasting and gladness, and of sending presents of food to
one another, and gifts to the needy.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> The Jews accepted the custom that they
had begun, as Mordecai had written to them;

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the
Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted against the Jews to
destroy them, and had cast "Pur," that is the lot, to consume them, and
to destroy them;

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> but when this became known to the king,
he commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he had devised
against the Jews, should return on his own head, and that he and his
sons should be hanged on the gallows.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Therefore they called these days "Purim,"
from the word "Pur." Therefore because of all the words of this letter,
and of that which they had seen concerning this matter, and that which
had come to them,

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> the Jews established, and imposed on
themselves, and on their descendants, and on all those who joined
themselves to them, so that it should not fail, that they would keep
these two days according to what was written, and according to its
appointed time, every year;

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> and that these days should be remembered
and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and
every city; and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the
Jews, nor the memory of them perish from their seed.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Then Esther the queen, the daughter of
Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority to confirm this
second letter of Purim.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> He sent letters to all the Jews, to the
hundred twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words
of peace and truth,

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> to confirm these days of Purim in their
appointed times, as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had decreed,
and as they had imposed upon themselves and their descendants, in the
matter of the fastings and their cry.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> The commandment of Esther confirmed these
matters of Purim; and it was written in the book.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> King Ahasuerus laid a tribute on the
land, and on the islands of the sea.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> All the acts of his power and of his
might, and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai, to which the
king advanced him, aren't they written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Media and Persia?

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For Mordecai the Jew was next to King
Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted by the multitude of
his brothers, seeking the good of his people, and speaking peace to all
his descendants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job](job.md)
