[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lam)  [Next](dan) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Ezekiel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it happened in the thirtieth year, in
the fourth \[month\], in the fifth \[day\] of the month, as I was among
the captives by the river Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I
saw visions of God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> In the fifth \[day\] of the month, which
was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> the word of Yahweh came expressly to
Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the
river Chebar; and the hand of Yahweh was there on him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I looked, and behold, a stormy wind came
out of the north, a great cloud, with flashing lightning, and a
brightness around it, and out of its midst as it were glowing metal, out
of the midst of the fire.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Out of its midst came the likeness of four
living creatures. This was their appearance: they had the likeness of a
man.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Everyone had four faces, and each one of
them had four wings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Their feet were straight feet; and the sole
of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot; and they sparkled like
burnished brass.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> They had the hands of a man under their
wings on their four sides; and the four of them had their faces and
their wings \[thus\]:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> their wings were joined one to another;
they didn't turn when they went; each one went straight forward.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> As for the likeness of their faces, they
had the face of a man; and the four of them had the face of a lion on
the right side; and the four of them had the face of an ox on the left
side; the four of them also had the face of an eagle.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Such were their faces. Their wings were
spread out above. Two wings of each one touched another, and two covered
their bodies.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Each one went straight forward: where the
spirit was to go, they went; they didn't turn when they went.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> As for the likeness of the living
creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the
appearance of torches: \[the fire\] went up and down among the living
creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth
lightning.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The living creatures ran and returned as
the appearance of a flash of lightning.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Now as I saw the living creatures,
behold, one wheel on the earth beside the living creatures, for each of
the four faces of it.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The appearance of the wheels and their
work was like a beryl: and the four of them had one likeness; and their
appearance and their work was as it were a wheel within a wheel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> When they went, they went in their four
directions: they didn't turn when they went.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> As for their rims, they were high and
dreadful; and the four of them had their rims full of eyes all around.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> When the living creatures went, the
wheels went beside them; and when the living creatures were lifted up
from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wherever the spirit was to go, they went;
there was the spirit to go: and the wheels were lifted up beside them;
for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> When those went, these went; and when
those stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth,
the wheels were lifted up beside them: for the spirit of the living
creature was in the wheels.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Over the head of the living creature
there was the likeness of an expanse, like the awesome crystal to look
on, stretched forth over their heads above.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Under the expanse were their wings
straight, the one toward the other: each one had two which covered on
this side, and every one had two which covered on that side, their
bodies.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> When they went, I heard the noise of
their wings like the noise of great waters, like the voice of the
Almighty, a noise of tumult like the noise of an army: when they stood,
they let down their wings.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> There was a voice above the expanse that
was over their heads: when they stood, they let down their wings.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Above the expanse that was over their
heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire
stone; and on the likeness of the throne was a likeness as the
appearance of a man on it above.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> I saw as it were glowing metal, as the
appearance of fire within it all around, from the appearance of his
waist and upward; and from the appearance of his waist and downward I
saw as it were the appearance of fire, and there was brightness around
him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> As the appearance of the rainbow that is
in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness
all around. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of
Yahweh. When I saw it, I fell on my face, and I heard a voice of one
that spoke.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> He said to me, Son of man, stand on your
feet, and I will speak with you.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The Spirit entered into me when he spoke to
me, and set me on my feet; and I heard him who spoke to me.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> He said to me, Son of man, I send you to
the children of Israel, to a nation of rebels who have rebelled against
me. They and their fathers have transgressed against me even to this
very day.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The children are impudent and
stiff-hearted: I am sending you to them; and you shall tell them, Thus
says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> They, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house), yet shall know
that there has been a prophet among them.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> You, son of man, don't be afraid of them,
neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns are with you,
and you do dwell among scorpions: don't be afraid of their words, nor be
dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> You shall speak my words to them, whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear; for they are most
rebellious.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But you, son of man, hear what I tell you;
don't be rebellious like that rebellious house: open your mouth, and eat
that which I give you.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> When I looked, behold, a hand was put forth
to me; and, behold, a scroll of a book was therein;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> He spread it before me: and it was
written within and without; and there were written therein lamentations,
and mourning, and woe.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> He said to me, Son of man, eat that which
you find. Eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to
eat the scroll.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> He said to me, Son of man, cause your belly
to eat, and fill your bowels with this scroll that I give you. Then I
ate it; and it was as sweet as honey in my mouth.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> He said to me, Son of man, go to the house
of Israel, and speak my words to them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For you are not sent to a people of a
strange speech and of a hard language, but to the house of Israel;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> not to many peoples of a strange speech and
of a hard language, whose words you can not understand. Surely, if I
sent you to them, they would listen to you.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the house of Israel will not listen to
you; for they will not listen to me: for all the house of Israel are
obstinate and hard-hearted.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Behold, I have made your face hard against
their faces, and your forehead hard against their foreheads.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> As an adamant harder than flint have I made
your forehead: don't be afraid of them, neither be dismayed at their
looks, though they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Moreover he said to me, Son of man, all
my words that I shall speak to you receive in your heart, and hear with
your ears.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Go to them of the captivity, to the
children of your people, and speak to them, and tell them, Thus says the
Lord Yahweh; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Then the Spirit lifted me up, and I heard
behind me the voice of a great rushing, \[saying\], Blessed be the glory
of Yahweh from his place.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> \[I heard\] the noise of the wings of the
living creatures as they touched one another, and the noise of the
wheels beside them, even the noise of a great rushing.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> So the Spirit lifted me up, and took me
away; and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; and the hand
of Yahweh was strong on me.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Then I came to them of the captivity at
Tel Aviv, that lived by the river Chebar, and to where they lived; and I
sat there overwhelmed among them seven days.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> It happened at the end of seven days,
that the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Son of man, I have made you a watchman to
the house of Israel: therefore hear the word from my mouth, and give
them warning from me.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> When I tell the wicked, You shall surely
die; and you give him no warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity; but his blood will I require at your hand.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Yet if you warn the wicked, and he
doesn't turn from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die
in his iniquity; but you have delivered your soul.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Again, when a righteous man does turn
from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block
before him, he shall die: because you have not given him warning, he
shall die in his sin, and his righteous deeds which he has done shall
not be remembered; but his blood will I require at your hand.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Nevertheless if you warn the righteous
man, that the righteous not sin, and he does not sin, he shall surely
live, because he took warning; and you have delivered your soul.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> The hand of Yahweh was there on me; and
he said to me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk
with you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then I arose, and went forth into the
plain: and behold, the glory of Yahweh stood there, as the glory which I
saw by the river Chebar; and I fell on my face.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then the Spirit entered into me, and set
me on my feet; and he spoke with me, and said to me, Go, shut yourself
inside your house.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But you, son of man, behold, they shall
lay bands on you, and shall bind you with them, and you shall not go out
among them:

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> and I will make your tongue stick to the
roof of your mouth, that you shall be mute, and shall not be to them a
reprover; for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> But when I speak with you, I will open
your mouth, and you shall tell them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: He who
hears, let him hear; and he who forbears, let him forbear: for they are
a rebellious house.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> You also, son of man, take a tile, and lay
it before yourself, and portray on it a city, even Jerusalem:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and lay siege against it, and build forts
against it, and cast up a mound against it; set camps also against it,
and plant battering rams against it all around.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Take for yourself an iron pan, and set it
for a wall of iron between you and the city: and set your face toward
it, and it shall be besieged, and you shall lay siege against it. This
shall be a sign to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Moreover lie on your left side, and lay the
iniquity of the house of Israel on it; \[according to\] the number of
the days that you shall lie on it, you shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For I have appointed the years of their
iniquity to be to you a number of days, even three hundred ninety days:
so you shall bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Again, when you have accomplished these,
you shall lie on your right side, and shall bear the iniquity of the
house of Judah: forty days, each day for a year, have I appointed it to
you.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> You shall set your face toward the siege of
Jerusalem, with your arm uncovered; and you shall prophesy against it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Behold, I lay bands on you, and you shall
not turn you from one side to the other, until you have accomplished the
days of your siege.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Take for yourself also wheat, and barley,
and beans, and lentils, and millet, and spelt, and put them in one
vessel, and make bread of it; \[according to\] the number of the days
that you shall lie on your side, even three hundred ninety days, you
shall eat of it.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Your food which you shall eat shall be by
weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time you shall eat it.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> You shall drink water by measure, the
sixth part of a hin: from time to time you shall drink.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> You shall eat it as barley cakes, and you
shall bake it in their sight with dung that comes out of man.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Yahweh said, Even thus shall the children
of Israel eat their bread unclean, among the nations where I will drive
them.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Then I said, Ah Lord Yahweh! behold, my
soul has not been polluted; for from my youth up even until now have I
not eaten of that which dies of itself, or is torn of animals; neither
came there abominable flesh into my mouth.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Then he said to me, Behold, I have given
you cow's dung for man's dung, and you shall prepare your bread thereon.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Moreover he said to me, Son of man,
behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat
bread by weight, and with fearfulness; and they shall drink water by
measure, and in dismay:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> that they may want bread and water, and
be dismayed one with another, and pine away in their iniquity.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> You, son of man, take a sharp sword; You
shall take it as a barber's razor to you, and shall cause it to pass on
your head and on your beard: then take balances to weigh, and divide the
hair.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> A third part you shall burn in the fire in
the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfilled; and you
shall take a third part, and strike with the sword around it; and a
third part you shall scatter to the wind, and I will draw out a sword
after them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> You shall take of it a few in number, and
bind them in your skirts.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Of these again you shall take, and cast
them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; from it
shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: This is
Jerusalem; I have set her in the midst of the nations, and countries are
around her.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> She has rebelled against my ordinances in
doing wickedness more than the nations, and against my statutes more
than the countries that are around her; for they have rejected my
ordinances, and as for my statutes, they have not walked in them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Because you are turbulent more than the nations that are around you, and
have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my ordinances, neither
have done after the ordinances of the nations that are around you;

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I, even I, am against you; and I will execute judgments in the
midst of you in the sight of the nations.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> I will do in you that which I have not
done, and whereunto I will not do any more the like, because of all your
abominations.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons
in the midst of you, and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will
execute judgments on you; and the whole remnant of you will I scatter to
all the winds.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Therefore, as I live, says the Lord
Yahweh, surely, because you have defiled my sanctuary with all your
detestable things, and with all your abominations, therefore will I also
diminish \[you\]; neither shall my eye spare, and I also will have no
pity.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> A third part of you shall die with the
pestilence, and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of you;
and a third part shall fall by the sword around you; and a third part I
will scatter to all the winds, and will draw out a sword after them.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Thus shall my anger be accomplished, and
I will cause my wrath toward them to rest, and I shall be comforted; and
they shall know that I, Yahweh, have spoken in my zeal, when I have
accomplished my wrath on them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Moreover I will make you a desolation and
a reproach among the nations that are around you, in the sight of all
that pass by.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an
instruction and an astonishment, to the nations that are around you,
when I shall execute judgments on you in anger and in wrath, and in
wrathful rebukes; (I, Yahweh, have spoken it;)

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> when I shall send on them the evil arrows
of famine, that are for destruction, which I will send to destroy you:
and I will increase the famine on you, and will break your staff of
bread;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> and I will send on you famine and evil
animals, and they shall bereave you; and pestilence and blood shall pass
through you; and I will bring the sword on you: I, Yahweh, have spoken
it.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Son of man, set your face toward the
mountains of Israel, and prophesy to them,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> and say, You mountains of Israel, hear the
word of the Lord Yahweh: Thus says the Lord Yahweh to the mountains and
to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys: Behold, I, even I,
will bring a sword on you, and I will destroy your high places.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Your altars shall become desolate, and your
incense altars shall be broken; and I will cast down your slain men
before your idols.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> I will lay the dead bodies of the children
of Israel before their idols; and I will scatter your bones around your
altars.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> In all your dwelling places the cities
shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate; that your
altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken
and cease, and your incense altars may be cut down, and your works may
be abolished.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> The slain shall fall in the midst of you,
and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Yet will I leave a remnant, in that you
shall have some that escape the sword among the nations, when you shall
be scattered through the countries.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Those of you that escape shall remember me
among the nations where they shall be carried captive, how that I have
been broken with their lewd heart, which has departed from me, and with
their eyes, which play the prostitute after their idols: and they shall
loathe themselves in their own sight for the evils which they have
committed in all their abominations.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> They shall know that I am Yahweh: I have
not said in vain that I would do this evil to them.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Strike with
your hand, and stamp with your foot, and say, Alas! because of all the
evil abominations of the house of Israel; for they shall fall by the
sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> He who is far off shall die of the
pestilence; and he who is near shall fall by the sword; and he who
remains and is besieged shall die by the famine: thus will I accomplish
my wrath on them.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> You shall know that I am Yahweh, when
their slain men shall be among their idols around their altars, on every
high hill, on all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree,
and under every thick oak, the places where they offered pleasant aroma
to all their idols.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> I will stretch out my hand on them, and
make the land desolate and waste, from the wilderness toward Diblah,
throughout all their habitations: and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> You, son of man, thus says the Lord Yahweh
to the land of Israel, An end: the end is come on the four corners of
the land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Now is the end on you, and I will send my
anger on you, and will judge you according to your ways; and I will
bring on you all your abominations.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> My eye shall not spare you, neither will I
have pity; but I will bring your ways on you, and your abominations
shall be in the midst of you: and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: An evil, an only
evil; behold, it comes.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> An end has come, the end has come; it
awakes against you; behold, it comes.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Your doom has come to you, inhabitant of
the land: the time has come, the day is near, \[a day of\] tumult, and
not \[of\] joyful shouting, on the mountains.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now will I shortly pour out my wrath on
you, and accomplish my anger against you, and will judge you according
to your ways; and I will bring on you all your abominations.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> My eye shall not spare, neither will I have
pity: I will bring on you according to your ways; and your abominations
shall be in the midst of you; and you shall know that I, Yahweh, do
strike.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Behold, the day, behold, it comes: your
doom is gone forth; the rod has blossomed, pride has budded.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Violence is risen up into a rod of
wickedness; none of them \[shall remain\], nor of their multitude, nor
of their wealth: neither shall there be eminency among them.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The time is come, the day draws near:
don't let the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn; for wrath is on all
its multitude.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For the seller shall not return to that
which is sold, although they be yet alive: for the vision is touching
the whole multitude of it, none shall return; neither shall any
strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> They have blown the trumpet, and have
made all ready; but none goes to the battle; for my wrath is on all its
multitude.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The sword is outside, and the pestilence
and the famine within: he who is in the field shall die with the sword:
and he who is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> But those of those who escape shall
escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of
them moaning, every one in his iniquity.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> All hands shall be feeble, and all knees
shall be weak as water.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> They shall also clothe themselves with
sackcloth, and horror shall cover them; and shame shall be on all faces,
and baldness on all their heads.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> They shall cast their silver in the
streets, and their gold shall be as an unclean thing; their silver and
their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of
Yahweh: they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels;
because it has been the stumbling block of their iniquity.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> As for the beauty of his ornament, he set
it in majesty; but they made the images of their abominations \[and\]
their detestable things therein: therefore have I made it to them as an
unclean thing.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I will give it into the hands of the
strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and
they shall profane it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> My face will I turn also from them, and
they shall profane my secret \[place\]; and robbers shall enter into it,
and profane it.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Make the chain; for the land is full of
bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Therefore I will bring the worst of the
nations, and they shall possess their houses: I will also make the pride
of the strong to cease; and their holy places shall be profaned.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Destruction comes; and they shall seek
peace, and there shall be none.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Mischief shall come on mischief, and
rumor shall be on rumor; and they shall seek a vision of the prophet;
but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the elders.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The king shall mourn, and the prince
shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the
land shall be troubled: I will do to them after their way, and according
to their own judgments will I judge them; and they shall know that I am
Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> It happened in the sixth year, in the sixth
\[month\], in the fifth \[day\] of the month, as I sat in my house, and
the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord Yahweh fell
there on me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Then I saw, and behold, a likeness as the
appearance of fire; from the appearance of his waist and downward, fire;
and from his waist and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as it
were glowing metal.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> He put forth the form of a hand, and took
me by a lock of my head; and the Spirit lifted me up between earth and
the sky, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door
of the gate of the inner \[court\] that looks toward the north; where
there was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provokes to jealousy.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Behold, the glory of the God of Israel was
there, according to the appearance that I saw in the plain.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, lift up
your eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up my eyes the way
toward the north, and see, northward of the gate of the altar this image
of jealousy in the entry.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> He said to me, Son of man, do you see what
they do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel do commit
here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? But you shall again
see yet other great abominations.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> He brought me to the door of the court; and
when I looked, behold, a hole in the wall.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, dig now in
the wall: and when I had dug in the wall, behold, a door.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> He said to me, Go in, and see the wicked
abominations that they do here.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> So I went in and saw; and see, every form
of creeping things, and abominable animals, and all the idols of the
house of Israel, portrayed around on the wall.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> There stood before them seventy men of
the elders of the house of Israel; and in the midst of them stood
Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, every man with his censer in his hand; and
the odor of the cloud of incense went up.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, have you
seen what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in
his rooms of imagery? for they say, Yahweh doesn't see us; Yahweh has
forsaken the land.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> He said also to me, You shall again see
yet other great abominations which they do.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Then he brought me to the door of the
gate of Yahweh's house which was toward the north; and see, there sat
the women weeping for Tammuz.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then he said to me, Have you seen
\[this\], son of man? You shall again see yet greater abominations than
these.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> He brought me into the inner court of
Yahweh's house; and see, at the door of the temple of Yahweh, between
the porch and the altar, were about twenty-five men, with their backs
toward the temple of Yahweh, and their faces toward the east; and they
were worshipping the sun toward the east.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then he said to me, Have you seen
\[this\], son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that
they commit the abominations which they commit here? for they have
filled the land with violence, and have turned again to provoke me to
anger: and behold, they put the branch to their nose.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Therefore will I also deal in wrath; my
eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in my
ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then he cried in my ears with a loud voice,
saying, Cause those who are in charge of the city to draw near, every
man with his destroying weapon in his hand.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Behold, six men came from the way of the
upper gate, which lies toward the north, every man with his slaughter
weapon in his hand; and one man in the midst of them clothed in linen,
with a writer's inkhorn by his side. They went in, and stood beside the
bronze altar.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> The glory of the God of Israel was gone up
from the cherub, whereupon it was, to the threshold of the house: and he
called to the man clothed in linen, who had the writer's inkhorn by his
side.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Yahweh said to him, Go through the midst of
the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark on the
foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry over all the abominations
that are done in its midst.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> To the others he said in my hearing, Go
through the city after him, and strike: don't let your eye spare,
neither have pity;

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> kill utterly the old man, the young man and
the virgin, and little children and women; but don't come near any man
on whom is the mark: and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the
old men that were before the house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He said to them, Defile the house, and fill
the courts with the slain. Go forth! They went forth, and struck in the
city.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> It happened, while they were smiting, and I
was left, that I fell on my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord Yahweh!
will you destroy all the residue of Israel in your pouring out of your
wrath on Jerusalem?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Then he said to me, The iniquity of the
house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly great, and the land is full of
blood, and the city full of perversion: for they say, Yahweh has
forsaken the land, and Yahweh doesn't see.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> As for me also, my eye shall not spare,
neither will I have pity, but I will bring their way on their head.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Behold, the man clothed in linen, who had
the inkhorn by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as you
have commanded me.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Then I looked, and see, in the expanse
that was over the head of the cherubim there appeared above them as it
were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> He spoke to the man clothed in linen, and
said, Go in between the whirling \[wheels\], even under the cherub, and
fill both your hands with coals of fire from between the cherubim, and
scatter them over the city. He went in as I watched.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Now the cherubim stood on the right side
of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud filled the inner
court.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> The glory of Yahweh mounted up from the
cherub, \[and stood\] over the threshold of the house; and the house was
filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of
Yahweh's glory.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The sound of the wings of the cherubim
was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of God Almighty when he
speaks.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> It came to pass, when he commanded the
man clothed in linen, saying, Take fire from between the whirling
wheels, from between the cherubim, that he went in, and stood beside a
wheel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The cherub stretched forth his hand from
between the cherubim to the fire that was between the cherubim, and took
\[of it\], and put it into the hands of him who was clothed in linen,
who took it and went out.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> There appeared in the cherubim the form
of a man's hand under their wings.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> I looked, and behold, four wheels beside
the cherubim, one wheel beside one cherub, and another wheel beside
another cherub; and the appearance of the wheels was like a beryl stone.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> As for their appearance, the four of
them had one likeness, like a wheel within a wheel.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> When they went, they went in their four
directions: they didn't turn as they went, but to the place where the
head looked they followed it; they didn't turn as they went.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Their whole body, and their backs, and
their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes all
around, \[even\] the wheels that the four of them had.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> As for the wheels, they were called in
my hearing, the whirling \[wheels\].

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Every one had four faces: the first
face was the face of the cherub, and the second face was the face of a
man, and the third face the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of
an eagle.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The cherubim mounted up: this is the
living creature that I saw by the river Chebar.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> When the cherubim went, the wheels went
beside them; and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount up
from the earth, the wheels also didn't turn from beside them.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> When they stood, these stood; and when
they mounted up, these mounted up with them: for the spirit of the
living creature was in them.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> The glory of Yahweh went forth from
over the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubim.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> The cherubim lifted up their wings, and
mounted up from the earth in my sight when they went forth, and the
wheels beside them: and they stood at the door of the east gate of
Yahweh's house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> This is the living creature that I saw
under the God of Israel by the river Chebar; and I knew that they were
cherubim.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Every one had four faces, and every one
four wings; and the likeness of the hands of a man was under their
wings.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> As for the likeness of their faces,
they were the faces which I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances
and themselves; they went every one straight forward.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Moreover the Spirit lifted me up, and
brought me to the east gate of Yahweh's house, which looks eastward: and
see, at the door of the gate twenty-five men; and I saw in the midst of
them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah,
princes of the people.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> He said to me, Son of man, these are the
men who devise iniquity, and who give wicked counsel in this city;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> who say, \[The time\] is not near to
build houses: this \[city\] is the caldron, and we are the flesh.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Therefore prophesy against them,
prophesy, son of man.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The Spirit of Yahweh fell on me, and he
said to me, Speak, Thus says Yahweh: Thus you have said, house of
Israel; for I know the things that come into your mind.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> You have multiplied your slain in this
city, and you have filled its streets with the slain.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh: Your
slain whom you have laid in its midst, they are the flesh, and this
\[city\] is the caldron; but you shall be brought forth out of its
midst.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> You have feared the sword; and I will
bring the sword on you, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I will bring you forth out of its midst,
and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments
among you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> You shall fall by the sword; I will
judge you in the border of Israel; and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> This \[city\] shall not be your
caldron, neither shall you be the flesh in its midst; I will judge you
in the border of Israel;

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and you shall know that I am Yahweh:
for you have not walked in my statutes, neither have you executed my
ordinances, but have done after the ordinances of the nations that are
around you.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> It happened, when I prophesied, that
Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then fell I down on my face, and cried
with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord Yahweh! will you make a full end of
the remnant of Israel?

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Son of man, your brothers, even your
brothers, the men of your relatives, and all the house of Israel, all of
them, \[are they\] to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Go
far away from Yahweh. This land has been given to us for a possession.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Therefore say, Thus says the Lord
Yahweh: Whereas I have removed them far off among the nations, and
whereas I have scattered them among the countries, yet will I be to them
a sanctuary for a little while in the countries where they are come.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Therefore say, Thus says the Lord
Yahweh: I will gather you from the peoples, and assemble you out of the
countries where you have been scattered, and I will give you the land of
Israel.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> They shall come there, and they shall
take away all the detestable things of it and all its abominations from
there.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> I will give them one heart, and I will
put a new spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh;

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> that they may walk in my statutes, and
keep my ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> But as for them whose heart walks after
the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will
bring their way on their own heads, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Then did the cherubim lift up their
wings, and the wheels were beside them; and the glory of the God of
Israel was over them above.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The glory of Yahweh went up from the
midst of the city, and stood on the mountain which is on the east side
of the city.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> The Spirit lifted me up, and brought me
in the vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the
captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then I spoke to them of the captivity
all the things that Yahweh had shown me.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> The word of Yahweh also came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Son of man, you dwell in the midst of the
rebellious house, who have eyes to see, and don't see, who have ears to
hear, and don't hear; for they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Therefore, you son of man, prepare your
stuff for moving, and move by day in their sight; and you shall move
from your place to another place in their sight: it may be they will
consider, though they are a rebellious house.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> You shall bring forth your stuff by day
in their sight, as stuff for moving; and you shall go forth yourself at
even in their sight, as when men go forth into exile.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Dig through the wall in their sight, and
carry your stuff out that way.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> In their sight you shall bear it on your
shoulder, and carry it forth in the dark; you shall cover your face, so
that you don't see the land: for I have set you for a sign to the house
of Israel.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> I did so as I was commanded: I brought
forth my stuff by day, as stuff for removing, and in the even I dug
through the wall with my hand; I brought it forth in the dark, and bore
it on my shoulder in their sight.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> In the morning came the word of Yahweh to
me, saying,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Son of man, has not the house of Israel,
the rebellious house, said to you, What are you doing?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Say to them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
This burden \[concerns\] the prince in Jerusalem, and all the house of
Israel among whom they are.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Say, I am your sign: like as I have
done, so shall it be done to them; they shall go into exile, into
captivity.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The prince who is among them shall bear
on his shoulder in the dark, and shall go forth: they shall dig through
the wall to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, because he shall
not see the land with his eyes.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> My net also will I spread on him, and
he shall be taken in my snare; and I will bring him to Babylon to the
land of the Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he shall die
there.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> I will scatter toward every wind all
who are around him to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw out
the sword after them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> They shall know that I am Yahweh, when
I shall disperse them among the nations, and scatter them through the
countries.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But I will leave a few men of them from
the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may
declare all their abominations among the nations where they come; and
they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Son of man, eat your bread with
quaking, and drink your water with trembling and with fearfulness;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and tell the people of the land, Thus
says the Lord Yahweh concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the
land of Israel: They shall eat their bread with fearfulness, and drink
their water in dismay, that her land may be desolate, \[and despoiled\]
of all that is therein, because of the violence of all those who dwell
therein.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> The cities that are inhabited shall be
laid waste, and the land shall be a desolation; and you shall know that
I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Son of man, what is this proverb that
you have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and
every vision fails?

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Tell them therefore, Thus says the Lord
Yahweh: I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it
as a proverb in Israel; but tell them, The days are at hand, and the
fulfillment of every vision.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> For there shall be no more any false
vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> For I am Yahweh; I will speak, and the
word that I shall speak shall be performed; it shall be no more
deferred: for in your days, rebellious house, will I speak the word, and
will perform it, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Again the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Son of man, behold, they of the house
of Israel say, The vision that he sees is for many day to come, and he
prophesies of times that are far off.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Therefore tell them, Thus says the Lord
Yahweh: None of my words shall be deferred any more, but the word which
I shall speak shall be performed, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the prophets
of Israel who prophesy, and say to those who prophesy out of their own
heart, Hear the word of Yahweh:

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh, Woe to the
foolish prophets, who follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Israel, your prophets have been like
foxes in the waste places.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> You have not gone up into the gaps,
neither built up the wall for the house of Israel, to stand in the
battle in the day of Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> They have seen falsehood and lying
divination, who say, Yahweh says; but Yahweh has not sent them: and they
have made men to hope that the word would be confirmed.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Haven't you seen a false vision, and
haven't you spoken a lying divination, in that you say, Yahweh says; but
I have not spoken?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Because you have spoken falsehood, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I
am against you, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> My hand shall be against the prophets who
see false visions, and who divine lies: they shall not be in the council
of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house
of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and you
shall know that I am the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Because, even because they have seduced
my people, saying, Peace; and there is no peace; and when one builds up
a wall, behold, they plaster it with whitewash:

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> tell those who plaster it with
whitewash, that it shall fall: there shall be an overflowing shower; and
you, great hailstones, shall fall; and a stormy wind shall tear it.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Behold, when the wall has fallen, shall
it not be said to you, Where is the plaster with which you have
plastered it?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh: I
will even tear it with a stormy wind in my wrath; and there shall be an
overflowing shower in my anger, and great hailstones in wrath to consume
it.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> So will I break down the wall that you
have plastered with whitewash, and bring it down to the ground, so that
its foundation shall be uncovered; and it shall fall, and you shall be
consumed in its midst: and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Thus will I accomplish my wrath on the
wall, and on those who have plastered it with whitewash; and I will tell
you, The wall is no more, neither those who plastered it;

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> \[to wit\], the prophets of Israel who
prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and who see visions of peace for her, and
there is no peace, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> You, son of man, set your face against
the daughters of your people, who prophesy out of their own heart; and
prophesy against them,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Woe
to the women who sew pillows on all elbows, and make kerchiefs for the
head of \[persons of\] every stature to hunt souls! Will you hunt the
souls of my people, and save souls alive for yourselves?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> You have profaned me among my people
for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to kill the souls who
should not die, and to save the souls alive who should not live, by your
lying to my people who listen to lies.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I am against your pillows, with which you there hunt the souls
to make \[them\] fly, and I will tear them from your arms; and I will
let the souls go, even the souls whom you hunt to make \[them\] fly.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and
deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your
hand to be hunted; and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Because with lies you have grieved the
heart of the righteous, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, and
be saved alive:

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Therefore you shall no more see false
visions, nor practice divination. I will deliver my people out of your
hand; and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then came certain of the elders of Israel
to me, and sat before me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Son of man, these men have taken their
idols into their heart, and put the stumbling block of their iniquity
before their face: should I be inquired of at all by them?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Therefore speak to them, and tell them,
Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Every man of the house of Israel who takes
his idols into his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity
before his face, and comes to the prophet; I Yahweh will answer him
therein according to the multitude of his idols;

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> that I may take the house of Israel in
their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their
idols.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Therefore tell the house of Israel, Thus
says the Lord Yahweh: Return, and turn yourselves from your idols; and
turn away your faces from all your abominations.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For everyone of the house of Israel, or
of the strangers who live in Israel, who separates himself from me, and
takes his idols into his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his
iniquity before his face, and comes to the prophet to inquire for
himself of me; I Yahweh will answer him by myself:

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and I will set my face against that man,
and will make him an astonishment, for a sign and a proverb, and I will
cut him off from the midst of my people; and you shall know that I am
Yahweh.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> If the prophet is deceived and speak a
word, I, Yahweh, have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my
hand on him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> They shall bear their iniquity: the
iniquity of the prophet shall be even as the iniquity of him who seeks
\[to him\];

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> that the house of Israel may go no more
astray from me, neither defile themselves any more with all their
transgressions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God,
says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Son of man, when a land sins against me
by committing a trespass, and I stretch out my hand on it, and break the
staff of its bread, and send famine on it, and cut off from it man and
animal;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> though these three men, Noah, Daniel,
and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If I cause evil animals to pass through
the land, and they ravage it, and it be made desolate, so that no man
may pass through because of the animals;

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> though these three men were in it, as I
live, says the Lord Yahweh, they should deliver neither sons nor
daughters; they only should be delivered, but the land should be
desolate.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Or if I bring a sword on that land, and
say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut off from it man and
animal;

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> though these three men were in it, as I
live, says the Lord Yahweh, they should deliver neither sons nor
daughters, but they only should be delivered themselves.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Or if I send a pestilence into that
land, and pour out my wrath on it in blood, to cut off from it man and
animal;

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in
it, as I live, says the Lord Yahweh, they should deliver neither son nor
daughter; they should but deliver their own souls by their
righteousness.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: How much
more when I send my four severe judgments on Jerusalem, the sword, and
the famine, and the evil animals, and the pestilence, to cut off from it
man and animal!

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Yet, behold, therein shall be left a
remnant that shall be carried forth, both sons and daughters: behold,
they shall come forth to you, and you shall see their way and their
doings; and you shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have
brought on Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought on it.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> They shall comfort you, when you see
their way and their doings; and you shall know that I have not done
without cause all that I have done in it, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Son of man, what is the vine tree more
than any tree, the vine-branch which is among the trees of the forest?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Shall wood be taken of it to make any
work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Behold, it is cast into the fire for
fuel; the fire has devoured both its ends, and its midst is burned: is
it profitable for any work?

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Behold, when it was whole, it was meet
for no work: how much less, when the fire has devoured it, and it is
burned, shall it yet be meet for any work!

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh: As
the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the
fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> I will set my face against them; they
shall go forth from the fire, but the fire shall devour them; and you
shall know that I am Yahweh, when I set my face against them.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> I will make the land desolate, because
they have committed a trespass, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Again the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh to
Jerusalem: Your birth and your birth is of the land of the Canaanite;
the Amorite was your father, and your mother was a Hittite.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> As for your birth, in the day you were
born your navel was not cut, neither were you washed in water to cleanse
you; you weren't salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> No eye pitied you, to do any of these
things to you, to have compassion on you; but you were cast out in the
open field, for that your person was abhorred, in the day that you were
born.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> When I passed by you, and saw you
wallowing in your blood, I said to you, \[Though you are\] in your
blood, live; yes, I said to you, \[Though you are\] in your blood, live.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> I caused you to multiply as that which
grows in the field, and you increased and grew great, and you attained
to excellent ornament; your breasts were fashioned, and your hair was
grown; yet you were naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Now when I passed by you, and looked at
you, behold, your time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over
you, and covered your nakedness: yes, I swore to you, and entered into a
covenant with you, says the Lord Yahweh, and you became mine.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Then washed I you with water; yes, I
thoroughly washed away your blood from you, and I anointed you with oil.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> I clothed you also with embroidered
work, and shod you with sealskin, and I dressed you about with fine
linen, and covered you with silk.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> I decked you with ornaments, and I put
bracelets on your hands, and a chain on your neck.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I put a ring on your nose, and earrings
in your ears, and a beautiful crown on your head.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Thus you were decked with gold and
silver; and your clothing was of fine linen, and silk, and embroidered
work; you ate fine flour, and honey, and oil; and you were exceeding
beautiful, and you prospered to royal estate.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Your renown went forth among the
nations for your beauty; for it was perfect, through my majesty which I
had put on you, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> But you trusted in your beauty, and
played the prostitute because of your renown, and poured out your
prostitution on everyone who passed by; his it was.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> You took of your garments, and made for
yourselves high places decked with various colors, and played the
prostitute on them: \[the like things\] shall not come, neither shall it
be \[so\].

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> You also took your beautiful jewels of
my gold and of my silver, which I had given you, and made for yourself
images of men, and played the prostitute with them;

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> and you took your embroidered garments,
and covered them, and did set my oil and my incense before them.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> My bread also which I gave you, fine
flour, and oil, and honey, with which I fed you, you even set it before
them for a pleasant aroma; and \[thus\] it was, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Moreover you have taken your sons and
your daughters, whom you have borne to me, and you have sacrificed these
to them to be devoured. Was your prostitution a small matter,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> that you have slain my children, and
delivered them up, in causing them to pass through \[the fire\] to them?

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> In all your abominations and your
prostitution you have not remembered the days of your youth, when you
were naked and bare, and were wallowing in your blood.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> It has happened after all your
wickedness, (woe, woe to you! says the Lord Yahweh),

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> that you have built for yourselves a
vaulted place, and have made yourselves a lofty place in every street.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> You have built your lofty place at the
head of every way, and have made your beauty an abomination, and have
opened your feet to everyone who passed by, and multiplied your
prostitution.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> You have also committed sexual
immorality with the Egyptians, your neighbors, great of flesh; and have
multiplied your prostitution, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> See therefore, I have stretched out my
hand over you, and have diminished your ordinary \[food\], and delivered
you to the will of those who hate you, the daughters of the Philistines,
who are ashamed of your lewd way.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> You have played the prostitute also
with the Assyrians, because you were insatiable; yes, you have played
the prostitute with them, and yet you weren't satisfied.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> You have moreover multiplied your
prostitution to the land of merchants, to Chaldea; and yet you weren't
satisfied with this.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> How weak is your heart, says the Lord
Yahweh, since you do all these things, the work of an impudent
prostitute;

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> in that you build your vaulted place at
the head of every way, and make your lofty place in every street, and
have not been as a prostitute, in that you scorn pay.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> A wife who commits adultery! who takes
strangers instead of her husband!

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> They give gifts to all prostitutes; but
you give your gifts to all your lovers, and bribe them, that they may
come to you on every side for your prostitution.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> You are different from \[other\] women
in your prostitution, in that no one follows you to play the prostitute;
and whereas you give hire, and no hire is given to you, therefore you
are different.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> Therefore, prostitute, hear the word of
Yahweh:

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh, Because your
filthiness was poured out, and your nakedness uncovered through your
prostitution with your lovers; and because of all the idols of your
abominations, and for the blood of your children, that you gave to them;

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> therefore see, I will gather all your
lovers, with whom you have taken pleasure, and all those who you have
loved, with all those who you have hated; I will even gather them
against you on every side, and will uncover your nakedness to them, that
they may see all your nakedness.

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> I will judge you, as women who break
wedlock and shed blood are judged; and I will bring on you the blood of
wrath and jealousy.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> I will also give you into their hand,
and they shall throw down your vaulted place, and break down your lofty
places; and they shall strip you of your clothes, and take your
beautiful jewels; and they shall leave you naked and bare.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> They shall also bring up a company
against you, and they shall stone you with stones, and thrust you
through with their swords.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> They shall burn your houses with fire,
and execute judgments on you in the sight of many women; and I will
cause you to cease from playing the prostitute, and you shall also give
no hire any more.

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> So will I cause my wrath toward you to
rest, and my jealousy shall depart from you, and I will be quiet, and
will be no more angry.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> Because you have not remembered the
days of your youth, but have raged against me in all these things;
therefore, behold, I also will bring your way on your head, says the
Lord Yahweh: and you shall not commit this lewdness with all your
abominations.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> Behold, everyone who uses proverbs
shall use \[this\] proverb against you, saying, As is the mother, so is
her daughter.

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> You are the daughter of your mother,
who loathes her husband and her children; and you are the sister of your
sisters, who loathed their husbands and their children: your mother was
a Hittite, and your father an Amorite.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> Your elder sister is Samaria, who
dwells at your left hand, she and her daughters; and your younger
sister, who dwells at your right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> Yet have you not walked in their ways,
nor done after their abominations; but, as \[if that were\] a very
little \[thing\], you were more corrupt than they in all your ways.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> As I live, says the Lord Yahweh, Sodom
your sister has not done, she nor her daughters, as you have done, you
and your daughters.

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Behold, this was the iniquity of your
sister Sodom: pride, fullness of bread, and prosperous ease was in her
and in her daughters; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor
and needy.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> They were haughty, and committed
abomination before me: therefore I took them away as I saw \[good\].

<span id="an_16:51">16:51</span> Neither has Samaria committed half of
your sins; but you have multiplied your abominations more than they, and
have justified your sisters by all your abominations which you have
done.

<span id="an_16:52">16:52</span> You also, bear you your own shame, in
that you have given judgment for your sisters; through your sins that
you have committed more abominable than they, they are more righteous
that you: yes, be also confounded, and bear your shame, in that you have
justified your sisters.

<span id="an_16:53">16:53</span> I will turn again their captivity, the
captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and
her daughters, and the captivity of your captives in the midst of them;

<span id="an_16:54">16:54</span> that you may bear your own shame, and
may be ashamed because of all that you have done, in that you are a
comfort to them.

<span id="an_16:55">16:55</span> Your sisters, Sodom and her daughters,
shall return to their former estate; and Samaria and her daughters shall
return to their former estate; and you and your daughters shall return
to your former estate.

<span id="an_16:56">16:56</span> For your sister Sodom was not mentioned
by your mouth in the day of your pride,

<span id="an_16:57">16:57</span> before your wickedness was uncovered,
as at the time of the reproach of the daughters of Syria, and of all who
are around her, the daughters of the Philistines, who do despite to you
all around.

<span id="an_16:58">16:58</span> You have borne your lewdness and your
abominations, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_16:59">16:59</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: I will
also deal with you as you have done, who have despised the oath in
breaking the covenant.

<span id="an_16:60">16:60</span> Nevertheless I will remember my
covenant with you in the days of your youth, and I will establish to you
an everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_16:61">16:61</span> Then you shall remember your ways, and
be ashamed, when you shall receive your sisters, your elder \[sisters\]
and your younger; and I will give them to you for daughters, but not by
your covenant.

<span id="an_16:62">16:62</span> I will establish my covenant with you;
and you shall know that I am Yahweh;

<span id="an_16:63">16:63</span> that you may remember, and be
confounded, and never open your mouth any more, because of your shame,
when I have forgiven you all that you have done, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak
a parable to the house of Israel;

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: A
great eagle with great wings and long feathers, full of feathers, which
had various colors, came to Lebanon, and took the top of the cedar:

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> he cropped off the topmost of the young
twigs of it, and carried it to a land of traffic; he set it in a city of
merchants.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He took also of the seed of the land, and
planted it in a fruitful soil; he placed it beside many waters; he set
it as a willow tree.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> It grew, and became a spreading vine of
low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and its roots were under
him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth
sprigs.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> There was also another great eagle with
great wings and many feathers: and behold, this vine did bend its roots
toward him, and shot forth its branches toward him, from the beds of its
plantation, that he might water it.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> It was planted in a good soil by many
waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear
fruit, that it might be a goodly vine.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Shall it
prosper? shall he not pull up its roots, and cut off its fruit, that it
may wither; that all its fresh springing leaves may wither? and not by a
strong arm or many people can it be raised from its roots.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Yes, behold, being planted, shall it
prosper? shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind touches it? it
shall wither in the beds where it grew.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Say now to the rebellious house, Don't
you know what these things mean? tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon
came to Jerusalem, and took its king, and its princes, and brought them
to him to Babylon:

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> and he took of the seed royal, and made
a covenant with him; he also brought him under an oath, and took away
the mighty of the land;

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> that the kingdom might be base, that it
might not lift itself up, but that by keeping his covenant it might
stand.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> But he rebelled against him in sending
his ambassadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and many
people. Shall he prosper? shall he escape who does such things? shall he
break the covenant, and yet escape?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> As I live, says the Lord Yahweh, surely
in the place where the king dwells who made him king, whose oath he
despised, and whose covenant he broke, even with him in the midst of
Babylon he shall die.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty
army and great company help him in the war, when they cast up mounds and
build forts, to cut off many persons.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> For he has despised the oath by
breaking the covenant; and behold, he had given his hand, and yet has
done all these things; he shall not escape.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh: As
I live, surely my oath that he has despised, and my covenant that he has
broken, I will even bring it on his own head.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> I will spread my net on him, and he
shall be taken in my snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will
enter into judgment with him there for his trespass that he has
trespassed against me.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> All his fugitives in all his bands
shall fall by the sword, and those who remain shall be scattered toward
every wind: and you shall know that I, Yahweh, have spoken it.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: I will also
take of the lofty top of the cedar, and will set it; I will crop off
from the topmost of its young twigs a tender one, and I will plant it on
a high and lofty mountain:

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> in the mountain of the height of Israel
will I plant it; and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be
a goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all birds of every wing; in the
shade of its branches shall they dwell.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> All the trees of the field shall know
that I, Yahweh, have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low
tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to
flourish; I, Yahweh, have spoken and have done it.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> What do you mean, that you use this
proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten
sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge?

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> As I live, says the Lord Yahweh, you
shall not have \[occasion\] any more to use this proverb in Israel.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul
of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul who sins,
he shall die.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> But if a man is just, and does that which
is lawful and right,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> and has not eaten on the mountains,
neither has lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel,
neither has defiled his neighbor's wife, neither has come near to a
woman in her impurity,

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> and has not wronged any, but has restored
to the debtor his pledge, has taken nothing by robbery, has given his
bread to the hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> he who has not given forth on interest,
neither has taken any increase, who has withdrawn his hand from
iniquity, has executed true justice between man and man,

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> has walked in my statutes, and has kept
my ordinances, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, says the
Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> If he fathers a son who is a robber, a
shedder of blood, and who does any one of these things,

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> and who does not any of those
\[duties\], but even has eaten on the mountains, and defiled his
neighbor's wife,

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> has wronged the poor and needy, has
taken by robbery, has not restored the pledge, and has lifted up his
eyes to the idols, has committed abomination,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> has given forth on interest, and has
taken increase; shall he then live? he shall not live: he has done all
these abominations; he shall surely die; his blood shall be on him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Now, behold, if he fathers a son, who
sees all his father's sins, which he has done, and fears, and does not
such like;

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> who has not eaten on the mountains,
neither has lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, has
not defiled his neighbor's wife,

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> neither has wronged any, has not taken
anything to pledge, neither has taken by robbery, but has given his
bread to the hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment;

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> who has withdrawn his hand from the
poor, who has not received interest nor increase, has executed my
ordinances, has walked in my statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity
of his father, he shall surely live.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> As for his father, because he cruelly
oppressed, robbed his brother, and did that which is not good among his
people, behold, he shall die in his iniquity.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Yet you say, Why doesn't the son bear
the iniquity of the father? When the son has done that which is lawful
and right, and has kept all my statutes, and has done them, he shall
surely live.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> The soul who sins, he shall die: the
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father
bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous shall
be on him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be on him.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> But if the wicked turn from all his
sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which
is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> None of his transgressions that he has
committed shall be remembered against him: in his righteousness that he
has done he shall live.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Have I any pleasure in the death of the
wicked? says the Lord Yahweh; and not rather that he should return from
his way, and live?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> But when the righteous turns away from
his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? None of his
righteous deeds that he has done shall be remembered: in his trespass
that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall
he die.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Yet you say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. Hear now, house of Israel: Is my way not equal? Aren't your ways
unequal?

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> When the righteous man turns away from
his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and dies therein; in his
iniquity that he has done shall he die.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Again, when the wicked man turns away
from his wickedness that he has committed, and does that which is lawful
and right, he shall save his soul alive.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Because he considers, and turns away
from all his transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live,
he shall not die.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Yet says the house of Israel, The way
of the Lord is not equal. house of Israel, are not my ways equal? Aren't
your ways unequal?

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Therefore I will judge you, house of
Israel, everyone according to his ways, says the Lord Yahweh. Return,
and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not
be your ruin.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Cast away from you all your
transgressions, in which you have transgressed; and make yourself a new
heart and a new spirit: for why will you die, house of Israel?

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> For I have no pleasure in the death of
him who dies, says the Lord Yahweh: therefore turn yourselves, and live.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Moreover, take up a lamentation for the
princes of Israel,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and say, What was your mother? A lioness:
she couched among lions, in the midst of the young lions she nourished
her cubs.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> She brought up one of her cubs: he became
a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey; he devoured men.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> The nations also heard of him; he was
taken in their pit; and they brought him with hooks to the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Now when she saw that she had waited, and
her hope was lost, then she took another of her cubs, and made him a
young lion.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> He went up and down among the lions; he
became a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey; he devoured men.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> He knew their palaces, and laid waste
their cities; and the land was desolate, and its fullness, because of
the noise of his roaring.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then the nations set against him on every
side from the provinces; and they spread their net over him; he was
taken in their pit.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> They put him in a cage with hooks, and
brought him to the king of Babylon; they brought him into strongholds,
that his voice should no more be heard on the mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Your mother was like a vine, in your
blood, planted by the waters: it was fruitful and full of branches by
reason of many waters.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> It had strong rods for the scepters of
those who bore rule, and their stature was exalted among the thick
boughs, and they were seen in their height with the multitude of their
branches.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> But it was plucked up in fury, it was
cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up its fruit: its
strong rods were broken off and withered; the fire consumed them.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Now it is planted in the wilderness, in
a dry and thirsty land.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Fire is gone out of the rods of its
branches, it has devoured its fruit, so that there is in it no strong
rod to be a scepter to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a
lamentation.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> It happened in the seventh year, in the
fifth \[month\], the tenth \[day\] of the month, that certain of the
elders of Israel came to inquire of Yahweh, and sat before me.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Son of man, speak to the elders of
Israel, and tell them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Is it to inquire of me
that you have come? As I live, says the Lord Yahweh, I will not be
inquired of by you.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Will you judge them, son of man, will you
judge them? Cause them to know the abominations of their fathers;

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> and tell them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
In the day when I chose Israel, and swore to the seed of the house of
Jacob, and made myself known to them in the land of Egypt, when I swore
to them, saying, I am Yahweh your God;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> in that day I swore to them, to bring
them forth out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had searched out
for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> I said to them, Cast away every man the
abominations of his eyes, and don't defile yourselves with the idols of
Egypt; I am Yahweh your God.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> But they rebelled against me, and would
not listen to me; they did not every man cast away the abominations of
their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Then I said I
would pour out my wrath on them, to accomplish my anger against them in
the midst of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> But I worked for my name's sake, that it
should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, among which they
were, in whose sight I made myself known to them, in bringing them forth
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> So I caused them to go forth out of the
land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> I gave them my statutes, and showed
them my ordinances, which if a man does, he shall live in them.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths,
to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am Yahweh
who sanctifies them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But the house of Israel rebelled
against me in the wilderness: they didn't walk in my statutes, and they
rejected my ordinances, which if a man keep, he shall live in them; and
my Sabbaths they greatly profaned. Then I said I would pour out my wrath
on them in the wilderness, to consume them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But I worked for my name's sake, that
it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I
brought them out.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Moreover also I swore to them in the
wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given
them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands;

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> because they rejected my ordinances,
and didn't walk in my statutes, and profaned my Sabbaths: for their
heart went after their idols.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Nevertheless my eye spared them, and I
didn't destroy them, neither did I make a full end of them in the
wilderness.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> I said to their children in the
wilderness, Don't walk in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe
their ordinances, nor defile yourselves with their idols.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> I am Yahweh your God: walk in my
statutes, and keep my ordinances, and do them;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> and make my Sabbaths holy; and they
shall be a sign between me and you, that you may know that I am Yahweh
your God.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> But the children rebelled against me;
they didn't walk in my statutes, neither kept my ordinances to do them,
which if a man do, he shall live in them; they profaned my Sabbaths.
Then I said I would pour out my wrath on them, to accomplish my anger
against them in the wilderness.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Nevertheless I withdrew my hand, and
worked for my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight
of the nations, in whose sight I brought them forth.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Moreover I swore to them in the
wilderness, that I would scatter them among the nations, and disperse
them through the countries;

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> because they had not executed my
ordinances, but had rejected my statutes, and had profaned my Sabbaths,
and their eyes were after their fathers' idols.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> Moreover also I gave them statutes that
were not good, and ordinances in which they should not live;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> and I polluted them in their own gifts,
in that they caused to pass through \[the fire\] all that opens the
womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know
that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Therefore, son of man, speak to the
house of Israel, and tell them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: In this
moreover have your fathers blasphemed me, in that they have committed a
trespass against me.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> For when I had brought them into the
land, which I swore to give to them, then they saw every high hill, and
every thick tree, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there
they presented the provocation of their offering; there also they made
their pleasant aroma, and they poured out there their drink offerings.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Then I said to them, What does the high
place where you go mean? So its name is called Bamah to this day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Therefore tell the house of Israel,
Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Do you pollute yourselves in the way of your
fathers? and do you play the prostitute after their abominations?

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> and when you offer your gifts, when you
make your sons to pass through the fire, do you pollute yourselves with
all your idols to this day? and shall I be inquired of by you, house of
Israel? As I live, says the Lord Yahweh, I will not be inquired of by
you;

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> and that which comes into your mind
shall not be at all, in that you say, We will be as the nations, as the
families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> As I live, says the Lord Yahweh, surely
with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with wrath poured
out, will I be king over you:

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> and I will bring you out from the
peoples, and will gather you out of the countries in which you are
scattered, with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with
wrath poured out;

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> and I will bring you into the
wilderness of the peoples, and there will I enter into judgment with you
face to face.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> Like as I entered into judgment with
your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I enter
into judgment with you, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> I will cause you to pass under the rod,
and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant;

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> and I will purge out from among you the
rebels, and those who disobey against me; I will bring them forth out of
the land where they live, but they shall not enter into the land of
Israel: and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> As for you, house of Israel, thus says
the Lord Yahweh: Go, serve everyone his idols, and hereafter also, if
you will not listen to me; but my holy name you shall no more profane
with your gifts, and with your idols.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> For in my holy mountain, in the
mountain of the height of Israel, says the Lord Yahweh, there shall all
the house of Israel, all of them, serve me in the land: there will I
accept them, and there will I require your offerings, and the first
fruits of your offerings, with all your holy things.

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> As a pleasant aroma will I accept you,
when I bring you out from the peoples, and gather you out of the
countries in which you have been scattered; and I will be sanctified in
you in the sight of the nations.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> You shall know that I am Yahweh, when I
shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country which I swore
to give to your fathers.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> There you shall remember your ways, and
all your doings, in which you have polluted yourselves; and you shall
loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that you have
committed.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> You shall know that I am Yahweh, when I
have dealt with you for my name's sake, not according to your evil ways,
nor according to your corrupt doings, you house of Israel, says the Lord
Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> Son of man, set your face toward the
south, and drop \[your word\] toward the south, and prophesy against the
forest of the field in the South;

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> and tell the forest of the South, Hear
the word of Yahweh: Thus says the Lord Yahweh, Behold, I will kindle a
fire in you, and it shall devour every green tree in you, and every dry
tree: the flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from the
south to the north shall be burnt thereby.

<span id="an_20:48">20:48</span> All flesh shall see that I, Yahweh,
have kindled it; it shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_20:49">20:49</span> Then I said, Ah Lord Yahweh! they say
of me, Isn't he a speaker of parables?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Son of man, set your face toward
Jerusalem, and drop \[your word\] toward the sanctuaries, and prophesy
against the land of Israel;

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and tell the land of Israel, Thus says
Yahweh: Behold, I am against you, and will draw forth my sword out of
its sheath, and will cut off from you the righteous and the wicked.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Seeing then that I will cut off from you
the righteous and the wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of
its sheath against all flesh from the south to the north:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> and all flesh shall know that I, Yahweh,
have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath; it shall not return any
more.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Sigh therefore, you son of man; with the
breaking of your thighs and with bitterness you will sigh before their
eyes.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> It shall be, when they tell you, Why do
you sigh? that you shall say, Because of the news, for it comes; and
every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit
shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it comes, and
it shall be done, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus says
Yahweh: Say, A sword, a sword, it is sharpened, and also furbished;

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> it is sharpened that it may make a
slaughter; it is furbished that it may be as lightning: shall we then
make mirth? the rod of my son, it condemns every tree.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> It is given to be furbished, that it
may be handled: the sword, it is sharpened, yes, it is furbished, to
give it into the hand of the killer.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Cry and wail, son of man; for it is on
my people, it is on all the princes of Israel: they are delivered over
to the sword with my people; strike therefore on your thigh.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> For there is a trial; and what if even
the rod that condemns shall be no more? says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> You therefore, son of man, prophesy,
and strike your hands together; and let the sword be doubled the third
time, the sword of the deadly wounded: it is the sword of the great one
who is deadly wounded, which enters into their rooms.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> I have set the threatening sword
against all their gates, that their heart may melt, and their stumblings
be multiplied: ah! it is made as lightning, it is pointed for slaughter.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Gather yourselves together, go to the
right, set yourselves in array, go to the left, wherever your face is
set.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> I will also strike my hands together,
and I will cause my wrath to rest: I, Yahweh, have spoken it.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The word of Yahweh came to me again,
saying,

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Also, you son of man, appoint two ways,
that the sword of the king of Babylon may come; they both shall come
forth out of one land: and mark out a place, mark it out at the head of
the way to the city.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> You shall appoint a way for the sword
to come to Rabbah of the children of Ammon, and to Judah in Jerusalem
the fortified.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For the king of Babylon stood at the
parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he
shook the arrows back and forth, he consulted the teraphim, he looked in
the liver.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> In his right hand was the divination
\[for\] Jerusalem, to set battering rams, to open the mouth in the
slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to set battering rams
against the gates, to cast up mounds, to build forts.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> It shall be to them as a false
divination in their sight, who have sworn oaths to them; but he brings
iniquity to memory, that they may be taken.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Because you have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your
transgressions are uncovered, so that in all your doings your sins
appear; because you have come to memory, you shall be taken with the
hand.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> You, deadly wounded wicked one, the
prince of Israel, whose day is come, in the time of the iniquity of the
end,

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> thus says the Lord Yahweh: Remove the
turban, and take off the crown; this \[shall be\] no more the same;
exalt that which is low, and abase that which is high.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> I will overturn, overturn, overturn it:
this also shall be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I will
give it \[him\].

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> You, son of man, prophesy, and say,
Thus says the Lord Yahweh concerning the children of Ammon, and
concerning their reproach; and say, A sword, a sword is drawn, for the
slaughter it is furbished, to cause it to devour, that it may be as
lightning;

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> while they see for you false visions,
while they divine lies to you, to lay you on the necks of the wicked who
are deadly wounded, whose day is come in the time of the iniquity of the
end.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> Cause it to return into its sheath. In
the place where you were created, in the land of your birth, will I
judge you.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> I will pour out my indignation on you;
I will blow on you with the fire of my wrath; and I will deliver you
into the hand of brutish men, skillful to destroy.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> You shall be for fuel to the fire; your
blood shall be in the midst of the land; you shall be remembered no
more: for I, Yahweh, have spoken it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> You, son of man, will you judge, will you
judge the bloody city? then cause her to know all her abominations.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> You shall say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
A city that sheds blood in the midst of her, that her time may come, and
that makes idols against herself to defile her!

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> You have become guilty in your blood that
you have shed, and are defiled in your idols which you have made; and
you have caused your days to draw near, and are come even to your years:
therefore have I made you a reproach to the nations, and a mocking to
all the countries.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Those who are near, and those who are far
from you, shall mock you, you infamous one \[and\] full of tumult.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Behold, the princes of Israel, everyone
according to his power, have been in you to shed blood.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> In you have they set light by father and
mother; in the midst of you have they dealt by oppression with the
foreigner; in you have they wronged the fatherless and the widow.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> You have despised my holy things, and
have profaned my Sabbaths.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Slanderous men have been in you to shed
blood; and in you they have eaten on the mountains: in the midst of you
they have committed lewdness.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> In you have they uncovered their
fathers' nakedness; in you have they humbled her who was unclean in her
impurity.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> One has committed abomination with his
neighbor's wife; and another has lewdly defiled his daughter-in-law; and
another in you has humbled his sister, his father's daughter.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> In you have they taken bribes to shed
blood; you have taken interest and increase, and you have greedily
gained of your neighbors by oppression, and have forgotten me, says the
Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Behold, therefore, I have struck my
hand at your dishonest gain which you have made, and at your blood which
has been in the midst of you.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Can your heart endure, or can your
hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with you? I, Yahweh, have
spoken it, and will do it.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> I will scatter you among the nations,
and disperse you through the countries; and I will consume your
filthiness out of you.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> You shall be profaned in yourself, in
the sight of the nations; and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Son of man, the house of Israel is
become dross to me: all of them are brass and tin and iron and lead, in
the midst of the furnace; they are the dross of silver.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Because you have all become dross, therefore, behold, I will gather you
into the midst of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> As they gather silver and brass and
iron and lead and tin into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire on
it, to melt it; so will I gather you in my anger and in my wrath, and I
will lay you there, and melt you.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Yes, I will gather you, and blow on you
with the fire of my wrath, and you shall be melted in its midst.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> As silver is melted in the midst of the
furnace, so you will be melted in its midst; and you will know that I,
Yahweh, have poured out my wrath on you.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Son of man, tell her, You are a land
that is not cleansed, nor rained on in the day of indignation.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> There is a conspiracy of her prophets
in its midst, like a roaring lion ravening the prey: they have devoured
souls; they take treasure and precious things; they have made her widows
many in its midst.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Her priests have done violence to my
law, and have profaned my holy things: they have made no distinction
between the holy and the common, neither have they caused men to discern
between the unclean and the clean, and have hidden their eyes from my
Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Her princes in its midst are like
wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, \[and\] to destroy souls, that
they may get dishonest gain.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Her prophets have plastered for them
with whitewash, seeing false visions, and divining lies to them, saying,
Thus says the Lord Yahweh, when Yahweh has not spoken.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> The people of the land have used
oppression, and exercised robbery; yes, they have troubled the poor and
needy, and have oppressed the foreigner wrongfully.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> I sought for a man among them, who
should build up the wall, and stand in the gap before me for the land,
that I should not destroy it; but I found none.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Therefore have I poured out my
indignation on them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath:
their own way have I brought on their heads, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> The word of Yahweh came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Son of man, there were two women, the
daughters of one mother:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> and they played the prostitute in Egypt;
they played the prostitute in their youth; there were their breasts
pressed, and there was handled the bosom of their virginity.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> The names of them were Oholah the elder,
and Oholibah her sister: and they became mine, and they bore sons and
daughters. As for their names, Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem
Oholibah.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Oholah played the prostitute when she was
mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians \[her\] neighbors,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> who were clothed with blue, governors and
rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding on horses.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> She bestowed her prostitution on them,
the choicest men of Assyria all of them; and on whoever she doted, with
all their idols she defiled herself.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Neither has she left her prostitution
since \[the days of\] Egypt; for in her youth they lay with her, and
they handled the bosom of her virginity; and they poured out their
prostitution on her.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Therefore I delivered her into the hand
of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, on whom she doted.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> These uncovered her nakedness; they
took her sons and her daughters; and her they killed with the sword: and
she became a byword among women; for they executed judgments on her.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Her sister Oholibah saw this, yet was
she more corrupt in her doting than she, and in her prostitution which
were more than the prostitution of her sister.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> She doted on the Assyrians, governors
and rulers, \[her\] neighbors, clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding
on horses, all of them desirable young men.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> I saw that she was defiled; they both
took one way.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> She increased her prostitution; for she
saw men portrayed on the wall, the images of the Chaldeans portrayed
with vermilion,

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> dressed with girdles on their waists,
with flowing turbans on their heads, all of them princes to look on,
after the likeness of the Babylonians in Chaldea, the land of their
birth.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> As soon as she saw them she doted on
them, and sent messengers to them into Chaldea.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> The Babylonians came to her into the
bed of love, and they defiled her with their prostitution, and she was
polluted with them, and her soul was alienated from them.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> So she uncovered her prostitution, and
uncovered her nakedness: then my soul was alienated from her, like as my
soul was alienated from her sister.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Yet she multiplied her prostitution,
remembering the days of her youth, in which she had played the
prostitute in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> She doted on their paramours, whose
flesh is as the flesh of donkeys, and whose issue is like the issue of
horses.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Thus you called to memory the lewdness
of your youth, in the handling of your bosom by the Egyptians for the
breasts of your youth.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Therefore, Oholibah, thus says the Lord
Yahweh: Behold, I will raise up your lovers against you, from whom your
soul is alienated, and I will bring them against you on every side:

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans,
Pekod and Shoa and Koa, \[and\] all the Assyrians with them; desirable
young men, governors and rulers all of them, princes and men of renown,
all of them riding on horses.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> They shall come against you with
weapons, chariots, and wagons, and with a company of peoples; they shall
set themselves against you with buckler and shield and helmet all
around; and I will commit the judgment to them, and they shall judge you
according to their judgments.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> I will set my jealousy against you, and
they shall deal with you in fury; they shall take away your nose and
your ears; and your residue shall fall by the sword: they shall take
your sons and your daughters; and your residue shall be devoured by the
fire.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> They shall also strip you of your
clothes, and take away your beautiful jewels.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Thus will I make your lewdness to cease
from you, and your prostitution \[brought\] from the land of Egypt; so
that you shall not lift up your eyes to them, nor remember Egypt any
more.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: Behold,
I will deliver you into the hand of them whom you hate, into the hand of
them from whom your soul is alienated;

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> and they shall deal with you in hatred,
and shall take away all your labor, and shall leave you naked and bare;
and the nakedness of your prostitution shall be uncovered, both your
lewdness and your prostitution.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> These things shall be done to you,
because you have played the prostitute after the nations, and because
you are polluted with their idols.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> You have walked in the way of your
sister; therefore will I give her cup into your hand.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: You will
drink of your sister's cup, which is deep and large; you will be
ridiculed and held in derision; it contains much.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> You shall be filled with drunkenness
and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of
your sister Samaria.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> You shall even drink it and drain it
out, and you shall gnaw the broken pieces of it, and shall tear your
breasts; for I have spoken it, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Because you have forgotten me, and cast me behind your back, therefore
you also bear your lewdness and your prostitution.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Yahweh said moreover to me: Son of man,
will you judge Oholah and Oholibah? then declare to them their
abominations.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> For they have committed adultery, and
blood is in their hands; and with their idols have they committed
adultery; and they have also caused their sons, whom they bore to me, to
pass through \[the fire\] to them to be devoured.

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Moreover this they have done to me:
they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my
Sabbaths.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For when they had slain their children
to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane
it; and behold, thus have they done in the midst of my house.

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> Furthermore you have sent for men who
come from far, to whom a messenger was sent, and behold, they came; for
whom you did wash yourself, paint your eyes, and decorate yourself with
ornaments,

<span id="an_23:41">23:41</span> and sit on a stately bed, with a table
prepared before it, whereupon you set my incense and my oil.

<span id="an_23:42">23:42</span> The voice of a multitude being at ease
was with her: and with men of the common sort were brought drunkards
from the wilderness; and they put bracelets on the hands of them
\[twain\], and beautiful crowns on their heads.

<span id="an_23:43">23:43</span> Then I said of her who was old in
adulteries, Now will they play the prostitute with her, and she \[with
them\].

<span id="an_23:44">23:44</span> They went in to her, as they go in to a
prostitute: so went they in to Oholah and to Oholibah, the lewd women.

<span id="an_23:45">23:45</span> Righteous men, they shall judge them
with the judgment of adulteresses, and with the judgment of women who
shed blood; because they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.

<span id="an_23:46">23:46</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: I will
bring up a company against them, and will give them to be tossed back
and forth and robbed.

<span id="an_23:47">23:47</span> The company shall stone them with
stones, and dispatch them with their swords; they shall kill their sons
and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.

<span id="an_23:48">23:48</span> Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out
of the land, that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

<span id="an_23:49">23:49</span> They shall recompense your lewdness on
you, and you shall bear the sins of your idols; and you shall know that
I am the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Again, in the ninth year, in the tenth
month, in the tenth \[day\] of the month, the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Son of man, write the name of the day,
\[even\] of this same day: the king of Babylon drew close to Jerusalem
this same day.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Utter a parable to the rebellious house,
and tell them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh, Set on the caldron, set it on,
and also pour water into it:

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> gather its pieces into it, even every
good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Take the choice of the flock, and also a
pile \[of wood\] for the bones under \[the caldron\]; make it boil well;
yes, let its bones be boiled in its midst.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh: Woe
to the bloody city, to the caldron whose rust is therein, and whose rust
is not gone out of it! take out of it piece after piece; No lot is
fallen on it.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For her blood is in the midst of her; she
set it on the bare rock; she didn't pour it on the ground, to cover it
with dust.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> That it may cause wrath to come up to
take vengeance, I have set her blood on the bare rock, that it should
not be covered.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh: Woe
to the bloody city! I also will make the pile great.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Heap on the wood, make the fire hot,
boil well the flesh, and make thick the broth, and let the bones be
burned.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Then set it empty on its coals, that it
may be hot, and its brass may burn, and that its filthiness may be
molten in it, that its rust may be consumed.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> She has wearied \[herself\] with toil;
yet her great rust doesn't go forth out of her; her rust doesn't \[go
forth\] by fire.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> In your filthiness is lewdness: because
I have cleansed you and you weren't cleansed, you shall not be cleansed
from your filthiness any more, until I have caused my wrath toward you
to rest.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> I, Yahweh, have spoken it: it shall
happen, and I will do it: I will not go back, neither will I spare,
neither will I repent; according to your ways, and according to your
doings, shall they judge you, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Also the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Son of man, behold, I will take away
from you the desire of your eyes with a stroke: yet you shall neither
mourn nor weep, neither shall your tears run down.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Sigh, but not aloud, make no mourning
for the dead; bind your headdress on you, and put your shoes on your
feet, and don't cover your lips, and don't eat men's bread.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> So I spoke to the people in the
morning; and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was
commanded.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> The people said to me, Won't you tell
us what these things are to us, that you do so?

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Then I said to them, The word of Yahweh
came to me, saying,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Speak to the house of Israel, Thus says
the Lord Yahweh: Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the pride of your
power, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pities; and
your sons and your daughters whom you have left behind shall fall by the
sword.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> You shall do as I have done: you shall
not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Your tires shall be on your heads, and
your shoes on your feet: you shall not mourn nor weep; but you shall
pine away in your iniquities, and moan one toward another.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> Thus Ezekiel shall be a sign to you;
according to all that he has done, you will do. When this comes, then
you will know that I am the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> You, son of man, shall it not be in the
day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the
desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their heart, their
sons and their daughters,

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> that in that day he who escapes shall
come to you, to cause you to hear it with your ears?

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> In that day your mouth will be opened
to him who has escaped, and you shall speak, and be no more mute: so you
will be a sign to them; and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Son of man, set your face toward the
children of Ammon, and prophesy against them:

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> and tell the children of Ammon, Hear the
word of the Lord Yahweh: Thus says the Lord Yahweh, Because you said,
Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the land of
Israel, when it was made desolate; and against the house of Judah, when
they went into captivity:

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> therefore, behold, I will deliver you to
the children of the east for a possession, and they shall set their
encampments in you, and make their dwellings in you; they shall eat your
fruit, and they shall drink your milk.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> I will make Rabbah a stable for camels,
and the children of Ammon a resting place for flocks: and you shall know
that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: Because
you have clapped your hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced
with all the despite of your soul against the land of Israel;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> therefore, behold, I have stretched out
my hand on you, and will deliver you for a spoil to the nations; and I
will cut you off from the peoples, and I will cause you to perish out of
the countries: I will destroy you; and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Because Moab
and Seir say, Behold, the house of Judah is like all the nations;

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> therefore, behold, I will open the side
of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the
glory of the country, Beth Jeshimoth, Baal Meon, and Kiriathaim,

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> to the children of the east, \[to go\]
against the children of Ammon; and I will give them for a possession,
that the children of Ammon may not be remembered among the nations.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> and I will execute judgments on Moab;
and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Because Edom
has dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and has
greatly offended, and revenged himself on them;

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh, I
will stretch out my hand on Edom, and will cut off man and animal from
it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; even to Dedan shall they
fall by the sword.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> I will lay my vengeance on Edom by the
hand of my people Israel; and they shall do in Edom according to my
anger and according to my wrath; and they shall know my vengeance, says
the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Because the
Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with despite
of soul to destroy with perpetual enmity;

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh,
Behold, I will stretch out my hand on the Philistines, and I will cut
off the Cherethites, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> I will execute great vengeance on them
with wrathful rebukes; and they shall know that I am Yahweh, when I
shall lay my vengeance on them.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> It happened in the eleventh year, in the
first \[day\] of the month, that the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Son of man, because Tyre has said against
Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken: the gate of the peoples; she is turned to
me; I shall be replenished, now that she is laid waste:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh,
Behold, I am against you, Tyre, and will cause many nations to come up
against you, as the sea causes its waves to come up.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> They shall destroy the walls of Tyre, and
break down her towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make
her a bare rock.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> She shall be a place for the spreading of
nets in the midst of the sea; for I have spoken it, says the Lord
Yahweh; and she shall become a spoil to the nations.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Her daughters who are in the field shall
be slain with the sword: and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: Behold, I
will bring on Tyre Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, from
the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and a
company, and many people.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He shall kill your daughters in the field
with the sword; and he shall make forts against you, and cast up a mound
against you, and raise up the buckler against you.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> He shall set his battering engines
against your walls, and with his axes he shall break down your towers.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> By reason of the abundance of his
horses their dust shall cover you: your walls shall shake at the noise
of the horsemen, and of the wagons, and of the chariots, when he shall
enter into your gates, as men enter into a city in which is made a
breach.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> With the hoofs of his horses shall he
tread down all your streets; he shall kill your people with the sword;
and the pillars of your strength shall go down to the ground.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> They shall make a spoil of your riches,
and make a prey of your merchandise; and they shall break down your
walls, and destroy your pleasant houses; and they shall lay your stones
and your timber and your dust in the midst of the waters.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> I will cause the noise of your songs to
cease; and the sound of your harps shall be no more heard.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> I will make you a bare rock; you shall
be a place for the spreading of nets; you shall be built no more: for I
Yahweh have spoken it, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh to Tyre:
shall not the islands shake at the sound of your fall, when the wounded
groan, when the slaughter is made in the midst of you?

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Then all the princes of the sea shall
come down from their thrones, and lay aside their robes, and strip off
their embroidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with trembling;
they shall sit on the ground, and shall tremble every moment, and be
astonished at you.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> They shall take up a lamentation over
you, and tell you, How you are destroyed, who were inhabited by
seafaring men, the renowned city, who was strong in the sea, she and her
inhabitants, who caused their terror to be on all who lived there!

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Now shall the islands tremble in the
day of your fall; yes, the islands that are in the sea shall be dismayed
at your departure.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: When I
shall make you a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited;
when I shall bring up the deep on you, and the great waters shall cover
you;

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> then will I bring you down with those
who descend into the pit, to the people of old time, and will make you
to dwell in the lower parts of the earth, in the places that are
desolate of old, with those who go down to the pit, that you be not
inhabited; and I will set glory in the land of the living:

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> I will make you a terror, and you shall
no more have any being; though you are sought for, yet you will never be
found again, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> The word of Yahweh came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> You, son of man, take up a lamentation
over Tyre;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and tell Tyre, you who dwell at the entry
of the sea, who are the merchant of the peoples to many islands, thus
says the Lord Yahweh: You, Tyre, have said, I am perfect in beauty.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Your borders are in the heart of the
seas; your builders have perfected your beauty.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> They have made all your planks of fir
trees from Senir; they have taken a cedar from Lebanon to make a mast
for you.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Of the oaks of Bashan have they made your
oars; they have made your benches of ivory inlaid in boxwood, from the
islands of Kittim.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Of fine linen with embroidered work from
Egypt was your sail, that it might be to you for a banner; blue and
purple from the islands of Elishah was your awning.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad were
your rowers: your wise men, Tyre, were in you, they were your pilots.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> The old men of Gebal and the wise men of
it were in you your repairers of ship seams: all the ships of the sea
with their mariners were in you to deal in your merchandise.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Persia and Lud and Put were in your
army, your men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in you; they
set forth your comeliness.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> The men of Arvad with your army were on
your walls all around, and valorous men were in your towers; they hanged
their shields on your walls all around; they have perfected your beauty.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Tarshish was your merchant by reason of
the multitude of all kinds of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead,
they traded for your wares.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were
your traffickers; they traded the persons of men and vessels of brass
for your merchandise.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> They of the house of Togarmah traded
for your wares with horses and war horses and mules.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> The men of Dedan were your traffickers;
many islands were the market of your hand: they brought you in exchange
horns of ivory and ebony.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Syria was your merchant by reason of
the multitude of your handiworks: they traded for your wares with
emeralds, purple, and embroidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and
rubies.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Judah, and the land of Israel, they
were your traffickers: they traded for your merchandise wheat of
Minnith, and confections, and honey, and oil, and balm.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Damascus was your merchant for the
multitude of your handiworks, by reason of the multitude of all kinds of
riches, with the wine of Helbon, and white wool.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> Vedan and Javan traded with yarn for
your wares: bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were among your
merchandise.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Dedan was your trafficker in precious
cloths for riding.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar,
they were the merchants of your hand; in lambs, and rams, and goats, in
these were they your merchants.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> The traffickers of Sheba and Raamah,
they were your traffickers; they traded for your wares with the chief of
all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Haran and Canneh and Eden, the
traffickers of Sheba, Asshur \[and\] Chilmad, were your traffickers.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> These were your traffickers in choice
wares, in wrappings of blue and embroidered work, and in chests of rich
clothing, bound with cords and made of cedar, among your merchandise.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The ships of Tarshish were your
caravans for your merchandise: and you were replenished, and made very
glorious in the heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Your rowers have brought you into great
waters: the east wind has broken you in the heart of the seas.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Your riches, and your wares, your
merchandise, your mariners, and your pilots, your repairers of ship
seams, and the dealers in your merchandise, and all your men of war, who
are in you, with all your company which is in the midst of you, shall
fall into the heart of the seas in the day of your ruin.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> At the sound of the cry of your pilots
the suburbs shall shake.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> All who handled the oar, the mariners,
\[and\] all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships;
they shall stand on the land,

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> and shall cause their voice to be heard
over you, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust on their heads,
they shall wallow themselves in the ashes:

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> and they shall make themselves bald for
you, and clothe them with sackcloth, and they shall weep for you in
bitterness of soul with bitter mourning.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> In their wailing they shall take up a
lamentation for you, and lament over you, \[saying\], Who is there like
Tyre, like her who is brought to silence in the midst of the sea?

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> When your wares went forth out of the
seas, you filled many peoples; you did enrich the kings of the earth
with the multitude of your riches and of your merchandise.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> In the time that you were broken by the
seas in the depths of the waters, your merchandise and all your company
did fall in the midst of you.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> All the inhabitants of the islands are
astonished at you, and their kings are horribly afraid; they are
troubled in their face.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> The merchants among the peoples hiss at
you; you are become a terror, and you shall nevermore have any being.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The word of Yahweh came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Son of man, tell the prince of Tyre, Thus
says the Lord Yahweh: Because your heart is lifted up, and you have
said, I am a god, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas;
yet you are man, and not God, though you did set your heart as the heart
of God--

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> behold, you are wiser than Daniel; there
is no secret that is hidden from you;

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> by your wisdom and by your understanding
you have gotten yourself riches, and have gotten gold and silver into
your treasures;

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> by your great wisdom \[and\] by your
traffic you have increased your riches, and your heart is lifted up
because of your riches--

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Because you have set your heart as the heart of God,

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> therefore, behold, I will bring strangers
on you, the terrible of the nations; and they shall draw their swords
against the beauty of your wisdom, and they shall defile your
brightness.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> They shall bring you down to the pit; and
you shall die the death of those who are slain, in the heart of the
seas.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Will you yet say before him who kills
you, I am God? but you are man, and not God, in the hand of him who
wounds you.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> You shall die the death of the
uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, says the
Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation over
the king of Tyre, and tell him, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: You seal up
the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> You were in Eden, the garden of God;
every precious stone adorned you: ruby, topaz, emerald, chrysolite,
onyx, jasper, sapphire, turquoise, and beryl. Gold work of tambourines
and of pipes was in you. In the day that you were created they were
prepared.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> You were the anointed cherub who
covers: and I set you, \[so that\] you were on the holy mountain of God;
you have walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> You were perfect in your ways from the
day that you were created, until unrighteousness was found in you.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> By the abundance of your traffic they
filled the midst of you with violence, and you have sinned: therefore I
have cast you as profane out of the mountain of God; and I have
destroyed you, covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Your heart was lifted up because of
your beauty; you have corrupted your wisdom by reason of your
brightness: I have cast you to the ground; I have laid you before kings,
that they may see you.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> By the multitude of your iniquities, in
the unrighteousness of your traffic, you have profaned your sanctuaries;
therefore have I brought forth a fire from the midst of you; it has
devoured you, and I have turned you to ashes on the earth in the sight
of all those who see you.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> All those who know you among the
peoples shall be astonished at you: you have become a terror, and you
shall nevermore have any being.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> Son of man, set your face toward Sidon,
and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> and say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I am against you, Sidon; and I will be glorified in the midst of
you; and they shall know that I am Yahweh, when I shall have executed
judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> For I will send pestilence into her,
and blood into her streets; and the wounded shall fall in the midst of
her, with the sword on her on every side; and they shall know that I am
Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> There shall be no more a pricking brier
to the house of Israel, nor a hurting thorn of any that are around them,
that did despite to them; and they shall know that I am the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: When I shall
have gathered the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they are
scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the nations,
then shall they dwell in their own land which I gave to my servant
Jacob.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> They shall dwell securely therein; yes,
they shall build houses, and plant vineyards, and shall dwell securely,
when I have executed judgments on all those who do them despite all
around them; and they shall know that I am Yahweh their God.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on
the twelfth day of the month, the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> "Son of man, set your face against
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him and against all Egypt.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Speak and say, 'Thus says the Lord
Yahweh: "Behold, I am against you, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great
monster that lies in the midst of his rivers, that has said, 'My river
is my own, and I have made it for myself.'

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> I will put hooks in your jaws, and I will
make the fish of your rivers stick to your scales; and I will bring you
up out of the midst of your rivers, with all the fish of your rivers
which stick to your scales.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> I'll cast you forth into the wilderness,
you and all the fish of your rivers. You'll fall on the open field. You
won't be brought together, nor gathered. I have given you for food to
the animals of the earth and to the birds of the sky.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> All the inhabitants of Egypt will know
that I am Yahweh, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of
Israel.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When they took hold of you by your hand,
you broke, and tore all their shoulders; and when they leaned on you,
you broke, and paralyzed all of their thighs."

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
"Behold, I will bring a sword on you, and will cut off man and animal
from you.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> The land of Egypt shall be a desolation
and a waste; and they shall know that I am Yahweh. Because he has said,
'The river is mine, and I have made it;'

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> therefore, behold, I am against you,
and against your rivers, and I will make the land of Egypt an utter
waste and desolation, from the tower of Seveneh even to the border of
Ethiopia.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> No foot of man shall pass through it,
nor foot of animal shall pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited
forty years.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> I will make the land of Egypt a
desolation in the midst of the countries that are desolate; and her
cities among the cities that are laid waste shall be a desolation forty
years; and I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will
disperse them through the countries."

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: "At the
end of forty years will I gather the Egyptians from the peoples where
they were scattered;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and I will bring back the captivity of
Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the
land of their birth; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> It shall be the base of the kingdoms;
neither shall it any more lift itself up above the nations: and I will
diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> It shall be no more the confidence of
the house of Israel, bringing iniquity to memory, when they turn to look
after them: and they shall know that I am the Lord Yahweh."'"

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> It came to pass in the seven and
twentieth year, in the first \[month\], in the first \[day\] of the
month, the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre: every
head was made bald, and every shoulder was worn; yet had he no wages,
nor his army, from Tyre, for the service that he had served against it.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I will give the land of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon;
and he shall carry off her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her
prey; and it shall be the wages for his army.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> I have given him the land of Egypt as
his recompense for which he served, because they worked for me, says the
Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> In that day will I cause a horn to bud
forth to the house of Israel, and I will give you the opening of the
mouth in the midst of them; and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word of Yahweh came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus says
the Lord Yahweh: Wail, Alas for the day!

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For the day is near, even the day of
Yahweh is near; it shall be a day of clouds, a time of the nations.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> A sword shall come on Egypt, and anguish
shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt; and they shall
take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Ethiopia, and Put, and Lud, and all the
mixed people, and Cub, and the children of the land that is allied with
them, shall fall with them by the sword.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Thus says Yahweh: They also who uphold
Egypt shall fall; and the pride of her power shall come down: from the
tower of Seveneh shall they fall in it by the sword, says the Lord
Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> They shall be desolate in the midst of
the countries that are desolate; and her cities shall be in the midst of
the cities that are wasted.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> They shall know that I am Yahweh, when I
have set a fire in Egypt, and all her helpers are destroyed.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> In that day shall messengers go forth
from before me in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid; and
there shall be anguish on them, as in the day of Egypt; for, behold, it
comes.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: I will also
make the multitude of Egypt to cease, by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> He and his people with him, the
terrible of the nations, shall be brought in to destroy the land; and
they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the
slain.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> I will make the rivers dry, and will
sell the land into the hand of evil men; and I will make the land
desolate, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers: I, Yahweh,
have spoken it.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: I will also
destroy the idols, and I will cause the images to cease from Memphis;
and there shall be no more a prince from the land of Egypt: and I will
put a fear in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> I will make Pathros desolate, and will
set a fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments on No.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> I will pour my wrath on Sin, the
stronghold of Egypt; and I will cut off the multitude of No.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> I will set a fire in Egypt: Sin shall
be in great anguish, and No shall be broken up; and Memphis \[shall
have\] adversaries in the daytime.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth
shall fall by the sword; and these \[cities\] shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> At Tehaphnehes also the day shall
withdraw itself, when I shall break there the yokes of Egypt, and the
pride of her power shall cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover
her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Thus will I execute judgments on Egypt;
and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> It happened in the eleventh year, in
the first \[month\], in the seventh \[day\] of the month, that the word
of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Son of man, I have broken the arm of
Pharaoh king of Egypt; and behold, it has not been bound up, to apply
\[healing\] medicines, to put a bandage to bind it, that it be strong to
hold the sword.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the
strong \[arm\], and that which was broken; and I will cause the sword to
fall out of his hand.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> I will scatter the Egyptians among the
nations, and will disperse them through the countries.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> I will strengthen the arms of the king
of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I will break the arms of
Pharaoh, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a deadly
wounded man.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> I will hold up the arms of the king of
Babylon; and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know
that I am Yahweh, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of
Babylon, and he shall stretch it out on the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> I will scatter the Egyptians among the
nations, and disperse them through the countries; and they shall know
that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> It happened in the eleventh year, in the
third \[month\], in the first \[day\] of the month, that the word of
Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Son of man, tell Pharaoh king of Egypt,
and to his multitude: Whom are you like in your greatness?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in
Lebanon with beautiful branches, and with a forest-like shade, and of
high stature; and its top was among the thick boughs.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> The waters nourished it, the deep made it
to grow: its rivers ran all around its plantation; and it sent out its
channels to all the trees of the field.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Therefore its stature was exalted above
all the trees of the field; and its boughs were multiplied, and its
branches became long by reason of many waters, when it shot \[them\]
forth.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> All the birds of the sky made their nests
in its boughs; and under its branches did all the animals of the field
bring forth their young; and under its shadow lived all great nations.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Thus was it beautiful in its greatness,
in the length of its branches; for its root was by many waters.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> The cedars in the garden of God could not
hide it; the fir trees were not like its boughs, and the plane trees
were not as its branches; nor was any tree in the garden of God like it
in its beauty.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> I made it beautiful by the multitude of
its branches, so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of
God, envied it.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Therefore thus said the Lord Yahweh:
Because you are exalted in stature, and he has set his top among the
thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height;

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> I will even deliver him into the hand
of the mighty one of the nations; he shall surely deal with him; I have
driven him out for his wickedness.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> Strangers, the terrible of the nations,
have cut him off, and have left him: on the mountains and in all the
valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the
watercourses of the land; and all the peoples of the earth are gone down
from his shadow, and have left him.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> On his ruin all the birds of the sky
shall dwell, and all the animals of the field shall be on his branches;

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> to the end that none of all the trees
by the waters exalt themselves in their stature, neither set their top
among the thick boughs, nor that their mighty ones stand up on their
height, \[even\] all who drink water: for they are all delivered to
death, to the lower parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of
men, with those who go down to the pit.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: In the day
when he went down to Sheol I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for
him, and I restrained its rivers; and the great waters were stayed; and
I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field
fainted for him.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> I made the nations to shake at the
sound of his fall, when I cast him down to Sheol with those who descend
into the pit; and all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon,
all that drink water, were comforted in the lower parts of the earth.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> They also went down into Sheol with him
to those who are slain by the sword; yes, those who were his arm,
\[that\] lived under his shadow in the midst of the nations.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> To whom are you thus like in glory and
in greatness among the trees of Eden? yet you will be brought down with
the trees of Eden to the lower parts of the earth: you shall lie in the
midst of the uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword. This
is Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> It happened in the twelfth year, in the
twelfth month, in the first \[day\] of the month, that the word of
Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Son of man, take up a lamentation over
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and tell him, You were likened to a young lion of
the nations: yet you are as a monster in the seas; and you did break
forth with your rivers, and troubled the waters with your feet, and
fouled their rivers.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: I will spread
out my net on you with a company of many peoples; and they shall bring
you up in my net.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> I will leave you on the land, I will cast
you forth on the open field, and will cause all the birds of the sky to
settle on you, and I will satisfy the animals of the whole earth with
you.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> I will lay your flesh on the mountains,
and fill the valleys with your height.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> I will also water with your blood the
land in which you swim, even to the mountains; and the watercourses
shall be full of you.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> When I shall extinguish you, I will cover
the heavens, and make its stars dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud,
and the moon shall not give its light.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> All the bright lights of the sky will I
make dark over you, and set darkness on your land, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> I will also trouble the hearts of many
peoples, when I shall bring your destruction among the nations, into the
countries which you have not known.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Yes, I will make many peoples amazed at
you, and their kings shall be horribly afraid for you, when I shall
brandish my sword before them; and they shall tremble at every moment,
every man for his own life, in the day of your fall.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: The
sword of the king of Babylon shall come on you.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> By the swords of the mighty will I
cause your multitude to fall; the terrible of the nations are they all:
and they shall bring to nothing the pride of Egypt, and all its
multitude shall be destroyed.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> I will destroy also all its animals
from beside many waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any
more, nor the hoofs of animals trouble them.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Then will I make their waters clear,
and cause their rivers to run like oil, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> When I shall make the land of Egypt
desolate and waste, a land destitute of that of which it was full, when
I shall strike all those who dwell therein, then shall they know that I
am Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> This is the lamentation with which they
shall lament; the daughters of the nations shall lament therewith; over
Egypt, and over all her multitude, shall they lament therewith, says the
Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> It happened also in the twelfth year,
in the fifteenth \[day\] of the month, that the word of Yahweh came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Son of man, wail for the multitude of
Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and the daughters of the famous
nations, to the lower parts of the earth, with those who go down into
the pit.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> Whom do you pass in beauty? Go down,
and be laid with the uncircumcised.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> They shall fall in the midst of those
who are slain by the sword: she is delivered to the sword; draw her away
and all her multitudes.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> The strong among the mighty shall speak
to him out of the midst of Sheol with those who help him: they are gone
down, they lie still, even the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> Asshur is there and all her company;
her graves are all around her; all of them slain, fallen by the sword;

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> whose graves are set in the uttermost
parts of the pit, and her company is around her grave; all of them
slain, fallen by the sword, who caused terror in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> There is Elam and all her multitude
around her grave; all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who are gone
down uncircumcised into the lower parts of the earth, who caused their
terror in the land of the living, and have borne their shame with those
who go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> They have set her a bed in the midst of
the slain with all her multitude; her graves are around her; all of them
uncircumcised, slain by the sword; for their terror was caused in the
land of the living, and they have borne their shame with those who go
down to the pit: he is put in the midst of those who are slain.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> There is Meshech, Tubal, and all their
multitude; their graves are around them; all of them uncircumcised,
slain by the sword; for they caused their terror in the land of the
living.

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> They shall not lie with the mighty who
are fallen of the uncircumcised, who are gone down to Sheol with their
weapons of war, and have laid their swords under their heads, and their
iniquities are on their bones; for \[they were\] the terror of the
mighty in the land of the living.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> But you shall be broken in the midst of
the uncircumcised, and shall lie with those who are slain by the sword.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> There is Edom, her kings and all her
princes, who in their might are laid with those who are slain by the
sword: they shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with those who go down
to the pit.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> There are the princes of the north, all
of them, and all the Sidonians, who are gone down with the slain; in the
terror which they caused by their might they are put to shame; and they
lie uncircumcised with those who are slain by the sword, and bear their
shame with those who go down to the pit.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be
comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army, slain
by the sword, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> For I have put his terror in the land
of the living; and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised,
with those who are slain by the sword, even Pharaoh and all his
multitude, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Son of man, speak to the children of your
people, and tell them, When I bring the sword on a land, and the people
of the land take a man from among them, and set him for their watchman;

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> if, when he sees the sword come on the
land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> then whoever hears the sound of the
trumpet, and doesn't take warning, if the sword come, and take him away,
his blood shall be on his own head.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> He heard the sound of the trumpet, and
didn't take warning; his blood shall be on him; whereas if he had taken
warning, he would have delivered his soul.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> But if the watchman sees the sword come,
and doesn't blow the trumpet, and the people aren't warned, and the
sword comes, and take any person from among them; he is taken away in
his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the watchman's hand.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> So you, son of man, I have set you a
watchman to the house of Israel; therefore hear the word at my mouth,
and give them warning from me.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> When I tell the wicked, O wicked man, you
shall surely die, and you don't speak to warn the wicked from his way;
that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require
at your hand.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> Nevertheless, if you warn the wicked of
his way to turn from it, and he doesn't turn from his way; he shall die
in his iniquity, but you have delivered your soul.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> You, son of man, tell the house of
Israel: Thus you speak, saying, Our transgressions and our sins are on
us, and we pine away in them; how then can we live?

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> Tell them, As I live, says the Lord
Yahweh, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the
wicked turn from his way and live: turn, turn from your evil ways; for
why will you die, house of Israel?

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> You, son of man, tell the children of
your people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in
the day of his disobedience; and as for the wickedness of the wicked, he
shall not fall thereby in the day that he turns from his wickedness;
neither shall he who is righteous be able to live thereby in the day
that he sins.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> When I tell the righteous, that he
shall surely live; if he trust to his righteousness, and commit
iniquity, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered; but in his
iniquity that he has committed, therein shall he die.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Again, when I say to the wicked, You
shall surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful
and right;

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> if the wicked restore the pledge, give
again that which he had taken by robbery, walk in the statutes of life,
committing no iniquity; he shall surely live, he shall not die.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> None of his sins that he has committed
shall be remembered against him: he has done that which is lawful and
right; he shall surely live.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> Yet the children of your people say,
The way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not
equal.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> When the righteous turns from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, he shall even die therein.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> When the wicked turns from his
wickedness, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall live
thereby.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Yet you say, The way of the Lord is not
equal. House of Israel, I will judge every one of you after his ways.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> It happened in the twelfth year of our
captivity, in the tenth \[month\], in the fifth \[day\] of the month,
that one who had escaped out of Jerusalem came to me, saying, The city
has been struck.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> Now the hand of Yahweh had been on me
in the evening, before he who was escaped came; and he had opened my
mouth, until he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and
I was no more mute.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Son of man, they who inhabit those
waste places in the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and
he inherited the land: but we are many; the land is given us for
inheritance.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Therefore tell them, Thus says the Lord
Yahweh: You eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes to your idols, and
shed blood: and shall you possess the land?

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> You stand on your sword, you work
abomination, and every one of you defiles his neighbor's wife: and shall
you possess the land?

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> You shall tell them, Thus says the Lord
Yahweh: As I live, surely those who are in the waste places shall fall
by the sword; and him who is in the open field will I give to the
animals to be devoured; and those who are in the strongholds and in the
caves shall die of the pestilence.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> I will make the land a desolation and
an astonishment; and the pride of her power shall cease; and the
mountains of Israel shall be desolate, so that none shall pass through.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Then shall they know that I am Yahweh,
when I have made the land a desolation and an astonishment, because of
all their abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> As for you, son of man, the children of
your people talk of you by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and
speak one to another, everyone to his brother, saying, Please come and
hear what is the word that comes forth from Yahweh.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> They come to you as the people come,
and they sit before you as my people, and they hear your words, but
don't do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart
goes after their gain.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> Behold, you are to them as a very
lovely song of one who has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument; for they hear your words, but they don't do them.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> When this comes to pass, (behold, it
comes), then shall they know that a prophet has been among them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Son of man, prophesy against the
shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and tell them, even to the shepherds,
Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Woe to the shepherds of Israel who feed
themselves! Shouldn't the shepherds feed the sheep?

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> You eat the fat, and you clothe yourself
with the wool, you kill the fatlings; but you don't feed the sheep.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> You haven't strengthened the diseased,
neither have you healed that which was sick, neither have you bound up
that which was broken, neither have you brought back that which was
driven away, neither have you sought that which was lost; but with force
and with rigor you have ruled over them.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> They were scattered, because there was no
shepherd; and they became food to all the animals of the field, and were
scattered.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> My sheep wandered through all the
mountains, and on every high hill: yes, my sheep were scattered on all
the surface of the earth; and there was none who searched or sought.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word
of Yahweh:

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> As I live, says the Lord Yahweh, surely
because my sheep became a prey, and my sheep became food to all the
animals of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my
shepherds search for my sheep, but the shepherds fed themselves, and
didn't feed my sheep;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> therefore, you shepherds, hear the word
of Yahweh:

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Behold, I am
against the shepherds; and I will require my sheep at their hand, and
cause them to cease from feeding the sheep; neither shall the shepherds
feed themselves any more; and I will deliver my sheep from their mouth,
that they may not be food for them.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For thus says the Lord Yahweh: Behold,
I myself, even I, will search for my sheep, and will seek them out.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> As a shepherd seeks out his flock in
the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered abroad, so will I
seek out my sheep; and I will deliver them out of all places where they
have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> I will bring them out from the peoples,
and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into their own
land; and I will feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the
watercourses, and in all the inhabited places of the country.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> I will feed them with good pasture; and
on the mountains of the height of Israel shall their fold be: there
shall they lie down in a good fold; and on fat pasture shall they feed
on the mountains of Israel.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> I myself will be the shepherd of my
sheep, and I will cause them to lie down, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> I will seek that which was lost, and
will bring back that which was driven away, and will bind up that which
was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick: but the fat and the
strong I will destroy; I will feed them in justice.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> As for you, O my flock, thus says the
Lord Yahweh: Behold, I judge between sheep and sheep, the rams and the
male goats.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Does it seem a small thing to you to
have fed on the good pasture, but you must tread down with your feet the
residue of your pasture? and to have drunk of the clear waters, but you
must foul the residue with your feet?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> As for my sheep, they eat that which
you have trodden with your feet, and they drink that which you have
fouled with your feet.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh to
them: Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat sheep and the lean
sheep.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Because you thrust with side and with
shoulder, and push all the diseased with your horns, until you have
scattered them abroad;

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> therefore will I save my flock, and
they shall no more be a prey; and I will judge between sheep and sheep.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> I will set up one shepherd over them,
and he shall feed them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and
he shall be their shepherd.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> I, Yahweh, will be their God, and my
servant David prince among them; I, Yahweh, have spoken it.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> I will make with them a covenant of
peace, and will cause evil animals to cease out of the land; and they
shall dwell securely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> I will make them and the places around
my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in its
season; there shall be showers of blessing.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> The tree of the field shall yield its
fruit, and the earth shall yield its increase, and they shall be secure
in their land; and they shall know that I am Yahweh, when I have broken
the bars of their yoke, and have delivered them out of the hand of those
who made slaves of them.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> They shall no more be a prey to the
nations, neither shall the animals of the earth devour them; but they
shall dwell securely, and none shall make them afraid.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> I will raise up to them a plantation
for renown, and they shall be no more consumed with famine in the land,
neither bear the shame of the nations any more.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> They shall know that I, Yahweh, their
God am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my people,
says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> You my sheep, the sheep of my pasture,
are men, and I am your God, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Son of man, set your face against Mount
Seir, and prophesy against it,

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> and tell it, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I am against you, Mount Seir, and I will stretch out my hand
against you, and I will make you a desolation and an astonishment.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> I will lay your cities waste, and you
shall be desolate; and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Because you have had a perpetual enmity,
and have given over the children of Israel to the power of the sword in
the time of their calamity, in the time of the iniquity of the end;

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> therefore, as I live, says the Lord
Yahweh, I will prepare you for blood, and blood shall pursue you: since
you have not hated blood, therefore blood shall pursue you.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> Thus will I make Mount Seir an
astonishment and a desolation; and I will cut off from it him who passes
through and him who returns.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> I will fill its mountains with its slain:
in your hills and in your valleys and in all your watercourses shall
they fall who are slain with the sword.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> I will make you a perpetual desolation,
and your cities shall not be inhabited; and you shall know that I am
Yahweh.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Because you have said, These two
nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it;
whereas Yahweh was there:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> therefore, as I live, says the Lord
Yahweh, I will do according to your anger, and according to your envy
which you have shown out of your hatred against them; and I will make
myself known among them, when I shall judge you.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> You shall know that I, Yahweh, have
heard all your insults which you have spoken against the mountains of
Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they have been given us to
devour.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> You have magnified yourselves against
me with your mouth, and have multiplied your words against me: I have
heard it.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: When the
whole earth rejoices, I will make you desolate.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> As you rejoiced over the inheritance of
the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so will I do to you: you
shall be desolate, Mount Seir, and all Edom, even all of it; and they
shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> You, son of man, prophesy to the
mountains of Israel, and say, You mountains of Israel, hear the word of
Yahweh.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Because the
enemy has said against you, Aha! and, The ancient high places are ours
in possession;

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> therefore prophesy, and say, Thus says
the Lord Yahweh: Because, even because they have made you desolate, and
swallowed you up on every side, that you might be a possession to the
residue of the nations, and you are taken up in the lips of talkers, and
the evil report of the people;

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> therefore, you mountains of Israel, hear
the word of the Lord Yahweh: Thus says the Lord Yahweh to the mountains
and to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys, to the
desolate wastes and to the cities that are forsaken, which are become a
prey and derision to the residue of the nations that are all around;

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of
the nations, and against all Edom, that have appointed my land to
themselves for a possession with the joy of all their heart, with
despite of soul, to cast it out for a prey.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Therefore prophesy concerning the land of
Israel, and tell the mountains and to the hills, to the watercourses and
to the valleys, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Behold, I have spoken in my
jealousy and in my wrath, because you have borne the shame of the
nations:

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh: I
have sworn, \[saying\], Surely the nations that are around you, they
shall bear their shame.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> But you, mountains of Israel, you shall
shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people Israel; for
they are at hand to come.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> For, behold, I am for you, and I will
turn into you, and you shall be tilled and sown;

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> and I will multiply men on you, all the
house of Israel, even all of it; and the cities shall be inhabited, and
the waste places shall be built;

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> and I will multiply on you man and
animal; and they shall increase and be fruitful; and I will cause you to
be inhabited after your former estate, and will do better \[to you\]
than at your beginnings: and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> Yes, I will cause men to walk on you,
even my people Israel; and they shall possess you, and you shall be
their inheritance, and you shall no more henceforth bereave them of
children.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Because they
say to you, You are a devourer of men, and have been a bereaver of your
nation;

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> therefore you shall devour men no more,
neither bereave your nation any more, says the Lord Yahweh;

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> neither will I let you hear any more
the shame of the nations, neither shall you bear the reproach of the
peoples any more, neither shall you cause your nation to stumble any
more, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Son of man, when the house of Israel
lived in their own land, they defiled it by their way and by their
doings: their way before me was as the uncleanness of a woman in her
impurity.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Therefore I poured out my wrath on them
for the blood which they had poured out on the land, and because they
had defiled it with their idols;

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> and I scattered them among the nations,
and they were dispersed through the countries: according to their way
and according to their doings I judged them.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> When they came to the nations, where
they went, they profaned my holy name; in that men said of them, These
are the people of Yahweh, and are gone forth out of his land.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> But I had respect for my holy name,
which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations, where they
went.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Therefore tell the house of Israel,
Thus says the Lord Yahweh: I don't do \[this\] for your sake, house of
Israel, but for my holy name, which you have profaned among the nations,
where you went.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> I will sanctify my great name, which
has been profaned among the nations, which you have profaned in the
midst of them; and the nations shall know that I am Yahweh, says the
Lord Yahweh, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> For I will take you from among the
nations, and gather you out of all the countries, and will bring you
into your own land.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> I will sprinkle clean water on you, and
you shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols,
will I cleanse you.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> I will also give you a new heart, and I
will put a new spirit within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my ordinances, and
do them.

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> You shall dwell in the land that I gave
to your fathers; and you shall be my people, and I will be your God.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> I will save you from all your
uncleanness: and I will call for the grain, and will multiply it, and
lay no famine on you.

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> I will multiply the fruit of the tree,
and the increase of the field, that you may receive no more the reproach
of famine among the nations.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> Then you shall remember your evil ways,
and your doings that were not good; and you shall loathe yourselves in
your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Nor for your sake do I \[this\], says
the Lord Yahweh, be it known to you: be ashamed and confounded for your
ways, house of Israel.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: In the day
that I cleanse you from all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to
be inhabited, and the waste places shall be built.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> The land that was desolate shall be
tilled, whereas it was a desolation in the sight of all who passed by.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> They shall say, This land that was
desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate
and ruined cities are fortified and inhabited.

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> Then the nations that are left around
you shall know that I, Yahweh, have built the ruined places, and planted
that which was desolate: I, Yahweh, have spoken it, and I will do it.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: For this,
moreover, will I be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for
them: I will increase them with men like a flock.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> As the flock for sacrifice, as the
flock of Jerusalem in her appointed feasts, so shall the waste cities be
filled with flocks of men; and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> The hand of Yahweh was on me, and he
brought me out in the Spirit of Yahweh, and set me down in the midst of
the valley; and it was full of bones.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> He caused me to pass by them all around:
and behold, there were very many in the open valley; and behold, they
were very dry.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> He said to me, Son of man, can these
bones live? I answered, Lord Yahweh, you know.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> Again he said to me, Prophesy over these
bones, and tell them, you dry bones, hear the word of Yahweh.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh to these bones:
Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and you shall live.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> I will lay sinews on you, and will bring
up flesh on you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and you
shall live; and you shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> So I prophesied as I was commanded: and
as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold, an earthquake; and the
bones came together, bone to its bone.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> I saw, and, behold, there were sinews on
them, and flesh came up, and skin covered them above; but there was no
breath in them.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Then he said to me, Prophesy to the wind,
prophesy, son of man, and tell the wind, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Come
from the four winds, breath, and breathe on these slain, that they may
live.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> So I prophesied as he commanded me, and
the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up on their feet,
an exceedingly great army.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Then he said to me, Son of man, these
bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are
dried up, and our hope is lost; we are clean cut off.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Therefore prophesy, and tell them, Thus
says the Lord Yahweh: Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to
come up out of your graves, my people; and I will bring you into the
land of Israel.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> You shall know that I am Yahweh, when I
have opened your graves, and caused you to come up out of your graves,
my people.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> I will put my Spirit in you, and you
shall live, and I will place you in your own land: and you shall know
that I, Yahweh, have spoken it and performed it, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> The word of Yahweh came again to me,
saying,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> You, son of man, take one stick, and
write on it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions:
then take another stick, and write on it, For Joseph, the stick of
Ephraim, and \[for\] all the house of Israel his companions:

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> and join them for you one to another
into one stick, that they may become one in your hand.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> When the children of your people shall
speak to you, saying, Will you not show us what you mean by these?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> tell them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of
Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions; and I will put them
with it, \[even\] with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and
they shall be one in my hand.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> The sticks whereon you write shall be
in your hand before their eyes.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> Say to them, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the nations, where
they are gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into
their own land:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> and I will make them one nation in the
land, on the mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them
all; and they shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be
divided into two kingdoms any more at all;

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> neither shall they defile themselves
any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with
any of their transgressions; but I will save them out of all their
dwelling places, in which they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so
shall they be my people, and I will be their God.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> My servant David shall be king over
them; and they all shall have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my
ordinances, and observe my statutes, and do them.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> They shall dwell in the land that I
have given to Jacob my servant, in which your fathers lived; and they
shall dwell therein, they, and their children, and their children's
children, forever: and David my servant shall be their prince for ever.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> Moreover I will make a covenant of
peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them; and I
will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the
midst of them forevermore.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> My tent also shall be with them; and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> The nations shall know that I am Yahweh
who sanctifies Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them
forevermore.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Son of man, set your face toward Gog, of
the land of Magog, the prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy
against him,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> and say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, I am against you, Gog, prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> and I will turn you around, and put hooks
into your jaws, and I will bring you forth, with all your army, horses
and horsemen, all of them clothed in full armor, a great company with
buckler and shield, all of them handling swords;

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Persia, Cush, and Put with them, all of
them with shield and helmet;

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Gomer, and all his hordes; the house of
Togarmah in the uttermost parts of the north, and all his hordes; even
many peoples with you.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Be prepared, yes, prepare yourself, you,
and all your companies who are assembled to you, and be a guard to them.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> After many days you shall be visited: in
the latter years you shall come into the land that is brought back from
the sword, that is gathered out of many peoples, on the mountains of
Israel, which have been a continual waste; but it is brought forth out
of the peoples, and they shall dwell securely, all of them.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> You shall ascend, you shall come like a
storm, you shall be like a cloud to cover the land, you, and all your
hordes, and many peoples with you.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: It shall
happen in that day, that things shall come into your mind, and you shall
devise an evil device:

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> and you shall say, I will go up to the
land of unwalled villages; I will go to those who are at rest, who dwell
securely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars
nor gates;

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> to take the spoil and to take the prey;
to turn your hand against the waste places that are \[now\] inhabited,
and against the people who are gathered out of the nations, who have
gotten livestock and goods, who dwell in the middle of the earth.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of
Tarshish, with all the young lions of it, shall tell you, Have you come
to take the spoil? have you assembled your company to take the prey? to
carry away silver and gold, to take away livestock and goods, to take
great spoil?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Therefore, son of man, prophesy, and
tell Gog, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: In that day when my people Israel
dwells securely, shall you not know it?

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> You shall come from your place out of
the uttermost parts of the north, you, and many peoples with you, all of
them riding on horses, a great company and a mighty army;

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> and you shall come up against my people
Israel, as a cloud to cover the land: it shall happen in the latter
days, that I will bring you against my land, that the nations may know
me, when I shall be sanctified in you, Gog, before their eyes.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Are you he
of whom I spoke in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, who
prophesied in those days for \[many\] years that I would bring you
against them?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> It shall happen in that day, when Gog
shall come against the land of Israel, says the Lord Yahweh, that my
wrath shall come up into my nostrils.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> For in my jealousy and in the fire of
my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shall be a great
shaking in the land of Israel;

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> so that the fish of the sea, and the
birds of the sky, and the animals of the field, and all creeping things
who creep on the earth, and all the men who are on the surface of the
earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown
down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the
ground.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> I will call for a sword against him to
all my mountains, says the Lord Yahweh: every man's sword shall be
against his brother.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> With pestilence and with blood will I
enter into judgment with him; and I will rain on him, and on his hordes,
and on the many peoples who are with him, an overflowing shower, and
great hailstones, fire, and sulfur.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> I will magnify myself, and sanctify
myself, and I will make myself known in the eyes of many nations; and
they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> You, son of man, prophesy against Gog,
and say, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Behold, I am against you, Gog,
prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal:

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> and I will turn you around, and will lead
you on, and will cause you to come up from the uttermost parts of the
north; and I will bring you on the mountains of Israel;

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> and I will strike your bow out of your
left hand, and will cause your arrows to fall out of your right hand.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> You shall fall on the mountains of
Israel, you, and all your hordes, and the peoples who are with you: I
will give you to the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the animals of
the field to be devoured.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> You shall fall on the open field; for I
have spoken it, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> I will send a fire on Magog, and on those
who dwell securely in the islands; and they shall know that I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> My holy name will I make known in the
midst of my people Israel; neither will I allow my holy name to be
profaned any more: and the nations shall know that I am Yahweh, the Holy
One in Israel.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> Behold, it comes, and it shall be done,
says the Lord Yahweh; this is the day about which I have spoken.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Those who dwell in the cities of Israel
shall go forth, and shall make fires of the weapons and burn them, both
the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the war
clubs, and the spears, and they shall make fires of them seven years;

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> so that they shall take no wood out of
the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shall make
fires of the weapons; and they shall plunder those who plundered them,
and rob those who robbed them, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> It shall happen in that day, that I
will give to Gog a place for burial in Israel, the valley of those who
pass through on the east of the sea; and it shall stop those who pass
through: and there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude; and they
shall call it The valley of Hamon Gog.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Seven months shall the house of Israel
be burying them, that they may cleanse the land.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> Yes, all the people of the land shall
bury them; and it shall be to them a renown in the day that I shall be
glorified, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> They shall set apart men of continual
employment, who shall pass through the land, and, with those who pass
through, those who bury those who remain on the surface of the land, to
cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> Those who pass through the land shall
pass through; and when any sees a man's bone, then shall he set up a
sign by it, until the undertakers have buried it in the valley of Hamon
Gog.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> Hamonah shall also be the name of a
city. Thus shall they cleanse the land.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> You, son of man, thus says the Lord
Yahweh: Speak to the birds of every sort, and to every animal of the
field, Assemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to
my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice on the
mountains of Israel, that you may eat flesh and drink blood.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> You shall eat the flesh of the mighty,
and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and
of goats, of bulls, all of them fatlings of Bashan.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> You shall eat fat until you be full,
and drink blood until you are drunk, of my sacrifice which I have
sacrificed for you.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> You shall be filled at my table with
horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, says the
Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> I will set my glory among the nations;
and all the nations shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my
hand that I have laid on them.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> So the house of Israel shall know that
I am Yahweh their God, from that day and forward.

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> The nations shall know that the house
of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity; because they
trespassed against me, and I hid my face from them: so I gave them into
the hand of their adversaries, and they fell all of them by the sword.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> According to their uncleanness and
according to their transgressions did I to them; and I hid my face from
them.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Now will I bring back the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy on the
whole house of Israel; and I will be jealous for my holy name.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> They shall bear their shame, and all
their trespasses by which they have trespassed against me, when they
shall dwell securely in their land, and none shall make them afraid;

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> when I have brought them back from the
peoples, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am
sanctified in them in the sight of many nations.

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> They shall know that I am Yahweh their
God, in that I caused them to go into captivity among the nations, and
have gathered them to their own land; and I will leave none of them any
more there;

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> neither will I hide my face any more
from them; for I have poured out my Spirit on the house of Israel, says
the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> In the five and twentieth year of our
captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth \[day\] of the
month, in the fourteenth year after that the city was struck, in the
same day, the hand of Yahweh was on me, and he brought me there.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> In the visions of God brought he me into
the land of Israel, and set me down on a very high mountain, whereon was
as it were the frame of a city on the south.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> He brought me there; and, behold, there
was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a
line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the
gate.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> The man said to me, Son of man, see with
your eyes, and hear with your ears, and set your heart on all that I
shall show you; for, to the intent that I may show them to you, you are
brought here: declare all that you see to the house of Israel.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> Behold, a wall on the outside of the
house all around, and in the man's hand a measuring reed six cubits
long, of a cubit and a handbreadth each: so he measured the thickness of
the building, one reed; and the height, one reed.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then came he to the gate which looks
toward the east, and went up its steps: and he measured the threshold of
the gate, one reed broad; and the other threshold, one reed broad.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Every lodge was one reed long, and one
reed broad; and \[the space\] between the lodges was five cubits; and
the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate toward the house was
one reed.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> He measured also the porch of the gate
toward the house, one reed.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Then measured he the porch of the gate,
eight cubits; and its posts, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was
toward the house.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> The lodges of the gate eastward were
three on this side, and three on that side; they three were of one
measure: and the posts had one measure on this side and on that side.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> He measured the breadth of the opening
of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits;

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> and a border before the lodges, one
cubit \[on this side\], and a border, one cubit on that side; and the
lodges, six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> He measured the gate from the roof of
the one lodge to the roof of the other, a breadth of twenty-five cubits;
door against door.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> He made also posts, sixty cubits; and
the court \[reached\] to the posts, around the gate.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> \[From\] the forefront of the gate at
the entrance to the forefront of the inner porch of the gate were fifty
cubits.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> There were closed windows to the
lodges, and to their posts within the gate all around, and likewise to
the arches; and windows were around inward; and on \[each\] post were
palm trees.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> Then brought he me into the outer
court; and behold, there were rooms and a pavement, made for the court
all around: thirty rooms were on the pavement.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> The pavement was by the side of the
gates, answerable to the length of the gates, even the lower pavement.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> Then he measured the breadth from the
forefront of the lower gate to the forefront of the inner court outside,
one hundred cubits, \[both\] on the east and on the north.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> The gate of the outer court whose
prospect is toward the north, he measured its length and its breadth.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> The lodges of it were three on this
side and three on that side; and its posts and its arches were after the
measure of the first gate: its length was fifty cubits, and the breadth
twenty-five cubits.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> The windows of it, and its arches, and
the palm trees of it, were after the measure of the gate whose prospect
is toward the east; and they went up to it by seven steps; and its
arches were before them.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> There was a gate to the inner court
over against the \[other\] gate, \[both\] on the north and on the east;
and he measured from gate to gate one hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> He led me toward the south; and behold,
a gate toward the south: and he measured its posts and its arches
according to these measures.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> There were windows in it and in its
arches all around, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and
the breadth twenty-five cubits.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> There were seven steps to go up to it,
and its arches were before them; and it had palm trees, one on this
side, and another on that side, on its posts.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> There was a gate to the inner court
toward the south: and he measured from gate to gate toward the south a
hundred cubits.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Then he brought me to the inner court
by the south gate: and he measured the south gate according to these
measures;

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> and its lodges, and its posts, and its
arches, according to these measures: and there were windows in it and in
its arches all around; it was fifty cubits long, and twenty-five cubits
broad.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> There were arches all around,
twenty-five cubits long, and five cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> The arches of it were toward the outer
court; and palm trees were on its posts: and the ascent to it had eight
steps.

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> He brought me into the inner court
toward the east: and he measured the gate according to these measures;

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> and its lodges, and its posts, and its
arches, according to these measures: and there were windows therein and
in its arches all around; it was fifty cubits long, and twenty-five
cubits broad.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> The arches of it were toward the outer
court; and palm trees were on its posts, on this side, and on that side:
and the ascent to it had eight steps.

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> He brought me to the north gate: and he
measured \[it\] according to these measures;

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> its lodges, its posts, and its arches:
and there were windows therein all around; the length was fifty cubits,
and the breadth twenty-five cubits.

<span id="an_40:37">40:37</span> The posts of it were toward the outer
court; and palm trees were on its posts, on this side, and on that side:
and the ascent to it had eight steps.

<span id="an_40:38">40:38</span> A room with its door was by the posts
at the gates; there they washed the burnt offering.

<span id="an_40:39">40:39</span> In the porch of the gate were two
tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to kill thereon the
burnt offering and the sin offering and the trespass offering.

<span id="an_40:40">40:40</span> On the \[one\] side outside, as one
goes up to the entry of the gate toward the north, were two tables; and
on the other side, which belonged to the porch of the gate, were two
tables.

<span id="an_40:41">40:41</span> Four tables were on this side, and four
tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon
they killed \[the sacrifices\].

<span id="an_40:42">40:42</span> There were four tables for the burnt
offering, of cut stone, a cubit and a half long, and a cubit and a half
broad, and one cubit high; whereupon they laid the instruments with
which they killed the burnt offering and the sacrifice.

<span id="an_40:43">40:43</span> The hooks, a handbreadth long, were
fastened within all around: and on the tables was the flesh of the
offering.

<span id="an_40:44">40:44</span> Outside of the inner gate were rooms
for the singers in the inner court, which was at the side of the north
gate; and their prospect was toward the south; one at the side of the
east gate having the prospect toward the north.

<span id="an_40:45">40:45</span> He said to me, This room, whose
prospect is toward the south, is for the priests, the keepers of the
duty of the house;

<span id="an_40:46">40:46</span> and the room whose prospect is toward
the north is for the priests, the keepers of the duty of the altar:
these are the sons of Zadok, who from among the sons of Levi come near
to Yahweh to minister to him.

<span id="an_40:47">40:47</span> He measured the court, one hundred
cubits long, and a hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar was
before the house.

<span id="an_40:48">40:48</span> Then he brought me to the porch of the
house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side,
and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate was three
cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.

<span id="an_40:49">40:49</span> The length of the porch was twenty
cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits; even by the steps by which they
went up to it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side,
and another on that side.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> He brought me to the temple, and measured
the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the
other side, which was the breadth of the tent.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> The breadth of the entrance was ten
cubits; and the sides of the entrance were five cubits on the one side,
and five cubits on the other side: and he measured its length, forty
cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Then went he inward, and measured each
post of the entrance, two cubits; and the entrance, six cubits; and the
breadth of the entrance, seven cubits.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> He measured its length, twenty cubits,
and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said to me,
This is the most holy place.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Then he measured the wall of the house,
six cubits; and the breadth of every side room, four cubits, all around
the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> The side rooms were in three stories, one
over another, and thirty in order; and they entered into the wall which
belonged to the house for the side rooms all around, that they might
have hold \[therein\], and not have hold in the wall of the house.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> The side rooms were broader as they
encompassed \[the house\] higher and higher; for the encompassing of the
house went higher and higher around the house: therefore the breadth of
the house \[continued\] upward; and so one went up \[from\] the lowest
\[room\] to the highest by the middle \[room\].

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> I saw also that the house had a raised
base all around: the foundations of the side rooms were a full reed of
six great cubits.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> The thickness of the wall, which was for
the side rooms, on the outside, was five cubits: and that which was left
was the place of the side rooms that belonged to the house.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Between the rooms was a breadth of
twenty cubits around the house on every side.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> The doors of the side rooms were toward
\[the place\] that was left, one door toward the north, and another door
toward the south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five
cubits all around.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> The building that was before the
separate place at the side toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and
the wall of the building was five cubits thick all around, and its
length ninety cubits.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> So he measured the house, one hundred
cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with its walls,
one hundred cubits long;

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> also the breadth of the face of the
house, and of the separate place toward the east, one hundred cubits.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> He measured the length of the building
before the separate place which was at its back, and its galleries on
the one side and on the other side, one hundred cubits; and the inner
temple, and the porches of the court;

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> the thresholds, and the closed windows,
and the galleries around on their three stories, over against the
threshold, with wood ceilings all around, and \[from\] the ground up to
the windows, (now the windows were covered),

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> to \[the space\] above the door, even
to the inner house, and outside, and by all the wall all around inside
and outside, by measure.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> It was made with cherubim and palm
trees; and a palm tree was between cherub and cherub, and every cherub
had two faces;

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> so that there was the face of a man
toward the palm tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion
toward the palm tree on the other side. \[thus was it\] made through all
the house all around:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> from the ground to above the door were
cherubim and palm trees made: thus was the wall of the temple.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> As for the temple, the door posts were
squared; and as for the face of the sanctuary, the appearance \[of it\]
was as the appearance \[of the temple\].

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> The altar was of wood, three cubits
high, and its length two cubits; and its corners, and its length, and
its walls, were of wood: and he said to me, This is the table that is
before Yahweh.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> The temple and the sanctuary had two
doors.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> The doors had two leaves \[apiece\],
two turning leaves: two \[leaves\] for the one door, and two leaves for
the other.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> There were made on them, on the doors
of the temple, cherubim and palm trees, like as were made on the walls;
and there was a threshold of wood on the face of the porch outside.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> There were closed windows and palm
trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch:
thus were the side rooms of the house, and the thresholds.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Then he brought me forth into the outer
court, the way toward the north: and he brought me into the room that
was over against the separate place, and which was over against the
building toward the north.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> Before the length of one hundred cubits
was the north door, and the breadth was fifty cubits.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Over against the twenty \[cubits\] which
belonged to the inner court, and over against the pavement which
belonged to the outer court, was gallery against gallery in the third
story.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Before the rooms was a walk of ten
cubits' breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors were toward
the north.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Now the upper rooms were shorter; for the
galleries took away from these, more than from the lower and the middle,
in the building.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> For they were in three stories, and they
didn't have pillars as the pillars of the courts: therefore \[the
uppermost\] was straitened more than the lowest and the middle from the
ground.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> The wall that was outside by the side of
the rooms, toward the outer court before the rooms, its length was fifty
cubits.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> For the length of the rooms that were in
the outer court was fifty cubits: and behold, before the temple were one
hundred cubits.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> From under these rooms was the entry on
the east side, as one goes into them from the outer court.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> In the thickness of the wall of the
court toward the east, before the separate place, and before the
building, there were rooms.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> The way before them was like the
appearance of \[the way of\] the rooms which were toward the north;
according to their length so was their breadth: and all their exits were
both according to their fashions, and according to their doors.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> According to the doors of the rooms
that were toward the south was a door at the head of the way, even the
way directly before the wall toward the east, as one enters into them.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> Then he said to me, The north rooms and
the south rooms, which are before the separate place, they are the holy
rooms, where the priests who are near to Yahweh shall eat the most holy
things: there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meal
offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place
is holy.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> When the priests enter in, then shall
they not go out of the holy place into the outer court, but there they
shall lay their garments in which they minister; for they are holy: and
they shall put on other garments, and shall approach to that which
pertains to the people.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> Now when he had made an end of
measuring the inner house, he brought me forth by the way of the gate
whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it all around.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> He measured on the east side with the
measuring reed five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed all around.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> He measured on the north side five
hundred reeds with the measuring reed all around.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> He measured on the south side five
hundred reeds with the measuring reed.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> He turned about to the west side, and
measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> He measured it on the four sides: it
had a wall around it, the length five hundred, and the breadth five
hundred, to make a separation between that which was holy and that which
was common.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> Afterward he brought me to the gate, even
the gate that looks toward the east.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> Behold, the glory of the God of Israel
came from the way of the east: and his voice was like the sound of many
waters; and the earth shined with his glory.

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> It was according to the appearance of the
vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I came
to destroy the city; and the visions were like the vision that I saw by
the river Chebar; and I fell on my face.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> The glory of Yahweh came into the house
by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> The Spirit took me up, and brought me
into the inner court; and behold, the glory of Yahweh filled the house.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> I heard one speaking to me out of the
house; and a man stood by me.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> He said to me, Son of man, \[this is\]
the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I
will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel forever. The house of
Israel shall no more defile my holy name, neither they, nor their kings,
by their prostitution, and by the dead bodies of their kings \[in\]
their high places;

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> in their setting of their threshold by my
threshold, and their doorpost beside my doorpost, and there was \[but\]
the wall between me and them; and they have defiled my holy name by
their abominations which they have committed: therefore I have consumed
them in my anger.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Now let them put away their prostitution,
and the dead bodies of their kings, far from me; and I will dwell in the
midst of them forever.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> You, son of man, show the house to the
house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities; and let
them measure the pattern.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> If they be ashamed of all that they
have done, make known to them the form of the house, and its fashion,
and its exits, and its entrances, and all its forms, and all its
ordinances, and all its forms, and all its laws; and write it in their
sight; that they may keep the whole form of it, and all its ordinances,
and do them.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> This is the law of the house: on the
top of the mountain the whole limit around it shall be most holy.
Behold, this is the law of the house.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> These are the measures of the altar by
cubits (the cubit is a cubit and a handbreadth): the bottom shall be a
cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and its border around its edge a span;
and this shall be the base of the altar.

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> From the bottom on the ground to the
lower ledge shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the
lesser ledge to the greater ledge shall be four cubits, and the breadth
a cubit.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> The upper altar shall be four cubits;
and from the altar hearth and upward there shall be four horns.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> The altar hearth shall be twelve
\[cubits\] long by twelve broad, square in the four sides of it.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> The ledge shall be fourteen \[cubits\]
long by fourteen broad in the four sides of it; and the border about it
shall be half a cubit; and its bottom shall be a cubit around; and its
steps shall look toward the east.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> He said to me, Son of man, thus says
the Lord Yahweh: These are the ordinances of the altar in the day when
they shall make it, to offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle
blood thereon.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> You shall give to the priests the
Levites who are of the seed of Zadok, who are near to me, to minister to
me, says the Lord Yahweh, a young bull for a sin offering.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> You shall take of its blood, and put it
on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the ledge, and on
the border all around: thus you shall cleanse it and make atonement for
it.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> You shall also take the bull of the sin
offering, and it shall be burnt in the appointed place of the house,
outside of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> On the second day you shall offer a
male goat without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the
altar, as they did cleanse it with the bull.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> When you have finished cleansing it,
you shall offer a young bull without blemish, and a ram out of the flock
without blemish.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> You shall bring them near to Yahweh,
and the priests shall cast salt on them, and they shall offer them up
for a burnt offering to Yahweh.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> Seven days you shall prepare every day
a goat for a sin offering: they shall also prepare a young bull, and a
ram out of the flock, without blemish.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Seven days shall they make atonement
for the altar and purify it; so shall they consecrate it.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> When they have accomplished the days,
it shall be that on the eighth day, and forward, the priests shall make
your burnt offerings on the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will
accept you, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> Then he brought me back by the way of the
outer gate of the sanctuary, which looks toward the east; and it was
shut.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> Yahweh said to me, This gate shall be
shut; it shall not be opened, neither shall any man enter in by it; for
Yahweh, the God of Israel, has entered in by it; therefore it shall be
shut.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> As for the prince, he shall sit therein
as prince to eat bread before Yahweh; he shall enter by the way of the
porch of the gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> Then he brought me by the way of the
north gate before the house; and I looked, and behold, the glory of
Yahweh filled the house of Yahweh: and I fell on my face.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> Yahweh said to me, Son of man, mark well,
and see with your eyes, and hear with your ears all that I tell you
concerning all the ordinances of the house of Yahweh, and all its laws;
and mark well the entrance of the house, with every exit of the
sanctuary.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> You shall tell the rebellious, even to
the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord Yahweh: you house of Israel, let
it suffice you of all your abominations,

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> in that you have brought in foreigners,
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my
sanctuary, to profane it, even my house, when you offer my bread, the
fat and the blood, and they have broken my covenant, \[to add\] to all
your abominations.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> You have not performed the duty of my
holy things; but you have set performers of my duty in my sanctuary for
yourselves.

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh, No foreigner,
uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my
sanctuary, of any foreigners who are among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> But the Levites who went far from me,
when Israel went astray, who went astray from me after their idols, they
shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Yet they shall be ministers in my
sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the house, and ministering
in the house: they shall kill the burnt offering and the sacrifice for
the people, and they shall stand before them to minister to them.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> Because they ministered to them before
their idols, and became a stumbling block of iniquity to the house of
Israel; therefore have I lifted up my hand against them, says the Lord
Yahweh, and they shall bear their iniquity.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> They shall not come near to me, to
execute the office of priest to me, nor to come near to any of my holy
things, to the things that are most holy; but they shall bear their
shame, and their abominations which they have committed.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> Yet will I make them performers of the
duty of the house, for all its service, and for all that shall be done
therein.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> But the priests the Levites, the sons
of Zadok, who performed the duty of my sanctuary when the children of
Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister to
me; and they shall stand before me to offer to me the fat and the blood,
says the Lord Yahweh:

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> they shall enter into my sanctuary, and
they shall come near to my table, to minister to me, and they shall keep
my instruction.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> It shall be that, when they enter in at
the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments;
and no wool shall come on them, while they minister in the gates of the
inner court, and within.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They shall have linen tires on their
heads, and shall have linen breeches on their waists; they shall not
clothe themselves with \[anything that causes\] sweat.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> When they go forth into the outer
court, even into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their
garments in which they minister, and lay them in the holy rooms; and
they shall put on other garments, that they not sanctify the people with
their garments.

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Neither shall they shave their heads,
nor allow their locks to grow long; they shall only cut off the hair of
their heads.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Neither shall any of the priests drink
wine, when they enter into the inner court.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> Neither shall they take for their wives
a widow, nor her who is put away; but they shall take virgins of the
seed of the house of Israel, or a widow who is the widow of a priest.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> They shall teach my people the
difference between the holy and the common, and cause them to discern
between the unclean and the clean.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> In a controversy they shall stand to
judge; according to my ordinances shall they judge it: and they shall
keep my laws and my statutes in all my appointed feasts; and they shall
make my Sabbaths holy.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> They shall go in to no dead person to
defile themselves; but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for
daughter, for brother, or for sister who has had no husband, they may
defile themselves.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> After he is cleansed, they shall reckon
to him seven days.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> In the day that he goes into the
sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall
offer his sin offering, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> They shall have an inheritance: I am
their inheritance; and you shall give them no possession in Israel; I am
their possession.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> They shall eat the meal offering, and
the sin offering, and the trespass offering; and every devoted thing in
Israel shall be theirs.

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> The first of all the first fruits of
every thing, and every offering of everything, of all your offerings,
shall be for the priest: you shall also give to the priests the first of
your dough, to cause a blessing to rest on your house.

<span id="an_44:31">44:31</span> The priests shall not eat of anything
that dies of itself, or is torn, whether it be bird or animal.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> Moreover, when you shall divide by lot
the land for inheritance, you shall offer an offering to Yahweh, a holy
portion of the land; the length shall be the length of twenty-five
thousand \[reeds\], and the breadth shall be ten thousand: it shall be
holy in all its border all around.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Of this there shall be for the holy place
five hundred \[in length\] by five hundred \[in breadth\], square all
around; and fifty cubits for its suburbs all around.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> Of this measure you shall measure a
length of twenty-five thousand, and a breadth of ten thousand: and in it
shall be the sanctuary, which is most holy.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> It is a holy portion of the land; it
shall be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who come near
to minister to Yahweh; and it shall be a place for their houses, and a
holy place for the sanctuary.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> Twenty-five thousand in length, and ten
thousand in breadth, shall be to the Levites, the ministers of the
house, for a possession to themselves, \[for\] twenty rooms.

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> You shall appoint the possession of the
city five thousand broad, and twenty-five thousand long, side by side
with the offering of the holy portion: it shall be for the whole house
of Israel.

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> \[Whatever is\] for the prince \[shall
be\] on the one side and on the other side of the holy offering and of
the possession of the city, in front of the holy offering and in front
of the possession of the city, on the west side westward, and on the
east side eastward; and in length answerable to one of the portions,
from the west border to the east border.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> In the land it shall be to him for a
possession in Israel: and my princes shall no more oppress my people;
but they shall give the land to the house of Israel according to their
tribes.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: Let it suffice
you, princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute justice
and righteousness; dispossessing my people, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> You shall have just balances, and a
just ephah, and a just bath.

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> The ephah and the bath shall be of one
measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer, and the
ephah the tenth part of a homer: its measure shall be after the homer.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> The shekel shall be twenty gerahs.
Twenty shekels plus twenty-five shekels plus fifteen shekels shall be
your mina.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> This is the offering that you shall
offer: the sixth part of an ephah from a homer of wheat; and you shall
give the sixth part of an ephah from a homer of barley;

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> and the set portion of oil, of the bath
of oil, the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, \[which is\] ten baths,
even a homer; (for ten baths are a homer;)

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> and one lamb of the flock, out of two
hundred, from the well-watered pastures of Israel--for a meal offering,
and for a burnt offering, and for peace offerings, to make atonement for
them, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> All the people of the land shall give
to this offering for the prince in Israel.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> It shall be the prince's part to give
the burnt offerings, and the meal offerings, and the drink offerings, in
the feasts, and on the new moons, and on the Sabbaths, in all the
appointed feasts of the house of Israel: he shall prepare the sin
offering, and the meal offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace
offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: In the first
\[month\], in the first \[day\] of the month, you shall take a young
bull without blemish; and you shall cleanse the sanctuary.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> The priest shall take of the blood of
the sin offering, and put it on the door posts of the house, and on the
four corners of the ledge of the altar, and on the posts of the gate of
the inner court.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> So you shall do on the seventh \[day\]
of the month for everyone who errs, and for him who is simple: so you
shall make atonement for the house.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> In the first \[month\], in the
fourteenth day of the month, you shall have the Passover, a feast of
seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> On that day shall the prince prepare
for himself and for all the people of the land a bull for a sin
offering.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> The seven days of the feast he shall
prepare a burnt offering to Yahweh, seven bulls and seven rams without
blemish daily the seven days; and a male goat daily for a sin offering.

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> He shall prepare a meal offering, an
ephah for a bull, and an ephah for a ram, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> In the seventh \[month\], in the
fifteenth day of the month, in the feast, shall he do the like the seven
days; according to the sin offering, according to the burnt offering,
and according to the meal offering, and according to the oil.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: The gate of
the inner court that looks toward the east shall be shut the six working
days; but on the Sabbath day it shall be opened, and on the day of the
new moon it shall be opened.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> The prince shall enter by the way of the
porch of the gate outside, and shall stand by the post of the gate; and
the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings,
and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go
forth; but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> The people of the land shall worship at
the door of that gate before Yahweh on the Sabbaths and on the new
moons.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> The burnt offering that the prince shall
offer to Yahweh shall be on the Sabbath day six lambs without blemish
and a ram without blemish;

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> and the meal offering shall be an ephah
for the ram, and the meal offering for the lambs as he is able to give,
and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> On the day of the new moon it shall be a
young bull without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram; they shall be
without blemish:

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> and he shall prepare a meal offering, an
ephah for the bull, and an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs
according as he is able, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> When the prince shall enter, he shall go
in by the way of the porch of the gate, and he shall go forth by its
way.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> But when the people of the land shall
come before Yahweh in the appointed feasts, he who enters by the way of
the north gate to worship shall go forth by the way of the south gate;
and he who enters by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way
of the north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate by which
he came in, but shall go forth straight before him.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> The prince, when they go in, shall go
in with of them; and when they go out, he shall go out.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> In the feasts and in the solemnities
the meal offering shall be an ephah for a bull, and an ephah for a ram,
and for the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> When the prince shall prepare a
freewill offering, a burnt offering or peace offerings as a freewill
offering to Yahweh, one shall open for him the gate that looks toward
the east; and he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace
offerings, as he does on the Sabbath day: then he shall go forth; and
after his going forth one shall shut the gate.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> You shall prepare a lamb a year old
without blemish for a burnt offering to Yahweh daily: morning by morning
you shall prepare it.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> You shall prepare a meal offering with
it morning by morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of
a hin of oil, to moisten the fine flour; a meal offering to Yahweh
continually by a perpetual ordinance.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and
the meal offering, and the oil, morning by morning, for a continual
burnt offering.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: If the
prince give a gift to any of his sons, it is his inheritance, it shall
belong to his sons; it is their possession by inheritance.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> But if he give of his inheritance a
gift to one of his servants, it shall be his to the year of liberty;
then it shall return to the prince; but as for his inheritance, it shall
be for his sons.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> Moreover the prince shall not take of
the people's inheritance, to thrust them out of their possession; he
shall give inheritance to his sons out of his own possession, that my
people not be scattered every man from his possession.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> Then he brought me through the entry,
which was at the side of the gate, into the holy rooms for the priests,
which looked toward the north: and behold, there was a place on the
hinder part westward.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> He said to me, This is the place where
the priests shall boil the trespass offering and the sin offering,
\[and\] where they shall bake the meal offering; that they not bring
them forth into the outer court, to sanctify the people.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> Then he brought me forth into the outer
court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; and
behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> In the four corners of the court there
were courts enclosed, forty \[cubits\] long and thirty broad: these four
in the corners were of one measure.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> There was a wall around in them, around
the four, and boiling places were made under the walls all around.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> Then he said to me, These are the
boiling houses, where the ministers of the house shall boil the
sacrifice of the people.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> He brought me back to the door of the
house; and behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the
house eastward; (for the forefront of the house was toward the east;)
and the waters came down from under, from the right side of the house,
on the south of the altar.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Then he brought me out by the way of the
gate northward, and led me round by the way outside to the outer gate,
by the way of \[the gate\] that looks toward the east; and behold, there
ran out waters on the right side.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> When the man went forth eastward with the
line in his hand, he measured one thousand cubits, and he caused me to
pass through the waters, waters that were to the ankles.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Again he measured one thousand, and
caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the knees.
Again he measured one thousand, and caused me to pass through \[the
waters\], waters that were to the waist.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Afterward he measured one thousand; \[and
it was\] a river that I could not pass through; for the waters were
risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> He said to me, Son of man, have you seen
\[this\]? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the bank of the
river.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> Now when I had returned, behold, on the
bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> Then he said to me, These waters issue
forth toward the eastern region, and shall go down into the Arabah; and
they shall go toward the sea; into the sea \[shall the waters go\] which
were made to issue forth; and the waters shall be healed.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> It shall happen, that every living
creature which swarms, in every place where the rivers come, shall live;
and there shall be a very great multitude of fish; for these waters are
come there, and \[the waters of the sea\] shall be healed, and
everything shall live wherever the river comes.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> It shall happen, that fishermen shall
stand by it: from En Gedi even to En Eglaim shall be a place for the
spreading of nets; their fish shall be after their kinds, as the fish of
the great sea, exceeding many.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> But the miry places of it, and its
marshes, shall not be healed; they shall be given up to salt.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> By the river on its bank, on this side
and on that side, shall grow every tree for food, whose leaf shall not
wither, neither shall its fruit fail: it shall bring forth new fruit
every month, because its waters issue out of the sanctuary; and its
fruit shall be for food, and its leaf for healing.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Thus says the Lord Yahweh: This shall
be the border, by which you shall divide the land for inheritance
according to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph \[shall have two\]
portions.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> You shall inherit it, one as well as
another; for I swore to give it to your fathers: and this land shall
fall to you for inheritance.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> This shall be the border of the land:
On the north side, from the great sea, by the way of Hethlon, to the
entrance of Zedad;

<span id="an_47:16">47:16</span> Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is
between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazer Hatticon,
which is by the border of Hauran.

<span id="an_47:17">47:17</span> The border from the sea, shall be Hazar
Enon at the border of Damascus; and on the north northward is the border
of Hamath. This is the north side.

<span id="an_47:18">47:18</span> The east side, between Hauran and
Damascus and Gilead, and the land of Israel, shall be the Jordan; from
the \[north\] border to the east sea you shall measure. This is the east
side.

<span id="an_47:19">47:19</span> The south side southward shall be from
Tamar as far as the waters of Meriboth Kadesh, to the brook \[of
Egypt\], to the great sea. This is the south side southward.

<span id="an_47:20">47:20</span> The west side shall be the great sea,
from the \[south\] border as far as over against the entrance of Hamath.
This is the west side.

<span id="an_47:21">47:21</span> So you shall divide this land to you
according to the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:22">47:22</span> It shall happen, that you shall divide
it by lot for an inheritance to you and to the aliens who live among
you, who shall father children among you; and they shall be to you as
the native-born among the children of Israel; they shall have
inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_47:23">47:23</span> It shall happen, that in what tribe the
stranger lives, there you shall give him his inheritance, says the Lord
Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Now these are the names of the tribes:
From the north end, beside the way of Hethlon to the entrance of Hamath,
Hazar Enan at the border of Damascus, northward beside Hamath, (and they
shall have their sides east \[and\] west), Dan, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> By the border of Dan, from the east side
to the west side, Asher, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> By the border of Asher, from the east
side even to the west side, Naphtali, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> By the border of Naphtali, from the east
side to the west side, Manasseh, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> By the border of Manasseh, from the east
side to the west side, Ephraim, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> By the border of Ephraim, from the east
side even to the west side, Reuben, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> By the border of Reuben, from the east
side to the west side, Judah, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> By the border of Judah, from the east
side to the west side, shall be the offering which you shall offer,
twenty-five thousand \[reeds\] in breadth, and in length as one of the
portions, from the east side to the west side: and the sanctuary shall
be in its midst.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> The offering that you shall offer to
Yahweh shall be twenty-five thousand \[reeds\] in length, and ten
thousand in breadth.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> For these, even for the priests, shall
be the holy offering: toward the north twenty-five thousand \[in
length\], and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the
east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south twenty-five thousand
in length: and the sanctuary of Yahweh shall be in its midst.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> \[It shall be\] for the priests who are
sanctified of the sons of Zadok, who have kept my instruction, who
didn't go astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites
went astray.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> It shall be to them an offering from
the offering of the land, a thing most holy, by the border of the
Levites.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> Answerable to the border of the
priests, the Levites shall have twenty-five thousand in length, and ten
thousand in breadth: all the length shall be twenty-five thousand, and
the breadth ten thousand.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> They shall sell none of it, nor
exchange it, nor shall the first fruits of the land be alienated; for it
is holy to Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> The five thousand that are left in the
breadth, in front of the twenty-five thousand, shall be for common use,
for the city, for dwelling and for suburbs; and the city shall be in its
midst.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> These shall be its measures: the north
side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand
and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred,
and the west side four thousand and five hundred.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> The city shall have suburbs: toward the
north two hundred fifty, and toward the south two hundred fifty, and
toward the east two hundred fifty, and toward the west two hundred
fifty.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> The remainder in the length, answerable
to the holy offering, shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand
westward; and it shall be answerable to the holy offering; and its
increase shall be for food to those who labor in the city.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> Those who labor in the city, out of all
the tribes of Israel, shall cultivate it.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> All the offering shall be twenty-five
thousand by twenty-five thousand: you shall offer the holy offering
foursquare, with the possession of the city.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> The residue shall be for the prince, on
the one side and on the other of the holy offering and of the possession
of the city; in front of the twenty-five thousand of the offering toward
the east border, and westward in front of the twenty-five thousand
toward the west border, answerable to the portions, it shall be for the
prince: and the holy offering and the sanctuary of the house shall be in
its midst.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> Moreover from the possession of the
Levites, and from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that
which is the prince's, between the border of Judah and the border of
Benjamin, it shall be for the prince.

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> As for the rest of the tribes: from the
east side to the west side, Benjamin, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> By the border of Benjamin, from the
east side to the west side, Simeon, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> By the border of Simeon, from the east
side to the west side, Issachar, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> By the border of Issachar, from the
east side to the west side, Zebulun, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> By the border of Zebulun, from the east
side to the west side, Gad, one \[portion\].

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> By the border of Gad, at the south side
southward, the border shall be even from Tamar to the waters of Meribath
Kadesh, to the brook \[of Egypt\], to the great sea.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> This is the land which you shall divide
by lot to the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their
several portions, says the Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> These are the exits of the city: On the
north side four thousand and five hundred \[reeds\] by measure;

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> and the gates of the city shall be
after the names of the tribes of Israel, three gates northward: the gate
of Reuben, one; the gate of Judah, one; the gate of Levi, one.

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> At the east side four thousand and five
hundred \[reeds\], and three gates: even the gate of Joseph, one; the
gate of Benjamin, one; the gate of Dan, one.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> At the south side four thousand and
five hundred \[reeds\] by measure, and three gates: the gate of Simeon,
one; the gate of Issachar, one; the gate of Zebulun, one.

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> At the west side four thousand and five
hundred \[reeds\], with their three gates: the gate of Gad, one; the
gate of Asher, one; the gate of Naphtali, one.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> It shall be eighteen thousand \[reeds\]
around: and the name of the city from that day shall be, Yahweh is
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel](dan)
