[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](co2)  [Next](eph) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Galatians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle (not from men, neither
through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised
him from the dead),

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and all the brothers who are with me, to
the assemblies of Galatia:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Grace to you and peace from God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> who gave himself for our sins, that he
might deliver us out of this present evil age, according to the will of
our God and Father--

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> to whom be the glory forever and ever.
Amen.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> I marvel that you are so quickly deserting
him who called you in the grace of Christ to a different "good news";

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and there isn't another "good news." Only
there are some who trouble you, and want to pervert the Good News of
Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But even though we, or an angel from
heaven, should preach to you any "good news" other than that which we
preached to you, let him be cursed.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> As we have said before, so I now say again:
if any man preaches to you any "good news" other than that which you
received, let him be cursed.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For am I now seeking the favor of men, or
of God? Or am I striving to please men? For if I were still pleasing
men, I wouldn't be a servant of Christ.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But I make known to you, brothers,
concerning the Good News which was preached by me, that it is not
according to man.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For neither did I receive it from man,
nor was I taught it, but it came to me through revelation of Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> For you have heard of my way of living in
time past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted
the assembly of God, and ravaged it.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I advanced in the Jews' religion beyond
many of my own age among my countrymen, being more exceedingly zealous
for the traditions of my fathers.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> But when it was the good pleasure of God,
who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me through his grace,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> to reveal his Son in me, that I might
preach him among the Gentiles, I didn't immediately confer with flesh
and blood,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who
were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia. Then I returned to
Damascus.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Then after three years I went up to
Jerusalem to visit Peter, and stayed with him fifteen days.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> But of the other apostles I saw no one,
except James, the Lord's brother.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Now about the things which I write to
you, behold, before God, I'm not lying.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Then I came to the regions of Syria and
Cilicia.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> I was still unknown by face to the
assemblies of Judea which were in Christ,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> but they only heard: "He who once
persecuted us now preaches the faith that he once tried to destroy."

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And they glorified God in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Then after a period of fourteen years I
went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> I went up by revelation, and I laid before
them the Good News which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately
before those who were respected, for fear that I might be running, or
had run, in vain.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> But not even Titus, who was with me, being
a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> This was because of the false brothers
secretly brought in, who stole in to spy out our liberty which we have
in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> to whom we gave no place in the way of
subjection, not for an hour, that the truth of the Good News might
continue with you.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But from those who were reputed to be
important (whatever they were, it makes no difference to me; God doesn't
show partiality to man)--they, I say, who were respected imparted
nothing to me,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but to the contrary, when they saw that I
had been entrusted with the Good News for the uncircumcision, even as
Peter with the Good News for the circumcision

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> (for he who appointed Peter to the
apostleship of the circumcision appointed me also to the Gentiles);

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and when they perceived the grace that was
given to me, James and Cephas and John, they who were reputed to be
pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that we
should go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> They only asked us to remember the
poor--which very thing I was also zealous to do.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But when Peter came to Antioch, I
resisted him to his face, because he stood condemned.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For before some people came from James,
he ate with the Gentiles. But when they came, he drew back and separated
himself, fearing those who were of the circumcision.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And the rest of the Jews joined him in
his hypocrisy; so that even Barnabas was carried away with their
hypocrisy.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But when I saw that they didn't walk
uprightly according to the truth of the Good News, I said to Peter
before them all, "If you, being a Jew, live as the Gentiles do, and not
as the Jews do, why do you compel the Gentiles to live as the Jews do?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> "We, being Jews by nature, and not
Gentile sinners,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> yet knowing that a man is not justified
by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, even we
believed in Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by faith in Christ,
and not by the works of the law, because no flesh will be justified by
the works of the law.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But if, while we sought to be justified
in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners, is Christ a servant of
sin? Certainly not!

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For if I build up again those things
which I destroyed, I prove myself a law-breaker.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For I, through the law, died to the law,
that I might live to God.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I have been crucified with Christ, and it
is no longer I that live, but Christ living in me. That life which I now
live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and
gave himself up for me.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I don't make void the grace of God. For
if righteousness is through the law, then Christ died for nothing!"

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you
not to obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly set
forth among you as crucified?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I just want to learn this from you. Did you
receive the Spirit by the works of the law, or by hearing of faith?

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Are you so foolish? Having begun in the
Spirit, are you now completed in the flesh?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Did you suffer so many things in vain, if
it is indeed in vain?

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He therefore who supplies the Spirit to
you, and works miracles among you, does he do it by the works of the
law, or by hearing of faith?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Even as Abraham "believed God, and it was
counted to him for righteousness."

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Know therefore that those who are of faith,
the same are children of Abraham.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> The Scripture, foreseeing that God would
justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the Good News beforehand to
Abraham, saying, "In you all the nations will be blessed."

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> So then, those who are of faith are blessed
with the faithful Abraham.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For as many as are of the works of the
law are under a curse. For it is written, "Cursed is everyone who
doesn't continue in all things that are written in the book of the law,
to do them."

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Now that no man is justified by the law
before God is evident, for, "The righteous will live by faith."

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> The law is not of faith, but, "The man
who does them will live by them."

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Christ redeemed us from the curse of the
law, having become a curse for us. For it is written, "Cursed is
everyone who hangs on a tree,"

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> that the blessing of Abraham might come
on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus; that we might receive the promise
of the Spirit through faith.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Brothers, speaking of human terms, though
it is only a man's covenant, yet when it has been confirmed, no one
makes it void, or adds to it.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Now the promises were spoken to Abraham
and to his seed. He doesn't say, "To seeds," as of many, but as of one,
"To your seed," which is Christ.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Now I say this. A covenant confirmed
beforehand by God in Christ, the law, which came four hundred thirty
years after, does not annul, so as to make the promise of no effect.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For if the inheritance is of the law, it
is no more of promise; but God has granted it to Abraham by promise.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> What then is the law? It was added
because of transgressions, until the seed should come to whom the
promise has been made. It was ordained through angels by the hand of a
mediator.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Now a mediator is not between one, but
God is one.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Is the law then against the promises of
God? Certainly not! For if there had been a law given which could make
alive, most certainly righteousness would have been of the law.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> But the Scriptures imprisoned all things
under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to
those who believe.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> But before faith came, we were kept in
custody under the law, confined for the faith which should afterwards be
revealed.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> So that the law has become our tutor to
bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> But now that faith has come, we are no
longer under a tutor.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> For you are all children of God, through
faith in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> For as many of you as were baptized into
Christ have put on Christ.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is
neither slave nor free man, there is neither male nor female; for you
are all one in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> If you are Christ's, then you are
Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But I say that so long as the heir is a
child, he is no different from a bondservant, though he is lord of all;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> but is under guardians and stewards until
the day appointed by the father.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> So we also, when we were children, were
held in bondage under the elemental principles of the world.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But when the fullness of the time came, God
sent out his Son, born to a woman, born under the law,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> that he might redeem those who were under
the law, that we might receive the adoption of children.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And because you are children, God sent out
the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, "Abba, Father!"

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> So you are no longer a bondservant, but a
son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> However at that time, not knowing God, you
were in bondage to those who by nature are not gods.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But now that you have come to know God, or
rather to be known by God, why do you turn back again to the weak and
miserable elemental principles, to which you desire to be in bondage all
over again?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> You observe days, months, seasons, and
years.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I am afraid for you, that I might have
wasted my labor for you.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> I beg you, brothers, become as I am, for
I also have become as you are. You did me no wrong,

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> but you know that because of weakness of
the flesh I preached the Good News to you the first time.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> That which was a temptation to you in my
flesh, you didn't despise nor reject; but you received me as an angel of
God, even as Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> What was the blessing you enjoyed? For I
testify to you that, if possible, you would have plucked out your eyes
and given them to me.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> So then, have I become your enemy by
telling you the truth?

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> They zealously seek you in no good way.
No, they desire to alienate you, that you may seek them.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But it is always good to be zealous in a
good cause, and not only when I am present with you.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> My little children, of whom I am again in
travail until Christ is formed in you--

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> but I could wish to be present with you
now, and to change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Tell me, you that desire to be under the
law, don't you listen to the law?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For it is written that Abraham had two
sons, one by the handmaid, and one by the free woman.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> However, the son by the handmaid was born
according to the flesh, but the son by the free woman was born through
promise.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> These things contain an allegory, for
these are two covenants. One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children to
bondage, which is Hagar.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia,
and answers to the Jerusalem that exists now, for she is in bondage with
her children.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> But the Jerusalem that is above is free,
which is the mother of us all.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For it is written, "Rejoice, you barren
who don't bear. Break forth and shout, you that don't travail. For more
are the children of the desolate than of her who has a husband."

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Now we, brothers, as Isaac was, are
children of promise.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> But as then, he who was born according to
the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the Spirit, so also
it is now.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> However what does the Scripture say?
"Throw out the handmaid and her son, for the son of the handmaid will
not inherit with the son of the free woman."

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> So then, brothers, we are not children of
a handmaid, but of the free woman.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Stand firm therefore in the liberty by
which Christ has made us free, and don't be entangled again with a yoke
of bondage.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Behold, I, Paul, tell you that if you
receive circumcision, Christ will profit you nothing.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Yes, I testify again to every man who
receives circumcision, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> You are alienated from Christ, you who
desire to be justified by the law. You have fallen away from grace.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> For we, through the Spirit, by faith wait
for the hope of righteousness.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
amounts to anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith working through love.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> You were running well! Who interfered with
you that you should not obey the truth?

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> This persuasion is not from him who calls
you.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> A little yeast grows through the whole
lump.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> I have confidence toward you in the Lord
that you will think no other way. But he who troubles you will bear his
judgment, whoever he is.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But I, brothers, if I still preach
circumcision, why am I still persecuted? Then the stumbling block of the
cross has been removed.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> I wish that those who disturb you would
cut themselves off.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For you, brothers, were called for
freedom. Only don't use your freedom for gain to the flesh, but through
love be servants to one another.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For the whole law is fulfilled in one
word, in this: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself."

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But if you bite and devour one another,
be careful that you don't consume one another.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> But I say, walk by the Spirit, and you
won't fulfill the lust of the flesh.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For the flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary to one another,
that you may not do the things that you desire.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But if you are led by the Spirit, you are
not under the law.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Now the works of the flesh are obvious,
which are: adultery, sexual immorality, uncleanness, lustfulness,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> idolatry, sorcery, hatred, strife,
jealousies, outbursts of anger, rivalries, divisions, heresies,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> envyings, murders, drunkenness, orgies,
and things like these; of which I forewarn you, even as I also
forewarned you, that those who practice such things will not inherit the
Kingdom of God.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> gentleness, and self-control. Against
such things there is no law.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Those who belong to Christ have crucified
the flesh with its passions and lusts.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> If we live by the Spirit, let's also walk
by the Spirit.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Let's not become conceited, provoking one
another, and envying one another.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Brothers, even if a man is caught in some
fault, you who are spiritual must restore such a one in a spirit of
gentleness; looking to yourself so that you also aren't tempted.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill
the law of Christ.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> For if a man thinks himself to be something
when he is nothing, he deceives himself.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But let each man test his own work, and
then he will take pride in himself and not in his neighbor.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For each man will bear his own burden.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But let him who is taught in the word share
all good things with him who teaches.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Don't be deceived. God is not mocked, for
whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> For he who sows to his own flesh will from
the flesh reap corruption. But he who sows to the Spirit will from the
Spirit reap eternal life.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Let us not be weary in doing good, for we
will reap in due season, if we don't give up.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> So then, as we have opportunity, let's do
what is good toward all men, and especially toward those who are of the
household of the faith.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> See with what large letters I write to
you with my own hand.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> As many as desire to look good in the
flesh, they compel you to be circumcised; only that they may not be
persecuted for the cross of Christ.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For even they who receive circumcision
don't keep the law themselves, but they desire to have you circumcised,
that they may boast in your flesh.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> But far be it from me to boast, except in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been
crucified to me, and I to the world.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> For in Christ Jesus neither is
circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> As many as walk by this rule, peace and
mercy be on them, and on God's Israel.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> From now on, let no one cause me any
trouble, for I bear the marks of the Lord Jesus branded on my body.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with your spirit, brothers. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians](eph)
