[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](dan)  [Next](joe.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Hosea

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of Yahweh that came to Hosea the
son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings
of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> When Yahweh spoke at first by Hosea, Yahweh
said to Hosea, "Go, take for yourself a wife of prostitution and
children of unfaithfulness; for the land commits great adultery,
forsaking Yahweh."

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So he went and took Gomer the daughter of
Diblaim; and she conceived, and bore him a son.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Yahweh said to him, "Call his name Jezreel;
for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel on the
house of Jehu, and will cause the kingdom of the house of Israel to
cease.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> It will happen in that day that I will
break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel."

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> She conceived again, and bore a daughter.
Then he said to him, "Call her name Lo-Ruhamah; for I will no longer
have mercy on the house of Israel, that I should in any way pardon them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But I will have mercy on the house of
Judah, and will save them by Yahweh their God, and will not save them by
bow, sword, battle, horses, or horsemen."

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Now when she had weaned Lo-Ruhamah, she
conceived, and bore a son.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> He said, "Call his name Lo-Ammi; for you
are not my people, and I will not be yours.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Yet the number of the children of Israel
will be as the sand of the sea, which can't be measured nor numbered;
and it will come to pass that, in the place where it was said to them,
'You are not my people,' they will be called 'sons of the living God.'

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> The children of Judah and the children of
Israel will be gathered together, and they will appoint themselves one
head, and will go up from the land; for great will be the day of
Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> "Say to your brothers, 'My people!' and to
your sisters, 'My loved one!'

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Contend with your mother! Contend, for she
is not my wife, neither am I her husband; and let her put away her
prostitution from her face, and her adulteries from between her breasts;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Lest I strip her naked, and make her bare
as in the day that she was born, and make her like a wilderness, and set
her like a dry land, and kill her with thirst.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Indeed, on her children I will have no
mercy; for they are children of unfaithfulness;

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For their mother has played the prostitute.
She who conceived them has done shamefully; for she said, 'I will go
after my lovers, who give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax,
my oil and my drink.'

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Therefore, behold, I will hedge up your way
with thorns, and I will build a wall against her, that she can't find
her way.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> She will follow after her lovers, but she
won't overtake them; and she will seek them, but won't find them. Then
she will say, 'I will go and return to my first husband; for then was it
better with me than now.'

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For she did not know that I gave her the
grain, the new wine, and the oil, and multiplied to her silver and gold,
which they used for Baal.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore I will take back my grain in its
time, and my new wine in its season, and will pluck away my wool and my
flax which should have covered her nakedness.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Now I will uncover her lewdness in the
sight of her lovers, and no one will deliver her out of my hand.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> I will also cause all her celebrations to
cease: her feasts, her new moons, her Sabbaths, and all her solemn
assemblies.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I will lay waste her vines and her fig
trees, about which she has said, 'These are my wages that my lovers have
given me; and I will make them a forest,' and the animals of the field
shall eat them.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I will visit on her the days of the
Baals, to which she burned incense, when she decked herself with her
earrings and her jewels, and went after her lovers, and forgot me," says
Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> "Therefore, behold, I will allure her,
and bring her into the wilderness, and speak tenderly to her.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> I will give her vineyards from there, and
the valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she will respond there, as
in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the
land of Egypt.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> It will be in that day," says Yahweh,
"that you will call me 'my husband,' and no longer call me 'my master.'

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For I will take away the names of the
Baals out of her mouth, and they will no longer be mentioned by name.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> In that day I will make a covenant for
them with the animals of the field, and with the birds of the sky, and
with the creeping things of the ground. I will break the bow, the sword,
and the battle out of the land, and will make them lie down safely.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> I will betroth you to me forever. Yes, I
will betroth you to me in righteousness, in justice, in loving kindness,
and in compassion.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> I will even betroth you to me in
faithfulness; and you shall know Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> It will happen in that day, I will
respond," says Yahweh, "I will respond to the heavens, and they will
respond to the earth;

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> and the earth will respond to the grain,
and the new wine, and the oil; and they will respond to Jezreel.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> I will sow her to me in the earth; and I
will have mercy on her who had not obtained mercy; and I will tell those
who were not my people, 'You are my people;' and they will say, 'My
God!'"

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Yahweh said to me, "Go again, love a woman
loved by another, and an adulteress, even as Yahweh loves the children
of Israel, though they turn to other gods, and love cakes of raisins."

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> So I bought her for myself for fifteen
pieces of silver and a homer and a half of barley.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> I said to her, "You shall stay with me many
days. You shall not play the prostitute, and you shall not be with any
other man. I will also be so toward you."

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For the children of Israel shall live many
days without king, and without prince, and without sacrifice, and
without sacred stone, and without ephod or idols.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Afterward the children of Israel shall
return, and seek Yahweh their God, and David their king, and shall come
with trembling to Yahweh and to his blessings in the last days.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear the word of Yahweh, you children of
Israel; for Yahweh has a charge against the inhabitants of the land:
"Indeed there is no truth, nor goodness, nor knowledge of God in the
land.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> There is cursing, lying, murder, stealing,
and committing adultery; they break boundaries, and bloodshed causes
bloodshed.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Therefore the land will mourn, and everyone
who dwells therein will waste away. all living things in her, even the
animals of the field and the birds of the sky; yes, the fish of the sea
also die.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> "Yet let no man bring a charge, neither let
any man accuse; For your people are like those who bring charges against
a priest.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> You will stumble in the day, and the
prophet will also stumble with you in the night; and I will destroy your
mother.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge. Because you have rejected knowledge, I will also reject you,
that you may be no priest to me. Because you have forgotten your God's
law, I will also forget your children.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> As they were multiplied, so they sinned
against me. I will change their glory into shame.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> They feed on the sin of my people, and set
their heart on their iniquity.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> It will be, like people, like priest; and I
will punish them for their ways, and will repay them for their deeds.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> They will eat, and not have enough. They
will play the prostitute, and will not increase; because they have
abandoned giving to Yahweh.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Prostitution, wine, and new wine take
away understanding.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> My people consult with their wooden idol,
and answer to a stick of wood. Indeed the spirit of prostitution has led
them astray, and they have been unfaithful to their God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> They sacrifice on the tops of the
mountains, and burn incense on the hills, under oaks and poplars and
terebinths, because its shade is good. Therefore your daughters play the
prostitute, and your brides commit adultery.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I will not punish your daughters when
they play the prostitute, nor your brides when they commit adultery;
because the men consort with prostitutes, and they sacrifice with the
shrine prostitutes; so the people without understanding will come to
ruin.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> "Though you, Israel, play the prostitute,
yet don't let Judah offend; and don't come to Gilgal, neither go up to
Beth Aven, nor swear, 'As Yahweh lives.'

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For Israel has behaved extremely
stubbornly, like a stubborn heifer. Then how will Yahweh feed them like
a lamb in a meadow.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Ephraim is joined to idols. Leave him
alone!

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Their drink has become sour. They play
the prostitute continually. Her rulers dearly love their shameful way.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The wind has wrapped her up in its wings;
and they shall be disappointed because of their sacrifices.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> "Listen to this, you priests! Listen, house
of Israel, and give ear, house of the king! For the judgment is against
you; for you have been a snare at Mizpah, and a net spread on Tabor.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> The rebels are deep in slaughter; but I
discipline all of them.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hidden
from me; for now, Ephraim, you have played the prostitute. Israel is
defiled.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Their deeds won't allow them to turn to
their God; for the spirit of prostitution is within them, and they don't
know Yahweh.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> The pride of Israel testifies to his face.
Therefore Israel and Ephraim will stumble in their iniquity. Judah also
will stumble with them.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> They will go with their flocks and with
their herds to seek Yahweh; but they won't find him. He has withdrawn
himself from them.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> They are unfaithful to Yahweh; for they
have borne illegitimate children. Now the new moon will devour them with
their fields.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> "Blow the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet
in Ramah! Sound a battle cry at Beth Aven, behind you, Benjamin!

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Ephraim will become a desolation in the day
of rebuke. Among the tribes of Israel, I have made known that which will
surely be.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> The princes of Judah are like those who
remove a landmark. I will pour out my wrath on them like water.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Ephraim is oppressed, he is crushed in
judgment; Because he is intent in his pursuit of idols.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Therefore I am to Ephraim like a moth,
and to the house of Judah like rottenness.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> "When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
his wound, Then Ephraim went to Assyria, and sent to king Jareb: but he
is not able to heal you, neither will he cure you of your wound.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> For I will be to Ephraim like a lion, and
like a young lion to the house of Judah. I myself will tear in pieces
and go away. I will carry off, and there will be no one to deliver.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> I will go and return to my place, until
they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face. In their affliction
they will seek me earnestly."

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> "Come, and let us return to Yahweh; for he
has torn us to pieces, and he will heal us; he has injured us, and he
will bind up our wounds.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> After two days he will revive us. On the
third day he will raise us up, and we will live before him.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Let us acknowledge Yahweh. Let us press on
to know Yahweh. As surely as the sun rises, Yahweh will appear. He will
come to us like the rain, like the spring rain that waters the earth."

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> "Ephraim, what shall I do to you? Judah,
what shall I do to you? For your love is like a morning cloud, and like
the dew that disappears early.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Therefore I have cut them to pieces with
the prophets; I killed them with the words of my mouth. Your judgments
are like a flash of lightning.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For I desire mercy, and not sacrifice; and
the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> But they, like Adam, have broken the
covenant. They were unfaithful to me, there.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Gilead is a city of those who work
iniquity; it is stained with blood.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> As gangs of robbers wait to ambush a man,
so the company of priests murder in the way toward Shechem, committing
shameful crimes.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> In the house of Israel I have seen a
horrible thing. There is prostitution in Ephraim. Israel is defiled.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> "Also, Judah, there is a harvest
appointed for you, when I restore the fortunes of my people.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> When I would heal Israel, then the iniquity
of Ephraim is uncovered, also the wickedness of Samaria; for they commit
falsehood, and the thief enters in, and the gang of robbers ravages
outside.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> They don't consider in their hearts that I
remember all their wickedness. Now their own deeds have engulfed them.
They are before my face.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> They make the king glad with their
wickedness, and the princes with their lies.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> They are all adulterers. They are burning
like an oven that the baker stops stirring, from the kneading of the
dough, until it is leavened.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> On the day of our king, the princes made
themselves sick with the heat of wine. He joined his hand with mockers.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For they have prepared their heart like an
oven, while they lie in wait. Their baker sleeps all the night. In the
morning it burns as a flaming fire.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> They are all hot as an oven, and devour
their judges. All their kings have fallen. There is no one among them
who calls to me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Ephraim, he mixes himself among the
nations. Ephraim is a pancake not turned over.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Strangers have devoured his strength, and
he doesn't realize it. Indeed, gray hairs are here and there on him, and
he doesn't realize it.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> The pride of Israel testifies to his
face; yet they haven't returned to Yahweh their God, nor sought him, for
all this.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> "Ephraim is like an easily deceived dove,
without understanding. They call to Egypt. They go to Assyria.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> When they go, I will spread my net on
them. I will bring them down like the birds of the sky. I will chastise
them, as their congregation has heard.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Woe to them! For they have wandered from
me. Destruction to them! For they have trespassed against me. Though I
would redeem them, yet they have spoken lies against me.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> They haven't cried to me with their
heart, but they howl on their beds. They assemble themselves for grain
and new wine. They turn away from me.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Though I have taught and strengthened
their arms, yet they plot evil against me.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> They return, but not to the Most High.
They are like a faulty bow. Their princes will fall by the sword for the
rage of their tongue. This will be their derision in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> "Put the trumpet to your lips! Something
like an eagle is over Yahweh's house, because they have broken my
covenant, and rebelled against my law.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> They cry to me, 'My God, we Israel
acknowledge you!'

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Israel has cast off that which is good. The
enemy will pursue him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They have set up kings, but not by me. They
have made princes, and I didn't approve. Of their silver and their gold
they have made themselves idols, that they may be cut off.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Let Samaria throw out his calf idol! My
anger burns against them! How long will it be until they are capable of
purity?

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For this is even from Israel! The workman
made it, and it is no God; indeed, the calf of Samaria shall be broken
in pieces.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For they sow the wind, and they will reap
the whirlwind. He has no standing grain. The stalk will yield no head.
If it does yield, strangers will swallow it up.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Israel is swallowed up. Now they are among
the nations like a worthless thing.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For they have gone up to Assyria, like a
wild donkey wandering alone. Ephraim has hired lovers for himself.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> But although they sold themselves among
the nations, I will now gather them; and they begin to waste away
because of the oppression of the king of mighty ones.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Because Ephraim has multiplied altars for
sinning, they became for him altars for sinning.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I wrote for him the many things of my
law; but they were regarded as a strange thing.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> As for the sacrifices of my offerings,
they sacrifice flesh and eat it; But Yahweh doesn't accept them. Now he
will remember their iniquity, and punish their sins. They will return to
Egypt.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For Israel has forgotten his Maker and
built palaces; and Judah has multiplied fortified cities; but I will
send a fire on his cities, and it will devour its fortresses."

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Don't rejoice, Israel, to jubilation like
the nations; for you were unfaithful to your God. You love the wages of
a prostitute at every grain threshing floor.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The threshing floor and the winepress won't
feed them, and the new wine will fail her.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They won't dwell in Yahweh's land; but
Ephraim will return to Egypt, and they will eat unclean food in Assyria.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> They won't pour out wine offerings to
Yahweh, neither will they be pleasing to him. Their sacrifices will be
to them like the bread of mourners; all who eat of it will be polluted;
for their bread will be for their appetite. It will not come into the
house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> What will you do in the day of solemn
assembly, and in the day of the feast of Yahweh?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For, behold, they have gone away from
destruction. Egypt will gather them up. Memphis will bury them. Nettles
will possess their pleasant things of silver. Thorns will be in their
tents.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> The days of visitation have come. The days
of reckoning have come. Israel will consider the prophet to be a fool,
and the man who is inspired to be insane, because of the abundance of
your sins, and because your hostility is great.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> A prophet watches over Ephraim with my God.
A fowler's snare is on all of his paths, and hostility in the house of
his God.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They have deeply corrupted themselves, as
in the days of Gibeah. He will remember their iniquity. He will punish
them for their sins.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> I found Israel like grapes in the
wilderness. I saw your fathers as the first ripe in the fig tree at its
first season; but they came to Baal Peor, and consecrated themselves to
the shameful thing, and became abominable like that which they loved.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> As for Ephraim, their glory will fly away
like a bird. There will be no birth, none with child, and no conception.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Though they bring up their children, yet
I will bereave them, so that not a man shall be left. Indeed, woe also
to them when I depart from them!

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> I have seen Ephraim, like Tyre, planted
in a pleasant place; but Ephraim will bring out his children to the
murderer.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Give them--Yahweh what will you give?
Give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> "All their wickedness is in Gilgal; for
there I hated them. Because of the wickedness of their deeds I will
drive them out of my house! I will love them no more. All their princes
are rebels.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Ephraim is struck. Their root has dried
up. They will bear no fruit. Even though they bring forth, yet I will
kill the beloved ones of their womb."

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> My God will cast them away, because they
did not listen to him; and they will be wanderers among the nations.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Israel is a luxuriant vine that puts
forth his fruit. According to the abundance of his fruit he has
multiplied his altars. As their land has prospered, they have adorned
their sacred stones.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Their heart is divided. Now they will be
found guilty. He will demolish their altars. He will destroy their
sacred stones.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Surely now they will say, "We have no
king; for we don't fear Yahweh; and the king, what can he do for us?"

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They make promises, swearing falsely in
making covenants. Therefore judgment springs up like poisonous weeds in
the furrows of the field.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> The inhabitants of Samaria will be in
terror for the calves of Beth Aven; for its people will mourn over it,
Along with its priests who rejoiced over it, for its glory, because it
has departed from it.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> It also will be carried to Assyria for a
present to a great king. Ephraim will receive shame, and Israel will be
ashamed of his own counsel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Samaria and her king float away, like a
twig on the water.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The high places also of Aven, the sin of
Israel, will be destroyed. The thorn and the thistle will come up on
their altars. They will tell the mountains, "Cover us!" and the hills,
"Fall on us!"

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> "Israel, you have sinned from the days of
Gibeah. There they remained. The battle against the children of iniquity
doesn't overtake them in Gibeah.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> When it is my desire, I will chastise
them; and the nations will be gathered against them, when they are bound
to their two transgressions.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Ephraim is a trained heifer that loves
to thresh; so I will put a yoke on her beautiful neck. I will set a
rider on Ephraim. Judah will plow. Jacob will break his clods.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Sow to yourselves in righteousness,
reap according to kindness. Break up your fallow ground; for it is time
to seek Yahweh, until he comes and rains righteousness on you.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> You have plowed wickedness. You have
reaped iniquity. You have eaten the fruit of lies, for you trusted in
your way, in the multitude of your mighty men.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Therefore a battle roar will arise
among your people, and all your fortresses will be destroyed, as Shalman
destroyed Beth Arbel in the day of battle. The mother was dashed in
pieces with her children.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> So Bethel will do to you because of
your great wickedness. At daybreak the king of Israel will be destroyed.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> "When Israel was a child, then I loved
him, and called my son out of Egypt.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> They called to them, so they went from
them. They sacrificed to the Baals, and burned incense to engraved
images.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Yet I taught Ephraim to walk. I took them
by his arms; but they didn't know that I healed them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> I drew them with cords of a man, with
ties of love; and I was to them like those who lift up the yoke on their
necks; and I bent down to him and I fed him.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> "They won't return into the land of
Egypt; but the Assyrian will be their king, because they refused to
repent.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The sword will fall on their cities, and
will destroy the bars of their gates, and will put an end to their
plans.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> My people are determined to turn from me.
Though they call to the Most High, he certainly won't exalt them.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> "How can I give you up, Ephraim? How can
I hand you over, Israel? How can I make you like Admah? How can I make
you like Zeboiim? My heart is turned within me, my compassion is
aroused.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> I will not execute the fierceness of my
anger. I will not return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man;
the Holy One in the midst of you; and I will not come in wrath.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They will walk after Yahweh, who will
roar like a lion; for he will roar, and the children will come trembling
from the west.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> They will come trembling like a bird
out of Egypt, and like a dove out of the land of Assyria; and I will
settle them in their houses," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Ephraim surrounds me with falsehood,
and the house of Israel with deceit. Judah still strays from God, and is
unfaithful to the Holy One.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Ephraim feeds on wind, and chases the
east wind. He continually multiplies lies and desolation. They make a
covenant with Assyria, and oil is carried into Egypt.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Yahweh also has a controversy with Judah,
and will punish Jacob according to his ways; according to his deeds he
will repay him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> In the womb he took his brother by the
heel; and in his manhood he contended with God.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Indeed, he struggled with the angel, and
prevailed; he wept, and made supplication to him. He found him at
Bethel, and there he spoke with us,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> even Yahweh, the God of Armies; Yahweh is
his name of renown!

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Therefore turn to your God. Keep kindness
and justice, and wait continually for your God.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> A merchant has dishonest scales in his
hand. He loves to defraud.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Ephraim said, "Surely I have become rich,
I have found myself wealth. In all my wealth they won't find in me any
iniquity that is sin."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> "But I am Yahweh your God from the land
of Egypt. I will yet again make you dwell in tents, as in the days of
the solemn feast.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> I have also spoken to the prophets, and
I have multiplied visions; and by the ministry of the prophets I have
used parables.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> If Gilead is wicked, surely they are
worthless. In Gilgal they sacrifice bulls. Indeed, their altars are like
heaps in the furrows of the field.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Jacob fled into the country of Aram,
and Israel served to get a wife, and for a wife he tended flocks and
herds.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> By a prophet Yahweh brought Israel up
out of Egypt, and by a prophet he was preserved.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Ephraim has bitterly provoked anger.
Therefore his blood will be left on him, and his Lord will repay his
contempt.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling.
He exalted himself in Israel, but when he became guilty in Baal, he
died.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Now they sin more and more, and have made
themselves molten images of their silver, even idols according to their
own understanding, all of them the work of the craftsmen. They say of
them, 'They offer human sacrifice and kiss the calves.'

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Therefore they will be like the morning
mist, and like the dew that passes away early, like the chaff that is
driven with the whirlwind out of the threshing floor, and like the smoke
out of the chimney.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> "Yet I am Yahweh your God from the land
of Egypt; and you shall acknowledge no god but me, and besides me there
is no savior.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> I knew you in the wilderness, in the land
of great drought.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> According to their pasture, so were they
filled; they were filled, and their heart was exalted. Therefore they
have forgotten me.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Therefore I am like a lion to them. Like
a leopard, I will lurk by the path.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> I will meet them like a bear that is
bereaved of her cubs, and will tear the covering of their heart. There I
will devour them like a lioness. The wild animal will tear them.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> You are destroyed, Israel, because you
are against me, against your help.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Where is your king now, that he may
save you in all your cities? And your judges, of whom you said, 'Give me
a king and princes?'

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> I have given you a king in my anger,
and have taken him away in my wrath.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The guilt of Ephraim is stored up. His
sin is stored up.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> The sorrows of a travailing woman will
come on him. He is an unwise son; for when it is time, he doesn't come
to the opening of the womb.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> I will ransom them from the power of
Sheol. I will redeem them from death! Death, where are your plagues?
Sheol, where is your destruction? "Compassion will be hidden from my
eyes.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Though he is fruitful among his
brothers, an east wind will come, the breath of Yahweh coming up from
the wilderness; and his spring will become dry, and his fountain will be
dried up. He will plunder the storehouse of treasure.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Samaria will bear her guilt; for she
has rebelled against her God. They will fall by the sword. Their infants
will be dashed in pieces, and their pregnant women will be ripped open."

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Israel, return to Yahweh your God; for
you have fallen because of your sin.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Take words with you, and return to
Yahweh. Tell him, "Forgive all our sins, and accept that which is good:
so we offer our lips like bulls.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Assyria can't save us. We won't ride on
horses; neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, 'Our
gods!' for in you the fatherless finds mercy."

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> "I will heal their waywardness. I will
love them freely; for my anger is turned away from him.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> I will be like the dew to Israel. He will
blossom like the lily, and send down his roots like Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> His branches will spread, and his beauty
will be like the olive tree, and his fragrance like Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Men will dwell in his shade. They will
revive like the grain, and blossom like the vine. Their fragrance will
be like the wine of Lebanon.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Ephraim, what have I to do any more with
idols? I answer, and will take care of him. I am like a green fir tree;
from me your fruit is found."

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Who is wise, that he may understand these
things? Who is prudent, that he may know them? For the ways of Yahweh
are right, and the righteous walk in them; But the rebellious stumble in
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel](joe.md)
