[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](heb)  [Next](pe1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: James

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> James, a servant of God and of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are in the Dispersion:
Greetings.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Count it all joy, my brothers, when you
fall into various temptations,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> knowing that the testing of your faith
produces endurance.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Let endurance have its perfect work, that
you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> But if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask
of God, who gives to all liberally and without reproach; and it will be
given to him.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But let him ask in faith, without any
doubting, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, driven by the
wind and tossed.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For let that man not think that he will
receive anything from the Lord.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> He is a double-minded man, unstable in all
his ways.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But let the brother in humble circumstances
glory in his high position;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and the rich, in that he is made humble,
because like the flower in the grass, he will pass away.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For the sun arises with the scorching
wind, and withers the grass, and the flower in it falls, and the beauty
of its appearance perishes. So also will the rich man fade away in his
pursuits.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Blessed is the man who endures
temptation, for when he has been approved, he will receive the crown of
life, which the Lord promised to those who love him.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Let no man say when he is tempted, "I am
tempted by God," for God can't be tempted by evil, and he himself tempts
no one.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> But each one is tempted, when he is drawn
away by his own lust, and enticed.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Then the lust, when it has conceived,
bears sin; and the sin, when it is full grown, brings forth death.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Don't be deceived, my beloved brothers.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Every good gift and every perfect gift is
from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom can be no
variation, nor turning shadow.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Of his own will he brought us forth by
the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his
creatures.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So, then, my beloved brothers, let every
man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to anger;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> for the anger of man doesn't produce the
righteousness of God.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Therefore, putting away all filthiness
and overflowing of wickedness, receive with humility the implanted word,
which is able to save your souls.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But be doers of the word, and not only
hearers, deluding your own selves.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> For if anyone is a hearer of the word and
not a doer, he is like a man looking at his natural face in a mirror;

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> for he sees himself, and goes away, and
immediately forgets what kind of man he was.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> But he who looks into the perfect law of
freedom, and continues, not being a hearer who forgets, but a doer of
the work, this man will be blessed in what he does.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> If anyone among you thinks himself to be
religious while he doesn't bridle his tongue, but deceives his heart,
this man's religion is worthless.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Pure religion and undefiled before our
God and Father is this: to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep oneself unstained by the world.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My brothers, don't hold the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ of glory with partiality.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if a man with a gold ring, in fine
clothing, comes into your synagogue, and a poor man in filthy clothing
also comes in;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and you pay special attention to him who
wears the fine clothing, and say, "Sit here in a good place;" and you
tell the poor man, "Stand there," or "Sit by my footstool;"

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> haven't you shown partiality among
yourselves, and become judges with evil thoughts?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Listen, my beloved brothers. Didn't God
choose those who are poor in this world to be rich in faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom which he promised to those who love him?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But you have dishonored the poor man. Don't
the rich oppress you, and personally drag you before the courts?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Don't they blaspheme the honorable name by
which you are called?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> However, if you fulfill the royal law,
according to the Scripture, "You shall love your neighbor as yourself,"
you do well.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But if you show partiality, you commit sin,
being convicted by the law as transgressors.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For whoever keeps the whole law, and yet
stumbles in one point, he has become guilty of all.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For he who said, "Do not commit
adultery," also said, "Do not commit murder." Now if you do not commit
adultery, but murder, you have become a transgressor of the law.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So speak, and so do, as men who are to be
judged by a law of freedom.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For judgment is without mercy to him who
has shown no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> What good is it, my brothers, if a man
says he has faith, but has no works? Can faith save him?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And if a brother or sister is naked and
in lack of daily food,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and one of you tells them, "Go in peace,
be warmed and filled;" and yet you didn't give them the things the body
needs, what good is it?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Even so faith, if it has no works, is
dead in itself.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Yes, a man will say, "You have faith, and
I have works." Show me your faith without works, and I by my works will
show you my faith.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> You believe that God is one. You do well.
The demons also believe, and shudder.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But do you want to know, vain man, that
faith apart from works is dead?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Wasn't Abraham our father justified by
works, in that he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> You see that faith worked with his works,
and by works faith was perfected;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and the Scripture was fulfilled which
says, "Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him as
righteousness;" and he was called the friend of God.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> You see then that by works, a man is
justified, and not only by faith.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> In the same way, wasn't Rahab the
prostitute also justified by works, in that she received the messengers,
and sent them out another way?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For as the body apart from the spirit is
dead, even so faith apart from works is dead.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Let not many of you be teachers, my
brothers, knowing that we will receive heavier judgment.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For in many things we all stumble. If
anyone doesn't stumble in word, the same is a perfect man, able to
bridle the whole body also.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Indeed, we put bits into the horses' mouths
so that they may obey us, and we guide their whole body.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Behold, the ships also, though they are so
big and are driven by fierce winds, are yet guided by a very small
rudder, wherever the pilot desires.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> So the tongue is also a little member, and
boasts great things. See how a small fire can spread to a large forest!

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And the tongue is a fire. The world of
iniquity among our members is the tongue, which defiles the whole body,
and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire by Gehenna.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For every kind of animal, bird, creeping
thing, and thing in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed by mankind.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But nobody can tame the tongue. It is a
restless evil, full of deadly poison.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> With it we bless our God and Father, and
with it we curse men, who are made in the image of God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Out of the same mouth comes forth
blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Does a spring send out from the same
opening fresh and bitter water?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Can a fig tree, my brothers, yield
olives, or a vine figs? Thus no spring yields both salt water and fresh
water.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Who is wise and understanding among you?
Let him show by his good conduct that his deeds are done in gentleness
of wisdom.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But if you have bitter jealousy and
selfish ambition in your heart, don't boast and don't lie against the
truth.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> This wisdom is not that which comes down
from above, but is earthly, sensual, and demonic.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For where jealousy and selfish ambition
are, there is confusion and every evil deed.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But the wisdom that is from above is
first pure, then peaceful, gentle, reasonable, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Now the fruit of righteousness is sown in
peace by those who make peace.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Where do wars and fightings among you come
from? Don't they come from your pleasures that war in your members?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> You lust, and don't have. You kill, covet,
and can't obtain. You fight and make war. You don't have, because you
don't ask.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> You ask, and don't receive, because you ask
with wrong motives, so that you may spend it for your pleasures.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> You adulterers and adulteresses, don't you
know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever
therefore wants to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of
God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Or do you think that the Scripture says in
vain, "The Spirit who lives in us yearns jealously"?

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> But he gives more grace. Therefore it says,
"God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble."

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Be subject therefore to God. But resist the
devil, and he will flee from you.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Draw near to God, and he will draw near to
you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your hearts, you
double-minded.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Lament, mourn, and weep. Let your laughter
be turned to mourning, and your joy to gloom.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Humble yourselves in the sight of the
Lord, and he will exalt you.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Don't speak against one another,
brothers. He who speaks against a brother and judges his brother, speaks
against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are
not a doer of the law, but a judge.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Only one is the lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy. But who are you to judge another?

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Come now, you who say, "Today or tomorrow
let's go into this city, and spend a year there, trade, and make a
profit."

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Whereas you don't know what your life
will be like tomorrow. For what is your life? For you are a vapor, that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For you ought to say, "If the Lord wills,
we will both live, and do this or that."

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> But now you glory in your boasting. All
such boasting is evil.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> To him therefore who knows to do good,
and doesn't do it, to him it is sin.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Come now, you rich, weep and howl for your
miseries that are coming on you.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Your riches are corrupted and your garments
are moth-eaten.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Your gold and your silver are corroded, and
their corrosion will be for a testimony against you, and will eat your
flesh like fire. You have laid up your treasure in the last days.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Behold, the wages of the laborers who mowed
your fields, which you have kept back by fraud, cry out, and the cries
of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of Armies.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> You have lived delicately on the earth, and
taken your pleasure. You have nourished your hearts as in a day of
slaughter.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> You have condemned, you have murdered the
righteous one. He doesn't resist you.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Be patient therefore, brothers, until the
coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of
the earth, being patient over it, until it receives the early and late
rain.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> You also be patient. Establish your hearts,
for the coming of the Lord is at hand.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Don't grumble, brothers, against one
another, so that you won't be judged. Behold, the judge stands at the
door.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Take, brothers, for an example of
suffering and of patience, the prophets who spoke in the name of the
Lord.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Behold, we call them blessed who endured.
You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the Lord in the
outcome, and how the Lord is full of compassion and mercy.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> But above all things, my brothers, don't
swear, neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but
let your "yes" be "yes," and your "no," "no;" so that you don't fall
into hypocrisy.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Is any among you suffering? Let him pray.
Is any cheerful? Let him sing praises.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Is any among you sick? Let him call for
the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him, anointing him
with oil in the name of the Lord,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and the prayer of faith will heal him who
is sick, and the Lord will raise him up. If he has committed sins, he
will be forgiven.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Confess your offenses to one another, and
pray for one another, that you may be healed. The insistent prayer of a
righteous person is powerfully effective.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Elijah was a man with a nature like ours,
and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it didn't rain on
the earth for three years and six months.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> He prayed again, and the sky gave rain,
and the earth brought forth its fruit.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Brothers, if any among you wanders from
the truth, and someone turns him back,

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> let him know that he who turns a sinner
from the error of his way will save a soul from death, and will cover a
multitude of sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter](pe1.md)
