[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tob)  [Next](aes.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Judith

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the twelfth year of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzar, who reigned in Nineveh, the great city, in the days of
Arphaxad, who reigned over the Medes in Ecbatane

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and who built walls around Ecbatane out of
stones hewn three cubits wide and six cubits long, and made the height
of the wall seventy cubits and its width fifty cubits,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> and set the towers of its gates a hundred
cubits high and at the foundation sixty cubits wide,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> and made its gates so that they were raised
to a height of seventy cubits and a width of forty cubits, for the going
forth of his mighty armies and for the setting in array of his foot
soldiers,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> in those very days, king Nebuchadnezzar
made war with king Arphaxad on the great plain, which is the plain on
the borders of Ragau.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And all those who lived in the hill country
came to him there; and all who lived by the Euphrates and the Tigris and
the Hydaspes, and on the plain of Arioch the king of the Elymeans, and
very many nations of the sons of Chelod assembled themselves for the
battle.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Then Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians
sent to all who lived in Persia, and to all who lived westward, and to
those who lived in Cilicia and Damascus and Libanus and Antilibanus, and
to all who lived upon the sea coast,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> and to those among the nations who were
from Carmel and Galaad and the higher Galilee and the great plain of
Esdrelom,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> and to all who were in Samaria and its
cities, and beyond the Jordan to Jerusalem and Bethany and Chelus and
Kadesh, and the river of Egypt, and Taphnes and Ramesse, and all the
land of Gesem,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> and even to beyond Tanis and Memphis, and
to all the inhabitants of Egypt, all the way to borders of Ethiopia.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But all the inhabitants of the land made
light of the commandment of Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians;
neither did they go into the battle with him, for they were not afraid
of him. Yes, they considered him to be only one man; and they sent his
ambassadors away from them with nothing to show except disgrace.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Therefore Nebuchadnezzar was very angry
with all this country; and he swore by his throne and kingdom that he
would surely be avenged upon all those coasts of Cilicia and Damascus
and Syria, and that he would slay with the sword all the inhabitants of
the land of Moab, and the children of Ammon, and all Judea, and all who
were in Egypt, up to the very borders of the two seas.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Then he marched in battle array with his
power against king Arphaxad in the seventeenth year, and he prevailed in
his battle, for he overthrew all the power of Arphaxad and all his
horsemen and all his chariots,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and became lord of his cities. And he
came to Ecbatane and took the towers and pillaged its streets and turned
its beauty into shame.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> He also overpowered Arphaxad at the
mountains of Ragau and struck him through with his darts, and destroyed
him utterly on that day.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> So he returned afterward to Nineveh, both
he and all his company of diverse nations, who were a very great
multitude of men of war; and there he took his ease and banqueted, both
he and his army, for one hundred twenty days.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And in the eighteenth year, on the
twenty-second day of the first month, there was talk in the house of
Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians that he should, as he had said,
avenge himself upon all the earth.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So he called all his officers to him, and
all his nobles, and discussed with them his secret plan, and, with his
own mouth, he ensured the scourging of the whole earth.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Then they decreed the destruction of all
flesh, of all who did not obey the commandment of his mouth.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And when he had ended his counsel,
Nebuchadnezzar king of the Assyrians called Holofernes the chief captain
of his army, who was next to him, and said to him:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> "Thus says the great king, the lord of the
whole earth, 'Behold, you will go forth from my presence and take with
you men who trust in their own strength, one hundred twenty thousand
foot soldiers; and the number of horses with their riders, twelve
thousand.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And you will go against all the west
country, because they disobeyed my commandment.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And you will declare to them that they
should prepare for me earth and water, for I will go forth in my wrath
against them and will cover the whole face of the earth with the feet of
my army, and I will give them as prey to them,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> so that their slain will fill their
valleys, and brooks and the river will be filled with their dead until
it overflows,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and I will lead them as captives to the
utmost parts of all the earth.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> You therefore will go forth and capture
for me beforehand all their coasts; and if they will yield themselves to
you, you will reserve them for me until the day of their punishment.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But concerning those who rebel, do not
allow your eyes to pity them, but slaughter them and plunder them
wherever you go.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For as I live, and by the power of my
kingdom, whatsoever I have spoken, I will do by my own hand.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And take heed that you transgress none of
the commandments of your lord, but accomplish them fully, as I have
commanded you, and do not defer to them.' "

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then Holofernes went forth from the
presence of his lord, and called all the governors and captains, and the
officers of the army of Assur.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And he mustered the chosen men for the
battle, as his lord had commanded him, to a force of one hundred twenty
thousand, plus twelve thousand archers on horseback;

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> and he arrayed them just as a great army
is ordered for war.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And he took camels and asses for their
carriages, a very great number; and sheep and oxen and goats without
number for their provision,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> and plenty of rations for every man of
the army, and very much gold and silver from the king's house.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Then he went forth with all his power to
precede king Nebuchadnezzar on the journey, and to cover all the face of
the earth westward with their chariots and horsemen, and their chosen
foot soldiers.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Also a great number of diverse countries
came with them, like locusts and like the sand of the earth, for their
multitude was without number.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And they went forth from Nineveh for
three days' journey toward the plain of Bectileth, and pitched camp
outside Bectileth, near the mountain which is at the left hand of upper
Cilicia.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Then he took all his army, his foot
soldiers, and horsemen and chariots, and went from there into the hill
country;

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and he destroyed Phud and Lud, and
pillaged all the children of Rasses, and the children of Israel who were
toward the wilderness at the south of the land of the Chellians.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Then he went over the Euphrates, and went
through Mesopotamia, and destroyed all the high cities along the river
Arbonai, all the way to the sea.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And he captured the borders of Cilicia,
and killed all who resisted him, and came to the borders of Japheth,
toward the south, opposite Arabia.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> He also encircled all the children of
Madian, and burned up their tabernacles, and plundered their sheep pens.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Then he went down into the plain of
Damascus, at the time of the wheat harvest, and burnt up all their
fields, and destroyed their flocks and herds; he also pillaged their
cities, and utterly laid waste to their countries, and struck down all
their young men with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Therefore the fear and dread of him fell
upon all the inhabitants of the sea coasts, who were in Sidon and Tyrus,
and those who lived in Sur and Ocina, and all who lived in Jemnaan. And
those who lived in Azotus and Ascalon feared him greatly.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> So they sent ambassadors to him to entreat
him for peace, saying,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> "Behold, we, the servants of Nebuchadnezzar
the great king, lie before you; use us as it seems good in your sight.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Behold, our houses and all our places, and
all our fields of wheat, and flocks and herds, and all the lodges of our
tents lie before your face; use them as it pleases you.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Behold, even our cities and their
inhabitants are your servants; come and deal with them as it seems good
to you."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> So the men came to Holofernes and made
declaration before him in this way.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Then he came down toward the sea coast,
both he and his army, and set garrisons in the high cities, and took out
of them chosen men to assist them.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> So they and all the surrounding country
received them with garlands, with dances, and with timbrels.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Yet he cast down their barriers and cut
down their sacred groves; for he had decreed the destruction of all the
gods of the land, so that all nations should worship Nebuchadnezzar
only, and so that all tongues and tribes should call upon him as god.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> He also came across Esdraelon near Dothaim,
across the great strait of Judea.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he pitched camp between Geba and
Scythopolis, and he delayed there a whole month, so that he could gather
together all the carriages of his army.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now the children of Israel, who lived in
Judea, heard all that Holofernes the chief captain of Nebuchadnezzar
king of the Assyrians had done to the nations, and in what way he had
pillaged all their temples and brought them to nothing.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Therefore they were exceedingly afraid of
him, and were troubled for Jerusalem and for the temple of the Lord
their God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For they were newly-returned from the
captivity, and all the people of Judea had only recently gathered
together; and the vessels and the altar and the house had been
sanctified after the profanation.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Therefore they sent into all the coasts of
Samaria and the villages, and to Bethoron and Belmen and Jericho, and to
Choba and Esora, and to the valley of Salem;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and they captured for themselves in advance
all the tops of the high mountains, and fortified the villages which
were in them, and stored up food as provisions for war, for their fields
had been recently reaped.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Also, Joacim the high priest, who was in
those days in Jerusalem, wrote to those who lived in Bethulia and
Betomestham, which is opposite Esdraelon toward the open country near
Dothaim,

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> charging them to hold the passages of the
hill country; for through them there was an entrance into Judea, and it
was easy to stop those who would come up, because the passage was
narrow, for two men at the most.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And the children of Israel did as Joacim
the high priest had commanded them, with the elders of all the people of
Israel, who lived at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Then every man cried to God with great
fervor, and they humbled their souls with great vehemence,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> and both they and their wives and their
children, and their cattle, and every stranger and hired hand, and their
servants bought with money, put sackcloth on their loins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thus every man, and the women and little
children, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, fell before the temple and
cast ashes upon their heads and spread out their sackcloth before the
face of the Lord; they also put sackcloth around the altar.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And they cried to the God of Israel, all
with one consent earnestly, so that he would not give over their
children as prey and their wives for a spoil and the cities of their
inheritance to destruction and the sanctuary to profanation and
reproach, for the nations to rejoice over them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> So God heard their prayers and looked
upon their afflictions; for the people fasted many days in all Judea and
Jerusalem before the sanctuary of the Lord Almighty.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And Joacim the high priest, and all the
priests who stood before the Lord and those who ministered to the Lord,
had their loins dressed with sackcloth, and offered the daily burnt
offerings with the vows and free gifts of the people,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> and had ashes on their liturgical
headdresses; and they cried to the Lord with all their power, so that he
would look upon all the house of Israel graciously.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then was it declared to Holofernes, the
chief captain of the army of Assur, that the children of Israel had
prepared for war and had shut up the passages of the hill country and
had fortified all the tops of the high hills and had laid impediments in
the open plains.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Because of this, he was very angry, and he
called all the princes of Moab and the captains of Ammon and all the
governors of the sea coast,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> and he said to them, "Tell me now, you sons
of Canaan, who is this people, who dwell in the hill country, and which
cities do they inhabit, and what is the multitude of their army, and
wherein is their power and strength, and what king or captain of their
army is set over them,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> and why are they resolved not to come and
meet me, more so than all the inhabitants of the west?"

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Then Achior, the captain of all the sons of
Ammon, said, "Let my lord now hear a word from the mouth of your servant
and I will declare to you the truth concerning this people, who dwell
near you and inhabit the hill countries, and no lie will come out of the
mouth of your servant.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This people is descended from the
Chaldeans,

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> and they resided temporarily and until
recently in Mesopotamia, because they would not follow the gods of their
fathers, who were in the land of Chaldea.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> For they left the way of their ancestors
and worshipped the God of heaven, the God they knew; so they cast them
out from the face of their gods, and they fled into Mesopotamia and
lodged there for many days.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Then their God commanded them to depart
from the place where they lived and to go into the land of Canaan; there
they lived and were increased with gold and silver and with very much
cattle.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> But when a famine covered all the land of
Canaan, they went down into Egypt and lodged there; meanwhile they were
nourished and became a great multitude there, so that one could not
number their nation.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Therefore the king of Egypt rose up
against them, and he dealt subtly with them and brought them low with
labor in brick and made them slaves.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then they cried to their God and he smote
all the land of Egypt with incurable plagues, so the Egyptians cast them
out of their sight.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And God dried the Red Sea before them

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and brought them to mount Sinai and
Kadesh-Barnea, and cast out all who lived in the wilderness.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> So they lived in the land of the
Amorites, and by their strength they destroyed all those who were of
Esebon, and passing over the Jordan they possessed all the hill country.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And they cast out before them the
Canaanite, the Pherezite, the Jebusite, and the Sychemite, and all the
Gergesites, and they lived in that country for many days.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> "While they did not sin before their God,
they prospered, because the God who hates iniquity was with them.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But when they departed from the way which
he appointed for them, they were destroyed in many battles very badly
and were led captive into a land which was not their own, and the temple
of their God was cast to the ground, and their cities were taken by the
enemies.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But now are they returned to their God
and have returned from the places where they were scattered and have
possessed Jerusalem, where their sanctuary is, and are seated in the
hill country, for it had been desolate.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Now therefore, my lord and governor, if
there is any ignorance in this people and they sin against their God,
let us consider that this will be their ruin, and let us go up and we
will overcome them.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> But if there is no iniquity in their
nation, let my lord now pass by, lest their Lord defend them and their
God be for them, and we become a reproach before all the world."

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And when Achior had finished these
sayings, all the people standing around the tent murmured; and the chief
men of Holofernes, and all who lived by the seaside and in Moab, were
saying that he should kill him.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For they said, "We will not be afraid of
the faces of the children of Israel, for we see that they are a people
who have no strength or power for a strong battle.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Now therefore, lord Holofernes, we will
go up and they will be a prey to be devoured by all your army."

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And when the tumult of men who were around
the council were quiet, Holofernes, the chief captain of the army of
Assur, said to Achior and all the Moabites in front of all the company
of the other nations:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> "And who are you, Achior and the hired
hands of Ephraim, that you would prophesy against us as today and would
say that we should not make war with the people of Israel because their
God will defend them? And who is God but Nebuchadnezzar?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> He will send his power and will destroy
them from the face of the earth and their God will not deliver them; but
we, his servants, will destroy them as if they were one man; for they
are not able to withstand the power of our horses.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For with them, we will tread them under
foot, and their mountains will be drunken with their blood and their
fields will be filled with their dead bodies and their footsteps will
not be able to stand before us, for they will utterly perish, as king
Nebuchadnezzar, lord of all the earth, has said. And he said, 'None of
my words will be in vain.'

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> "And you, Achior, a hired hand of Ammon,
who has spoken these words on the day of your iniquity, will see my face
no more from this day forward, until I take vengeance on this nation
which came out of Egypt.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And then the sword of my army and the
multitude of those who serve me will pass through your sides, and you
will fall among their slain, when I return.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Now therefore, my servants will bring you
back into the hill country and will set you in one of the cities of the
passages;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and you will not perish, until you are
destroyed with them.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And if you persuade yourself in your mind
that they will be taken, do not let your countenance fall; I have spoken
it and none of my words will be in vain."

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Then Holofernes commanded his servants,
who served in his tent, to take Achior and bring him to Bethulia and
deliver him into the hands of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So his servants took him and brought him
out of the camp into the plain, and they went from the midst of the
plain into the hill country, and they came to the fountains which were
under Bethulia.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And when the men of the city saw them,
they took up their weapons and went out of the city to the top of the
hill, and every man who was armed with a sling kept them from coming up
by casting stones against them.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Nevertheless, having gotten secretly
under the hill, they bound Achior and threw him down, and they left him
at the foot of the hill and returned to their lord.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> But the Israelites descended from their
city and came to him, and they freed him and brought him to Bethulia,
and presented him to the governors of the city,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> who were in those days Uzziah the son of
Micah of the tribe of Simeon, and Chabris the son of Gothoniel, and
Charmis the son of Melchiel.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And they called together all the elders
of the city, and all their youth ran together, and their women, to the
assembly, and they set Achior in the midst of all their people. Then
Uzziah asked him what had happened.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And he answered and declared to them the
words of the council of Holofernes, and all the words which he had
spoken in the midst of the princes of Assur, and whatsoever Holofernes
had spoken proudly against the house of Israel.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Then the people fell down and worshipped
God, and cried to God saying,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> "O Lord God of heaven, behold their pride
and pity the low estate of our nation and look upon the face of those
who are sanctified for you this day."

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Then they comforted Achior and praised
him greatly.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And Uzziah took him out of the assembly
to his house and made a feast for the elders. And they called on the God
of Israel all that night for help.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The next day Holofernes commanded all his
army and all his people who had arrived take his side that they should
remove their camp from opposite Bethulia and capture in advance the
ascents of the hill country in order to make war against the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Then their strong men removed their camps
on that day; and the army of the men of war was one hundred seventy
thousand foot soldiers, and twelve thousand horsemen, besides the
baggage and the other men who were afoot among them, a very great
multitude.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And they camped in the valley near
Bethulia, by the spring, and they spread themselves in width across
Dothaim even to Belmaim, and in length from Bethulia to Cynamon, which
is opposite Esdraelon.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Now the children of Israel, when they saw
the multitude of them, were greatly troubled, and everyone said to his
neighbor, "Now these men will wipe clean the face of the earth, for
neither the high mountains, nor the valleys, nor the hills, are able to
bear their weight."

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Then every man took up his weapons of war,
and when they had kindled fires on their towers, they remained and
watched all that night.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But on the second day, Holofernes brought
forth all his horsemen in the sight of the children of Israel, who were
in Bethulia,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> and viewed the passages up to the city; and
he went to the origins of their waters and captured them, and he set
garrisons of men of war over them, and he himself returned toward his
people.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Then they came to him, all the chiefs of
the children of Esau and all the governors of the people of Moab and the
captains of the sea coast, and they said,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> "Let our lord now hear a word, so that
there will not be a loss among your army.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For this people of the children of Israel
do not trust in their spears, but in the height of the mountains where
they dwell, for it is not easy to come up to the tops of their
mountains.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now therefore, my lord, do not fight
against them in battle array and not so much as one man among your
people will perish.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Remain in your camp and keep all the men
of your army there, and let us your servants take hold of the springs of
water, which issue forth at the foot of the mountain.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For all the inhabitants of Bethulia have
their water there; so thirst will kill them and they will give up their
city, and we and our people will go up to the tops of the mountains
nearby and will camp on them to watch so that none can go out of the
city.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> So they and their wives and their
children will be consumed with fiery thirst, as if it were a sword
brought against them, and so they will be overthrown in the streets
where they dwell.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Thus will you render them an evil reward,
because they rebelled and did not meet your person peaceably."

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And these words pleased Holofernes and
all his servants, and he decided to do as they had said.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> So the camp of the children of Ammon
departed, and with them five thousand of the Assyrians, and they pitched
camp in the valley and captured the waters and the origins of the waters
of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Then the children of Esau went up with
the children of Ammon and camped in the hill country opposite Dothaim.
And they sent some of them toward the south and toward the east opposite
Ekrebel, near Chusi upon the brook Mochmur; and the rest of the army of
the Assyrians camped in the plain and covered the face of the whole
land; and their tents and carriages were pitched for a very great
multitude.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Then the children of Israel cried to the
Lord their God, because their heart failed, for all their enemies had
surrounded them and there was no way to escape out from among them.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Thus all the company of Assur remained
around them, both their foot soldiers, chariots, and horsemen, for
thirty-four days, so that all their vessels of water ran dry for all the
inhabitants of Bethulia

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> and the cisterns were emptied. And they
did not have enough water to drink their fill for even one day, for they
rationed their water.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Therefore their young children lost
heart, and their women and young men fainted for thirst and fell down in
the streets of the city and by the passageways of the gates; and there
was no longer any strength in them.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Then all the people assembled before
Uzziah and the chiefs of the city, including young men and women and
children, and they cried with a loud voice and said before all the
elders,

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> "God be judge between us and you, for you
have done us great injury in that you have not made peace with the
children of Assur.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> For now we have no helper, but God has
sold us into their hands, so that we should be thrown down before them
with thirst and great destruction.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Now therefore call them to you and
deliver the whole city for a spoil to the people of Holofernes and to
all his army.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> For it is better for us to be made a
spoil for them than to die of thirst; for we will be his servants, so
that our souls may live and we will not see the death of our infants
before our eyes, nor the dying of our wives or our children.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> We present as witness against you: the
heaven and the earth, and our God and Lord of our fathers, who punishes
us according to our sins and the sins of our fathers, so that he will
not allow what we have described to happen on this day."

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Then there was great weeping in the midst
of the assembly, all with one consent; and they cried to the Lord God
with a loud voice.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> Then Uzziah said to them, "Brethren, be
courageous. Let us endure yet five days, in that period of time the Lord
our God may turn his mercy toward us, for he will not forsake us
utterly.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And if these days pass and no help comes
to us, I will do according to your word."

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> And he dispersed the people, each to
their own posts; and they went to the walls and towers of their city,
and sent the women and children into their houses; and they were brought
very low in the city.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now at that time Judith heard about this;
she was the daughter of Merari, the son of Ox, the son of Joseph, the
son of Ozel, the son of Elcia, the son of Ananiah, the son of Gedeon,
the son of Raphaim, the son of Acitho, the son of Eliu, the son of
Eliab, the son of Nathanael, the son of Samael, the son of Salasadal,
the son of Israel.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And Manasseh was her husband, of her tribe
and kindred, who died during the barley harvest.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For as he stood overseeing those who bound
sheaves in the field, the heat affected his head, and he fell on his
bed, and died in the city of Bethulia; and they buried him with his
fathers in the field between Dothaim and Balamo.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> So Judith was a widow in her house three
years and four months.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And she made her a tent on the top of her
house; and she put sackcloth on her loins and wore her widow's clothing.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And she fasted all the days of her
widowhood, except for the eves of the sabbaths and the sabbaths, and the
eves of the new moons and the new moons, and the feasts and solemn days
of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> She also had a graceful temperament and was
very beautiful to behold. And her husband Manasseh had left her gold and
silver, and menservants and maidservants, and cattle and lands, and she
remained with them.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And there was no one who spoke an ill word
about her, for she feared God greatly.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Now she heard the evil words of the people
against the governor and that they fainted for lack of water; for Judith
had heard all the words that Uzziah had spoken to them and that he had
sworn to deliver the city to the Assyrians after five days.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> So then she sent her woman servant, who
was in charge of everything that she had, to call Uzziah and Chabris and
Charmis, the elders of the city.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they came to her, and she said to
them, "Hear me now, you governors of the inhabitants of Bethulia; for
your words which you spoke before the people this day are not right,
concerning this oath which you made and pronounced between God and
yourselves, and your promise to deliver the city to our enemies, unless
within these days the Lord turns to help you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And now who are you to have tempted God
this day, and to stand among the children of men instead of God?

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And now test the Lord Almighty, but you
will never know anything.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For you cannot find the depth of the
heart of man, neither can you perceive the things which he thinks; so
then how can you search out God, who has made all these things, and know
his mind or comprehend his purpose? No, my brethren, do not provoke the
Lord our God to anger.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> "For if he will not help us within these
five days, he has power to defend us when he will, even every day, or to
destroy us before our enemies.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Do not bind the plans of the Lord our
God; for God is not like man as if he could be threatened; neither is he
like the son of man so that he would be wavering.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Therefore let us wait for salvation from
him and call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice, if it
pleases him.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For there arose none in our age, neither
is there any now in these days, neither tribe, nor family, nor people,
nor city among us, who worship gods made with hands, as has happened in
past times.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For this reason our fathers were given to
the sword and as a spoil and had a great fall before our enemies.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> But we know no other God, therefore we
trust that he will not despise us, nor any of our nation.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> "For if we are overcome, then all Judea
will lie waste and our sanctuary will be pillaged; and he will place the
blame for the profanation of it at our mouth;

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> and the slaughter of our brethren and the
captivity of the country and the desolation of our inheritance, he will
blame on our heads among the Gentiles, wherever we will be in captivity;
and we will be an offence and a reproach to all those who possess us.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> For our servitude will not be directed
towards our benefit, but the Lord our God will turn it to our dishonor.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Now therefore, O brethren, let us show an
example to our brethren, because their hearts depend on us, and the
sanctuary and the house and the altar rest on us.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Moreover, let us give thanks to the Lord
our God, who tests us, even as he did our fathers.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Remember the things he did to Abraham,
and how he tested Isaac, and what happened to Jacob in Mesopotamia of
Syria, when he kept the sheep of Laban his mother's brother.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> For he has not tested us in the fire, as
he did them for the examination of their hearts, neither has he taken
vengeance on us; but the Lord does scourge those who come near to him,
to admonish them."

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Then Uzziah said to her, "All that you
have spoken, you have spoken with a good heart and there is no one who
can refute your words.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For this is not the first day that your
wisdom has been manifested; but from the beginning of your days all the
people have known your understanding, because the disposition of your
heart has been good.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> But the people were very thirsty; and
they compelled us to do to them as we have spoken and to bring an oath
on ourselves, which we will not break.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Now therefore pray for us, because you
are a godly woman, and then the Lord will send us rain to fill our
cisterns and we will faint no more."

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Then Judith said to them, "Listen to me
and I will do something which will be remembered throughout all
generations among the children of our nation.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> You will watch this night at the gate,
and I will go forth with my woman servant; and, within the days that you
have promised to deliver the city to our enemies, the Lord will visit
Israel by my hand.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> But do not ask me what I will do, for I
will not reveal it to you until the things that I do are completed."

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Then Uzziah and the princes said to her,
"Go in peace, and may the Lord God go before you to take vengeance on
our enemies."

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> So they returned from the tent and went
to their posts.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Judith fell upon her face and put ashes on
her head and uncovered the sackcloth she was wearing; and, about the
time that the incense of that evening was offered in Jerusalem in the
house of the Lord, Judith cried with a loud voice, and said,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> "O Lord God of my father Simeon, to whom
you gave a sword to take vengeance on the strangers, who loosened the
girdle of a maid to defile her, and uncovered the thigh to her shame,
and polluted her virginity to her reproach; for you said, 'It will not
be so,' and yet they did so.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Therefore you gave their rulers to be
slain, so that they dyed their bed in blood, being deceived, and you
struck the servants with their lords and the lords upon their thrones;

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> and you have given their wives for a prey
and their daughters to be captives and all their spoils to be divided
among your dear children, who were moved with your zeal and abhorred the
pollution of their blood and called upon you for aid. O God, my God,
hear me also for I am a widow.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> "And you have wrought not only those
things, but also the things which happened before and which followed
afterwards; you have thought about the things which are now and which
are to come.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Yes, the things you established were ready
at hand, and they said, 'Lo, we are here,' for all your ways are
prepared and your judgments are in your foreknowledge.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> For, behold, the Assyrians are multiplied
in their power; they are exalted with horse and man; they glory in the
strength of their foot soldiers; they trust in shield and spear and bow
and sling; and they do not know that you are the Lord who breaks the
battles: the Lord is your name.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Throw down their strength in your power and
bring down their force in your wrath; for they have resolved to defile
your sanctuary and to pollute the tabernacle where your glorious name
rests and to cast down with sword the horn of your altar.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Behold their pride and send your wrath upon
their heads; give into my hand, the hand of a widow, the power that I
have conceived.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Strike, by the deceit of my lips, the
servant with the prince, and the prince with the servant; break down
their stateliness by the hand of a woman.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For your power is not found in numbers,
nor your might in strong men; for you are a God of the afflicted, a
helper of the oppressed, an upholder of the weak, a protector of the
forlorn, a savior of those who are without hope.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> "I pray to you, I beg you, O God of my
father and God of the inheritance of Israel, Lord of the heavens and the
earth, Creator of the waters, King of every creature, hear my prayer;

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> and make my speech and deceit to be their
wound and stripe, who have resolved cruel things against your covenant
and your hallowed house, and against the top of Zion and the house of
the possession of your children;

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and so make every nation and tribe
acknowledge that you are the God of all power and might, and that there
is no other who protects the people of Israel but you."

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now after this, she ceased to cry to the
God of Israel, and she completed all these words.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> She rose where she had fallen down and
called her maid; and she went down into the house in which she lived on
the sabbath days and on her feast days,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> and she pulled off the sackcloth which
she had on, and put off the garments of her widowhood, and washed her
body all over with water, and anointed herself with precious ointment,
and braided the hair of her head and put a headdress on it, and put on
her garments of gladness, which she used to wear during the life of
Manasseh her husband.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And she put sandals on her feet, and she
put on her bracelets and her chains and her rings and her earrings and
all her ornaments, and she decked herself out boldly, to allure the eyes
of all men who might see her.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Then she gave her maid a bottle of wine
and a cruse of oil, and filled a bag with parched grain and lumps of
figs and with fine bread; so she folded all these things together and
laid them upon her.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Thus they went forth to the gate of the
city of Bethulia, and they found standing there Uzziah and the elders of
the city, Chabris and Charmis.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when they saw her, that her
countenance was altered and her apparel was changed, they wondered at
her beauty very greatly and said to her,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> "May God, the God of our fathers, give
you favor and accomplish your endeavors to the glory of the children of
Israel and to the exaltation of Jerusalem." Then they worshipped God.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And she said to them, "Command the gates
of the city to be opened for me, so that I may go forth to accomplish
the things that you have discussed with me." So they commanded the young
men to open it for her, as she had said.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And when they had done so, Judith went
out, she and her maid with her; and the men of the city looked after
her, until she had gone down the mountain and had passed the valley and
they could see her no more.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Thus they went straight ahead in the
valley, and the first watch of the Assyrians met her

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> and captured her; and they asked her,
"Of what people are you? And where have you come from? And where are you
going?" And she said, "I am a woman of the Hebrews, and I have fled from
them, for they will be given over to you to be consumed.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And I am going before Holofernes the
chief captain of your army, to declare words of truth; and I will show
him a way, by which he can go and win all the hill country, without
losing the body or life of any of his men."

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Now when the men heard her words and
beheld her countenance, they wondered greatly at her beauty and said to
her,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> "You have saved your life because you
have hurried to come down to the presence of our lord. Now therefore
come to his tent, and some of us will conduct you, until they have
delivered you to his hands.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And when you stand before him, do not
be afraid in your heart, but reveal to him what you have said, and he
will treat you well."

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Then they chose from among them a
hundred men to accompany her and her maid; and they brought her to the
tent of Holofernes.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Then a crowd began to assemble from
throughout all the camp, for the news of her arrival had spread among
the tents, and they gathered around her as she stood outside the tent of
Holofernes, until they had told him about her.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And they wondered at her beauty and
admired the children of Israel because of her, and each one said to his
neighbor, "Who could despise this people, who have such women among
them? Surely it is not good for one man among them to be left, who,
being set free, might deceive the whole earth."

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And those who lay near Holofernes went
out, and they and all his servants brought her into the tent.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Now Holofernes rested on his bed under
a canopy, which was woven with purple and gold and emeralds and precious
stones.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> So they informed him about her; and he
came out in front of his tent with silver lamps going before him.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And when Judith was presented before
him and his servants, they all marveled at the beauty of her
countenance; and she fell down upon her face and did him reverence, and
his servants lifted her up.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Then Holofernes said to her, "Woman, be
of good comfort; fear not in your heart. For I have never hurt any who
were willing to serve Nebuchadnezzar, the king of all the earth.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now therefore, if your people who dwell
in the mountains had not treated me heedlessly, I would not have lifted
up my spear against them, but they have done these things to themselves.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> But now tell me how you have fled from
them and come to us; for you have reached safety, so be of good comfort;
you will live this night and hereafter.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For none will hurt you, but they will
treat you well, as they do the servants of king Nebuchadnezzar my lord."

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Then Judith said to him, "Receive the
words of your servant and permit your handmaid to speak in your
presence, and I will declare no lie to my lord this night.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And if you will follow the words of your
handmaid, God will bring something perfectly to pass by you, and my lord
will not fail in his purposes.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> As Nebuchadnezzar king of all the earth
lives, and as his power lives, he has sent you for the upholding of
every living thing; for not only men will serve him by you, but also the
beasts of the field, and the cattle and the birds of the air, will live
by your power under Nebuchadnezzar and all his house.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> For we have heard of your wisdom and your
policies, and it is reported across all the earth, that you alone are
excellent in all the kingdom, and mighty in knowledge, and wonderful in
feats of war.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> "Now as concerning the matter which
Achior spoke about in your council, we have heard his words; for the men
of Bethulia saved him, and he declared to them all that he had spoken to
you.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Therefore, O lord and governor, respect
not his word, but store it in your heart, for it is true; for our nation
will not be punished, nor can sword prevail against them, unless they
sin against their God.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And now, so that my lord will not be
defeated and frustrated in his purpose, even death has now fallen upon
them and their sin has overtaken them, and therefore they will provoke
their God to anger whenever they do what is not right to be done.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> For their food stores fail them and
their water supply is scant, and they have decided to lay hands on their
cattle, and have resolved to consume all those things which God has
forbidden them to eat by his laws.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And they are resolved to use up the
first fruits and the tenths of wine and oil, which they had sanctified
and which are reserved for the priests who serve in Jerusalem before the
face of our God, the things it is not lawful for any of the people so
much as to touch with their hands.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> For they have sent an envoy to
Jerusalem, because those who dwell there have also done the same, to
bring them a license from the senate.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Now when they bring them word, they
will immediately do it, and they will be given to you to be destroyed
the same day.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> "Therefore I, your handmaid, knowing
all this, have fled from their presence; and God has sent me to work
things with you, things at which all the earth will be astonished,
whosoever hears it.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> For your servant is religious and
serves the God of heaven day and night. Therefore, my lord, I will
remain with you now, and your servant will go out by night into the
valley, and I will pray to God, and he will tell me when they have
committed their sins.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And I will return and reveal it to you.
Then you will go forth with all your army, and there will be none among
them who will withstand you.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And I will lead you through the midst
of Judea, until you come against Jerusalem, and I will set your throne
in the midst thereof; and you will drive them as sheep which have no
shepherd, and a dog will not so much as open his mouth at you; for these
things were told to me according to my foreknowledge, and they were
declared to me, and I am sent to tell you."

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then her words pleased Holofernes and
all his servants; and they marveled at her wisdom and said,

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> "There is no other such woman from one
end of the earth to the other, both for beauty of face and wisdom of
words."

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Likewise Holofernes said to her, "God
has done well to send you before the sons of your people, so that
strength might be in our hands and destruction be on those who regard my
lord lightly.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And now you are both beautiful in your
countenance and clever in your words; surely if you do as you have
spoken, your God will be my God, and you will dwell in the house of king
Nebuchadnezzar and will be renowned throughout the whole earth."

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Then he commanded them to bring her in to
where his plate was set; and he directed them to prepare for her from
his own meats and that she should drink from his own wine.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And Judith said, "I will not eat of it,
lest there be an offence, but provision will be made for me from the
things which I have brought."

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Then Holofernes said to her, "If your
provisions should fail, how should we give you the like? For there are
none among us from your nation."

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then Judith said to him, "As your soul
lives, my lord, your handmaid will not use up those things which I have
before the Lord works by my hand the things he has determined."

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Then the servants of Holofernes brought
her into the tent, and she slept until midnight, and she arose when it
was toward the morning watch.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And she sent to Holofernes, saying, "Let
my lord now command that your handmaid may go forth to prayer."

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Then Holofernes commanded his guard not
to prevent her; thus she resided in the camp for three days, and went
out in the night into the valley of Bethulia and washed herself in a
spring of water by the camp.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And when she came out, she beseeched the
Lord God of Israel to direct her way in order to accomplish the raising
up of the children of her people.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> So she came in clean and remained in the
tent until she ate her meat in the evening.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And on the fourth day, Holofernes made
a feast for his own servants only, and he called none of the officers to
the banquet.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Then he said to Bagoas the eunuch, who
was in charge of all that he had, "Go now and persuade this Hebrew woman
who is with you that she should come to us, and eat and drink with us.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For, see, it will be a shame upon our
person, if we let such a woman go without having had her company; for if
we do not draw her to us, she will laugh at us in scorn."

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Then Bagoas went from the presence of
Holofernes, and he came to her and said, "Let not this fair gentlewoman
fear to approach my lord and to be honored in his presence, and to drink
wine and be merry with us, and to become this day like one of the
daughters of the Assyrians, who serve in the house of Nebuchadnezzar."

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Then Judith said to him, "Who am I now,
that I should contradict my lord? Surely whatever pleases him I will do
without hesitation, and it will be my joy until the day of my death."

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> So she arose, and she decked herself
out with her apparel and all her woman's attire. And her maid went and
laid soft skins on the ground for her opposite Holofernes, which she had
received from Bagoas for her daily use, so that she might sit and eat
upon them.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Now when Judith came in and sat down
with Holofernes, his heart was inflamed with her, and his mind was
stirred up, and he greatly desired her company; for he had been waiting
for sometime to deceive her, even from the day that he had first seen
her.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Then Holofernes said to her, "Drink now
and be merry with us."

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> So Judith said, "I will drink now, my
lord, because my life is exalted in me this day more than all the days
since I was born."

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Then she took and ate and drank before
him the things which her maid had prepared.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And Holofernes took great delight in
her, and he drank more wine than he had drunk at any time in one day
since he was born.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now when evening had arrived, his
servants hurried to depart, and Bagoas shut his tent from the outside
and dismissed the waiters from the presence of his lord; and they went
to their beds, for they were all weary because the feast had been long.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And Judith was left alone in the tent
with Holofernes lying by himself on his bed, for he was filled with
wine.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Now Judith had commanded her maid to
stand outside her bedroom and to wait for her to go forth, as she did
daily; for she said she would go forth to her prayers, and she spoke to
Bagoas towards the same purpose.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> So everyone left and no one was left in
the bedroom, neither little nor great. Then Judith, standing by his bed,
said in her heart: "O Lord God of all power, look at this time upon the
works of my hands for the exaltation of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> For now is the time to help your
inheritance and to execute your purposes for the destruction of the
enemies who have risen against us."

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Then she went to the pillar of the bed,
which was at Holofernes' head, and took down his broadsword from there.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And she approached his bed, and took hold
of the hair of his head, and said, "Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel,
this day."

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And she twice struck his neck with all
her might, and she took his head away from him.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And she tumbled his body down from the
bed, and pulled down the canopy from the pillars; and, soon after, she
went out and gave the head of Holofernes to her maid.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And she put it in her bag of meat, so
these two went together, according to their custom, to prayer; and when
they passed the camp, they circled the valley and went up the mountain
of Bethulia and came to its gates.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Then Judith said, from far off to the
watchmen at the gate, "Open, open the gate now! God, our God, is with us
to show his power yet in Jerusalem and his forces against the enemy, as
he has truly done on this day!"

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Now when the men of her city heard her
voice, they hurried down to the gate of their city and they called the
elders of the city.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And then they ran all together, both
small and great, for it was surprising to them that she had returned. So
they opened the gate and received them; and they made a fire for a
light, and they stood all around them.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Then she said to them with a loud
voice, "Praise, praise God, praise God, I say, for he has not taken away
his mercy from the house of Israel, but has destroyed our enemies by my
hands this night."

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> So she took the head out of the bag and
showed it and said to them, "Behold the head of Holofernes, the chief
captain of the army of Assur, and behold the canopy where he had lain in
his drunkenness; and the Lord has struck him by the hand of a woman.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> As the Lord lives, who has preserved me
in the path that I took, my attractiveness has deceived him to his
destruction, and yet he did not commit sin with me, to defile and shame
me."

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Then all the people were wonderfully
astonished, and bowed themselves and worshipped God, and said with one
accord, "Blessed are you, O our God, who has this day brought to nothing
the enemies of your people!"

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Then Uzziah said to her, "O daughter,
blessed are you of the most high God above all the women upon the earth;
and blessed is the Lord God, who has created the heavens and the earth,
who guided you in cutting off the head of the chief of our enemies.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Because of this, your resoluteness will
not depart from the heart of men, who will remember the power of God for
ever.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And may God turn these things to your
benefit as a perpetual praise, to assist you in good things because you
have not withheld your life during the affliction of our nation, but
have revenged our ruin, walking a straight path before our God." And all
the people said, "Amen! Amen!"

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then Judith said to them, "Hear me now,
my brethren! Take this head and hang it on the highest place of your
walls!

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And so, as soon as morning appears and
the sun shines upon the earth, everyone must take his weapons and go
forth, every valiant man out of the city, and with a captain set over
them, as though you were going down into the field toward the watch of
the Assyrians; but do not go down.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Then they will take their amour and go
into their camp and call for the captains of the army of Assur; and they
will run to the tent of Holofernes, but will not find him; then fear
will fall upon them, and they will flee before your face.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> So then you, and all who inhabit the
coast of Israel, will pursue them and overthrow them as they go.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> But before you do these things, call
Achior the Ammonite to me, so that he may see and know him who despised
the house of Israel and who sent him to us as if to his death."

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Then they called Achior out of the house
of Uzziah; and when he arrived and saw the head of Holofernes in a man's
hand in the assembly of the people, he fell down on his face and
fainted.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> But when they had revived him, he fell at
Judith's feet and reverenced her and said, "Blessed are you in all the
tents of Judah and in all nations, who when they hear your name will be
astonished.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Now therefore tell me all the things
which you have done in these days." Then Judith declared to him in the
midst of the people all that she had done, from the day that she went
forth until that hour when she spoke to them.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And when she had finished speaking, the
people shouted with a loud voice and made a joyful noise in their city.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And when Achior had seen all that the
God of Israel had done, he believed in God greatly; and he circumcised
the flesh of his foreskin and was joined to the house of Israel unto
this day.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And as soon as morning arose, they hung
the head of Holofernes on the wall, and every man took his weapons, and
they went forth by bands to the straits of the mountain.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> But when the Assyrians saw them, they
sent word to their leaders, who went to their captains and tribunes, and
to every one of their rulers.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> So they came to Holofernes' tent, and
said to him who had the charge of all his things, "Awaken our lord now,
for the slaves have been so bold as to come down against us in battle,
so that they may be utterly destroyed."

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Then Bagoas went in and knocked at the
door of the tent; for he thought that he had slept with Judith.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> But, because no one answered, he opened
it and went into the bedroom; and he found him cast upon the floor dead,
and his head had been taken from him.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Therefore he cried with a loud voice,
with weeping and sighing and a mighty cry, and he tore his garments.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> After this, he went into the tent where
Judith lodged, and when he did not find her, he dashed out to the people
and cried,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> "These slaves have dealt treacherously;
one woman of the Hebrews has brought shame on the house of king
Nebuchadnezzar; for, behold, Holofernes lies on the ground without a
head!"

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> When the captains of the Assyrians'
army heard these words, they tore their coats, and their minds were
exceptionally troubled; and there was a cry and a very great noise
throughout the camp.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And when those who were in the tents
heard, they were astonished at what had happened.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And fear and trembling fell upon them, so
that there was no man who dared to remain in the sight of his neighbor,
but rushing out all together, they fled in every direction of the plain
and of the hill country.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Those who had camped in the mountains
surrounding Bethulia also fled away. Then the children of Israel, every
one who was a warrior among them, rushed out upon them.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Then Uzziah sent to Betomasthem and to
Bebai and Chobai and Cola and to all the coasts of Israel, to declare
all that had happened and to tell them that all should rush forth upon
their enemies to destroy them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Now when the children of Israel heard it,
they all fell upon them with one consent and slew them all the way to
Chobai; and those who came from Jerusalem and from all the hill country
did likewise, for men had told them what had happened in the camp of
their enemies, and those who were in Galaad and in Galilee chased them
with a great slaughter, until they were past Damascus and its borders.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the remnant who lived at Bethulia
fell upon the camp of Assur and pillaged them, and they were greatly
enriched.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And the children of Israel who had
returned from the slaughter took what remained; and the villages and the
cities, which were in the mountains and on the plain, obtained many
spoils, for their number was very great.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Then Joacim the high priest and the
elders of the children of Israel who lived in Jerusalem came to behold
the good things that God had done for Israel, and to see Judith and
greet her.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And when they came to her, they blessed
her with one accord and said to her, "You are the exaltation of
Jerusalem, you are the great glory of Israel, you are the great
rejoicing of our nation.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> You have done all these things by your
hand. You have done much good to Israel, and God is pleased with it; you
will be blessed by the Almighty Lord for evermore." And all the people
said, "Amen!"

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And the people despoiled the camp for
the space of thirty days. And they gave the tent of Holofernes to
Judith, and all his plates and beds and vessels and all his belongings;
and she took it and laid it on her mule; and she prepared her cart and
laid them on it.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then all the women of Israel ran
together to see her, and they blessed her and made a dance among them
for her; and she took branches in her hand and gave some also to the
women who were with her.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And they put a garland of olive upon
her and on her maid who was with her; and she went before all the people
in the dance, leading all the women; and all the men of Israel followed
in their amour with garlands, and with songs in their mouths.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Then Judith began to sing this
thanksgiving for all Israel, and all the people sang after her this song
of praise.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And Judith said, "Begin to my God with
timbrels; sing to my Lord with cymbals; tune to him a new psalm; exalt
him and call upon his name.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> For God breaks the battles. For among the
camps, in the midst of the people, he has delivered me out of the hands
of those who persecuted me.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Assur came out of the mountains from the
north, he came with ten thousands of his army, their great number
stopped the torrents and their horsemen covered the hills.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> He bragged that he would burn up my
borders, and kill my young men with the sword, and dash the infants
against the ground, and make my young children as a prey, and my virgins
as a spoil.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But the Almighty Lord has disappointed
them by the hand of a woman.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> For the mighty one did not fall by the
young men, neither did the sons of the Titans strike him, nor did lofty
giants set upon him; but Judith the daughter of Merari weakened him with
the beauty of her countenance.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> For she put off the garment of her
widowhood, for the exaltation of those who were oppressed in Israel, and
anointed her face with ointment, and bound her hair in a headdress, and
put on a linen garment, to deceive him.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Her sandals ravished his eyes; her beauty
took his mind prisoner; and the broadsword passed through his neck.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> The Persians quaked at her boldness;
and the Medes were daunted by her hardiness.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Then my afflicted shouted for joy and
my weak ones cried aloud. But they were astonished; these lifted up
their voices, but they were overthrown.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> The sons of the gentlewomen have
pierced them through and wounded them as fugitives' children; they
perished by the battle of the Lord.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> I will sing to the Lord a new song. O
Lord, you are great and glorious, wonderful in strength, and invincible.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Let all creatures serve you. For you
spoke and they were made; you sent forth your spirit and it created
them; and there is none who can resist your voice.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> For the mountains will be moved from
their foundations with the waters; the rocks will melt like wax at your
presence. Yet you are merciful to those who fear you.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> For all sacrifice is too little to be a
sweet fragrance for you and all the fat is not sufficient for your burnt
offering, but he who fears the Lord is great at all times.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Woe to the nations who rise up against
my kindred! The Lord Almighty will take vengeance upon them on the Day
of Judgment by putting fire and worms in their flesh; and they will feel
them and will weep for ever."

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Now as soon as they entered into
Jerusalem, they worshipped the Lord; and as soon as the people were
purified, they offered their burnt offerings and their free offerings
and their gifts.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Judith also dedicated all the
belongings of Holofernes, which the people had given her, and she gave
the canopy, which she had taken out of his bedroom, as a gift to the
Lord.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> So the people continued feasting in
Jerusalem before the sanctuary for the space of three months; and Judith
remained with them.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> After this time, every one returned to
his own inheritance. And Judith went to Bethulia and remained in her own
possession; and during her time she was held in honor throughout the
country.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And many desired her, but none knew her
all the days of her life, after Manasseh her husband was dead and was
gathered to his people.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> But she increased more and more in
honor; and she grew old in her husband's house, reaching the age of one
hundred five years; and she made her woman servant free. So she died in
Bethulia, and they buried her in the cave of her husband Manasseh.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And the house of Israel lamented for
her seven days. And before she died, she distributed her goods to all
those who were the nearest kindred of Manasseh her husband and to those
who were the nearest of her kindred.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And there was no one who made the
children of Israel afraid again during the days of Judith, nor for a
long time after her death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additions to Esther](aes.md)
