[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](isa)  [Next](lam) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Jeremiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah,
of the priests who were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to whom the word of Yahweh came in the days
of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his
reign.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the
son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the end of the eleventh year of
Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the carrying away of
Jerusalem captive in the fifth month.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Now the word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> "Before I formed you in the belly, I knew
you. Before you came forth out of the womb, I sanctified you. I have
appointed you a prophet to the nations."

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Then I said, "Ah, Lord Yahweh! Behold, I
don't know how to speak; for I am a child."

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But Yahweh said to me, "Don't say, 'I am a
child;' for to whoever I shall send you, you shall go, and whatever I
shall command you, you shall speak.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Don't be afraid because of them; for I am
with you to deliver you," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Then Yahweh put forth his hand, and touched
my mouth; and Yahweh said to me, "Behold, I have put my words in your
mouth.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Behold, I have this day set you over the
nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down and to
destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant."

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying, "Jeremiah, what do you see?" I said, "I see a branch of an
almond tree."

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then Yahweh said to me, "You have seen
well; for I watch over my word to perform it."

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> The word of Yahweh came to me the second
time, saying, "What do you see?" I said, "I see a boiling caldron; and
it is tipping away from the north."

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Then Yahweh said to me, "Out of the north
evil will break out on all the inhabitants of the land.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For, behold, I will call all the families
of the kingdoms of the north," says Yahweh; "and they shall come, and
they shall each set his throne at the entrance of the gates of
Jerusalem, and against all its walls all around, and against all the
cities of Judah.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I will utter my judgments against them
touching all their wickedness, in that they have forsaken me, and have
burned incense to other gods, and worshiped the works of their own
hands.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> "You therefore put your belt on your
waist, arise, and speak to them all that I command you. Don't be
dismayed at them, lest I dismay you before them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For, behold, I have made you this day a
fortified city, and an iron pillar, and bronze walls, against the whole
land, against the kings of Judah, against its princes, against its
priests, and against the people of the land.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> They will fight against you; but they
will not prevail against you; for I am with you," says Yahweh, "to
deliver you."

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> "Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, 'Thus says Yahweh, "I remember for you the kindness of your
youth, the love of your weddings; how you went after me in the
wilderness, in a land that was not sown.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Israel \[was\] holiness to Yahweh, the
first fruits of his increase. All who devour him shall be held guilty.
Evil shall come on them,"' says Yahweh."

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Hear the word of Yahweh, O house of Jacob,
and all the families of the house of Israel!

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Thus says Yahweh, "What unrighteousness
have your fathers found in me, that they have gone far from me, and have
walked after vanity, and are become vain?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Neither did they say, 'Where is Yahweh who
brought us up out of the land of Egypt, who led us through the
wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of
drought and of the shadow of death, through a land that none passed
through, and where no man lived?'

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I brought you into a plentiful land, to eat
its fruit and its goodness; but when you entered, you defiled my land,
and made my heritage an abomination.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The priests didn't say, 'Where is Yahweh?'
and those who handle the law didn't know me. The rulers also
transgressed against me, and the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked
after things that do not profit.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> "Therefore I will yet contend with you,"
says Yahweh, "and I will contend with your children's children.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For pass over to the islands of Kittim,
and see; and send to Kedar, and consider diligently; and see if there
has been such a thing.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Has a nation changed \[its\] gods, which
really are no gods? But my people have changed their glory for that
which does not profit.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> "Be astonished, you heavens, at this, and
be horribly afraid. Be very desolate," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> "For my people have committed two evils:
they have forsaken me, the spring of living waters, and cut them out
cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Is Israel a servant? Is he a native-born
\[slave\]? Why has he become a prey?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> The young lions have roared at him, and
yelled. They have made his land waste. His cities are burned up, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> The children also of Memphis and
Tahpanhes have broken the crown of your head.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> "Haven't you procured this to yourself,
in that you have forsaken Yahweh your God, when he led you by the way?

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Now what have you to do in the way to
Egypt, to drink the waters of the Shihor? Or what have you to do in the
way to Assyria, to drink the waters of the River?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> "Your own wickedness shall correct you,
and your backsliding shall reprove you. Know therefore and see that it
is an evil thing and a bitter, that you have forsaken Yahweh your God,
and that my fear is not in you," says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> "For of old time I have broken your yoke,
and burst your bonds; and you said, 'I will not serve;' for on every
high hill and under every green tree you bowed yourself, playing the
prostitute.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Yet I had planted you a noble vine,
wholly a right seed. How then have you turned into the degenerate
branches of a foreign vine to me?

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For though you wash yourself with lye,
and use much soap, yet your iniquity is marked before me," says the Lord
Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> "How can you say, 'I am not defiled. I
have not gone after the Baals'? See your way in the valley. Know what
you have done. \[You are\] a swift dromedary traversing her ways;

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> a wild donkey used to the wilderness,
that snuffs up the wind in her desire. When she is in heat, who can turn
her away? All those who seek her will not weary themselves. In her
month, they will find her.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> "Withhold your foot from being unshod,
and your throat from thirst. But you said, 'It is in vain. No, for I
have loved strangers, and I will go after them.'

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> As the thief is ashamed when he is found,
so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and
their priests, and their prophets;

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> who tell wood, 'You are my father;' and a
stone, 'You have brought me out:' for they have turned their back to me,
and not their face; but in the time of their trouble they will say,
'Arise, and save us.'

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> "But where are your gods that you have
made for yourselves? Let them arise, if they can save you in the time of
your trouble: for according to the number of your cities are your gods,
Judah.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> "Why will you contend with me? You all
have transgressed against me," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> "I have struck your children in vain.
They received no correction. Your own sword has devoured your prophets,
like a destroying lion.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> Generation, consider the word of Yahweh.
Have I been a wilderness to Israel? Or a land of thick darkness? Why do
my people say, 'We have broken loose. We will come to you no more?'

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> "Can a virgin forget her ornaments, or a
bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me for days without
number.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> How well you prepare your way to seek
love! Therefore you have taught even the wicked women your ways.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Also the blood of the souls of the
innocent poor is found in your skirts. You did not find them breaking
in; but it is because of all these things.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> "Yet you said, 'I am innocent. Surely his
anger has turned away from me.' "Behold, I will judge you, because you
say, 'I have not sinned.'

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Why do you go about so much to change
your way? You will be ashamed of Egypt also, as you were ashamed of
Assyria.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> From there also you shall go forth, with
your hands on your head; for Yahweh has rejected those in whom you
trust, and you shall not prosper with them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> "They say, 'If a man puts away his wife,
and she goes from him, and become another man's, will he return to her
again?' Wouldn't that land be greatly polluted? But you have played the
prostitute with many lovers; yet return again to me," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> "Lift up your eyes to the bare heights, and
see! Where have you not been lain with? You have sat for them by the
ways, as an Arabian in the wilderness. You have polluted the land with
your prostitution and with your wickedness.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Therefore the showers have been withheld,
and there has been no latter rain; yet you have a prostitute's forehead,
you refused to be ashamed.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Will you not from this time cry to me, 'My
Father, you are the guide of my youth?'

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> "'Will he retain \[his anger\] forever?
Will he keep it to the end?' Behold, you have spoken and have done evil
things, and have had your way."

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Moreover, Yahweh said to me in the days of
Josiah the king, "Have you seen that which backsliding Israel has done?
She has gone up on every high mountain and under every green tree, and
there has played the prostitute.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I said after she had done all these things,
'She will return to me;' but she didn't return; and her treacherous
sister Judah saw it.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> I saw, when, for this very cause that
backsliding Israel had committed adultery, I had put her away and given
her a bill of divorce, yet treacherous Judah, her sister, didn't fear;
but she also went and played the prostitute.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> It happened through the lightness of her
prostitution, that the land was polluted, and she committed adultery
with stones and with stocks.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Yet for all this her treacherous sister,
Judah, has not returned to me with her whole heart, but only in
pretense," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Yahweh said to me, "Backsliding Israel
has shown herself more righteous than treacherous Judah.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Go, and proclaim these words toward the
north, and say, 'Return, you backsliding Israel,' says Yahweh; 'I will
not look in anger on you; for I am merciful,' says Yahweh. 'I will not
keep \[anger\] forever.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Only acknowledge your iniquity, that you
have transgressed against Yahweh your God, and have scattered your ways
to the strangers under every green tree, and you have not obeyed my
voice,' says Yahweh."

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> "Return, backsliding children," says
Yahweh; "for I am a husband to you. I will take you one of a city, and
two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> I will give you shepherds according to my
heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> It shall come to pass, when you are
multiplied and increased in the land, in those days," says Yahweh, "they
shall say no more, 'The ark of the covenant of Yahweh!' neither shall it
come to mind; neither shall they remember it; neither shall they miss
it; neither shall it be made any more.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> At that time they shall call Jerusalem
'The throne of Yahweh;' and all the nations shall be gathered to it, to
the name of Yahweh, to Jerusalem. Neither shall they walk any more after
the stubbornness of their evil heart.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In those days the house of Judah shall
walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the
land of the north to the land that I gave for an inheritance to your
fathers.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> "But I said, 'How I would put you among
the children, and give you a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the
armies of the nations!' and I said, 'You shall call me "My Father," and
shall not turn away from following me.'

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> "Surely as a wife treacherously departs
from her husband, so you have dealt treacherously with me, house of
Israel," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> A voice is heard on the bare heights, the
weeping \[and\] the petitions of the children of Israel; because they
have perverted their way, they have forgotten Yahweh their God.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Return, you backsliding children, I will
heal your backsliding. "Behold, we have come to you; for you are Yahweh
our God.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Truly in vain is \[the help that is
looked for\] from the hills, the tumult on the mountains. Truly the
salvation of Israel is in Yahweh our God.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> But the shameful thing has devoured the
labor of our fathers from our youth, their flocks and their herds, their
sons and their daughters.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Let us lie down in our shame, and let our
confusion cover us; for we have sinned against Yahweh our God, we and
our fathers, from our youth even to this day. We have not obeyed the
voice of Yahweh our God."

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> "If you will return, Israel," says Yahweh,
"if you will return to me, and if you will put away your abominations
out of my sight; then you shall not be removed;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and you shall swear, 'As Yahweh lives,' in
truth, in justice, and in righteousness. The nations shall bless
themselves in him, and in him shall they glory."

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For thus says Yahweh to the men of Judah
and to Jerusalem, "Break up your fallow ground, and don't sow among
thorns.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Circumcise yourselves to Yahweh, and take
away the foreskins of your heart, you men of Judah and inhabitants of
Jerusalem; lest my wrath go forth like fire, and burn so that none can
quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Declare in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem;
and say, 'Blow the trumpet in the land!' Cry aloud and say, 'Assemble
yourselves! Let us go into the fortified cities!'

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Set up a standard toward Zion. Flee for
safety! Don't wait; for I will bring evil from the north, and a great
destruction."

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> A lion is gone up from his thicket, and a
destroyer of nations; he is on his way, he is gone forth from his place,
to make your land desolate, that your cities be laid waste, without
inhabitant.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For this clothe yourself with sackcloth,
lament and wail; for the fierce anger of Yahweh hasn't turned back from
us.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> "It shall happen at that day," says Yahweh,
"that the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes;
and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder."

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then I said, "Ah, Lord Yahweh! Surely you
have greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, 'You shall have
peace;' whereas the sword reaches to the heart."

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> At that time shall it be said to this
people and to Jerusalem, "A hot wind from the bare heights in the
wilderness toward the daughter of my people, not to winnow, nor to
cleanse;

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> a full wind from these shall come for me.
Now I will also utter judgments against them."

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and
his chariots \[shall be\] as the whirlwind: his horses are swifter than
eagles. Woe to us! For we are ruined.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Jerusalem, wash your heart from
wickedness, that you may be saved. How long shall your evil thoughts
lodge within you?

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For a voice declares from Dan, and
publishes evil from the hills of Ephraim:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> "Tell the nations; behold, publish
against Jerusalem, 'Watchers come from a far country, and raise their
voice against the cities of Judah.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> As keepers of a field, they are against
her all around, because she has been rebellious against me,'" says
Yahweh.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> "Your way and your doings have brought
these things to you. This is your wickedness; for it is bitter, for it
reaches to your heart."

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> My anguish, my anguish! I am pained at my
very heart; my heart is disquieted in me; I can't hold my peace; because
you have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Destruction on destruction is cried; for
the whole land is laid waste: suddenly are my tents destroyed, \[and\]
my curtains in a moment.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> How long shall I see the standard, and
hear the sound of the trumpet?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> "For my people are foolish, they don't
know me. They are foolish children, and they have no understanding. They
are skillful in doing evil, but to do good they have no knowledge."

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> I saw the earth, and, behold, it was
waste and void; and the heavens, and they had no light.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> I saw the mountains, and behold, they
trembled, and all the hills moved back and forth.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> I saw, and behold, there was no man, and
all the birds of the sky had fled.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> I saw, and behold, the fruitful field was
a wilderness, and all its cities were broken down at the presence of
Yahweh, \[and\] before his fierce anger.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For thus says Yahweh, "The whole land
shall be a desolation; yet will I not make a full end.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For this the earth will mourn, and the
heavens above be black; because I have spoken it, I have purposed it,
and I have not repented, neither will I turn back from it."

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> Every city flees for the noise of the
horsemen and archers; they go into the thickets, and climb up on the
rocks: every city is forsaken, and not a man dwells therein.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> You, when you are made desolate, what
will you do? Though you clothe yourself with scarlet, though you deck
you with ornaments of gold, though you enlarge your eyes with paint, in
vain do you make yourself beautiful; \[your\] lovers despise you, they
seek your life.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For I have heard a voice as of a woman in
travail, the anguish as of her who brings forth her first child, the
voice of the daughter of Zion, who gasps for breath, who spreads her
hands, \[saying\], "Woe is me now! For my soul faints before the
murderers."

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> "Run back and forth through the streets of
Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places of it, if
you can find a man, if there are any who does justly, who seeks truth;
and I will pardon her.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Though they say, 'As Yahweh lives;' surely
they swear falsely."

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> O Yahweh, don't your eyes look on truth?
You have stricken them, but they were not grieved. You have consumed
them, but they have refused to receive correction. They have made their
faces harder than a rock. They have refused to return.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Then I said, "Surely these are poor. They
are foolish; for they don't know the way of Yahweh, nor the law of their
God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I will go to the great men, and will speak
to them; for they know the way of Yahweh, and the law of their God." But
these with one accord have broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore a lion out of the forest shall
kill them, a wolf of the evenings shall destroy them, a leopard shall
watch against their cities; everyone who goes out there shall be torn in
pieces; because their transgressions are many, \[and\] their backsliding
is increased.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> "How can I pardon you? Your children have
forsaken me, and sworn by what are no gods. When I had fed them to the
full, they committed adultery, and assembled themselves in troops at the
prostitutes' houses.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> They were as fed horses roaming at large:
everyone neighed after his neighbor's wife.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Shouldn't I punish them for these things?"
says Yahweh; "and shouldn't my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> "Go up on her walls, and destroy; but
don't make a full end. Take away her branches; for they are not
Yahweh's.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> For the house of Israel and the house of
Judah have dealt very treacherously against me," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> They have denied Yahweh, and said, "It is
not he; neither shall evil come on us; neither shall we see sword nor
famine.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> The prophets shall become wind, and the
word is not in them. Thus shall it be done to them."

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh, the God of
Armies, "Because you speak this word, behold, I will make my words in
your mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Behold, I will bring a nation on you from
far, house of Israel," says Yahweh. "It is a mighty nation. It is an
ancient nation, a nation whose language you don't know, neither
understand what they say.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Their quiver is an open tomb, they are
all mighty men.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> They shall eat up your harvest, and your
bread, \[which\] your sons and your daughters should eat. They shall eat
up your flocks and your herds. They shall eat up your vines and your fig
trees. They shall beat down your fortified cities, in which you trust,
with the sword.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> "But even in those days," says Yahweh, "I
will not make a full end with you.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> It will happen, when you say, 'Why has
Yahweh our God done all these things to us?' Then you shall say to them,
'Just like you have forsaken me, and served foreign gods in your land,
so you shall serve strangers in a land that is not yours.'

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> "Declare this in the house of Jacob, and
publish it in Judah, saying,

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> 'Hear now this, foolish people, and
without understanding; who have eyes, and don't see; who have ears, and
don't hear:

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Don't you fear me?' says Yahweh 'Won't
you tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of
the sea, by a perpetual decree, that it can't pass it? and though its
waves toss themselves, yet they can't prevail; though they roar, yet
they can't pass over it.'

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> "But this people has a revolting and a
rebellious heart; they have revolted and gone.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Neither do they say in their heart, 'Let
us now fear Yahweh our God, who gives rain, both the former and the
latter, in its season; who preserves to us the appointed weeks of the
harvest.'

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> "Your iniquities have turned away these
things, and your sins have withheld good from you.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For among my people are found wicked men.
They watch, as fowlers lie in wait. They set a trap. They catch men.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> As a cage is full of birds, so are their
houses full of deceit. Therefore they have become great, and grew rich.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> They have grown fat. They shine; yes,
they excell in deeds of wickedness. They don't plead the cause, the
cause of the fatherless, that they may prosper; and they don't judge the
right of the needy.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> "Shall I not punish for these things?"
says Yahweh. "Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> "An astonishing and horrible thing has
happened in the land.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> The prophets prophesy falsely, and the
priests rule by their own authority; and my people love to have it so.
What will you do in the end of it?

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> "Flee for safety, you children of Benjamin,
out of the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and raise
up a signal on Beth Haccherem; for evil looks forth from the north, and
a great destruction.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The comely and delicate one, the daughter
of Zion, will I cut off.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Shepherds with their flocks shall come to
her; they shall pitch their tents against her all around; they shall
feed everyone in his place."

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> "Prepare war against her; arise, and let us
go up at noon. Woe to us! For the day declines, for the shadows of the
evening are stretched out.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Arise, and let us go up by night, and let
us destroy her palaces."

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For Yahweh of Armies said, "Cut down trees,
and cast up a mound against Jerusalem: this is the city to be visited;
she is wholly oppression in the midst of her.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> As a well casts forth its waters, so she
casts forth her wickedness: violence and destruction is heard in her;
before me continually is sickness and wounds.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Be instructed, Jerusalem, lest my soul be
alienated from you; lest I make you a desolation, a land not inhabited."

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, "They shall
thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel like a vine. Turn again your hand
as a grape gatherer into the baskets."

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> To whom shall I speak and testify, that
they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they can't
listen. Behold, the word of Yahweh has become a reproach to them. They
have no delight in it.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Therefore I am full of the wrath of
Yahweh. I am weary with holding in. "Pour it out on the children in the
street, and on the assembly of young men together; for even the husband
with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him who is full of days.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Their houses shall be turned to others,
their fields and their wives together; for I will stretch out my hand on
the inhabitants of the land, says Yahweh."

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> "For from the least of them even to the
greatest of them, everyone is given to covetousness; and from the
prophet even to the priest, everyone deals falsely.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> They have healed also the hurt of my
people superficially, saying, 'Peace, peace!' when there is no peace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Were they ashamed when they had committed
abomination? No, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush.
Therefore they shall fall among those who fall; at the time that I visit
them, they shall be cast down," says Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Thus says Yahweh, "Stand in the ways and
see, and ask for the old paths, 'Where is the good way?' and walk in it,
and you will find rest for your souls. But they said, 'We will not walk
in it.'

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> I set watchmen over you, saying, 'Listen
to the sound of the trumpet!' But they said, 'We will not listen!'

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Therefore hear, you nations, and know,
congregation, what is among them.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Hear, earth! Behold, I will bring evil on
this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not
listened to my words; and as for my law, they have rejected it.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> To what purpose comes there to me
frankincense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country? your
burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices pleasing to me."

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh, "Behold, I
will lay stumbling blocks before this people. The fathers and the sons
together shall stumble against them. The neighbor and his friend shall
perish."

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Thus says Yahweh, "Behold, a people comes
from the north country. A great nation shall be stirred up from the
uttermost parts of the earth.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> They take hold of bow and spear. They are
cruel, and have no mercy. Their voice roars like the sea, and they ride
on horses, everyone set in array, as a man to the battle, against you,
daughter of Zion."

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> We have heard its report; our hands wax
feeble: anguish has taken hold of us, \[and\] pangs as of a woman in
travail.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Don't go forth into the field, nor walk
by the way; for the sword of the enemy, \[and\] terror, are on every
side.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Daughter of my people, clothe yourself
with sackcloth, and wallow in ashes! Mourn, as for an only son, most
bitter lamentation; for the destroyer shall suddenly come on us.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> "I have made you a tester of metals
\[and\] a fortress among my people; that you may know and try their way.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> They are all grievous rebels, going about
with slanders; they are brass and iron: they all of them deal corruptly.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> The bellows blow fiercely; the lead is
consumed of the fire: in vain do they go on refining; for the wicked are
not plucked away.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Men will call them rejected silver,
because Yahweh has rejected them."

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh,
saying,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> "Stand in the gate of Yahweh's house, and
proclaim there this word, and say, 'Hear the word of Yahweh, all you of
Judah, who enter in at these gates to worship Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell
in this place.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Don't trust in lying words, saying, The
temple of Yahweh, the temple of Yahweh, the temple of Yahweh, are these.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For if you thoroughly amend your ways and
your doings; if you thoroughly execute justice between a man and his
neighbor;

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> if you don't oppress the foreigner, the
fatherless, and the widow, and don't shed innocent blood in this place,
neither walk after other gods to your own hurt:

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> then will I cause you to dwell in this
place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, from of old even
forevermore.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Behold, you trust in lying words, that
can't profit.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Will you steal, murder, and commit
adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and walk after
other gods that you have not known,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> and come and stand before me in this
house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered; that you
may do all these abominations?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Is this house, which is called by my
name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, I, even I, have seen
it, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But go now to my place which was in
Shiloh, where I caused my name to dwell at the first, and see what I did
to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Now, because you have done all these
works, says Yahweh, and I spoke to you, rising up early and speaking,
but you didn't hear; and I called you, but you didn't answer:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> therefore will I do to the house which is
called by my name, in which you trust, and to the place which I gave to
you and to your fathers, as I did to Shiloh.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> I will cast you out of my sight, as I
have cast out all your brothers, even the whole seed of Ephraim.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Therefore don't pray for this people,
neither lift up a cry nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to
me; for I will not hear you.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Don't you see what they do in the cities
of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The children gather wood, and the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the
queen of the sky, and to pour out drink offerings to other gods, that
they may provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Do they provoke me to anger? says Yahweh;
\[do they\] not \[provoke\] themselves, to the confusion of their own
faces?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Therefore thus says the Lord Yahweh:
Behold, my anger and my wrath shall be poured out on this place, on man,
and on animal, and on the trees of the field, and on the fruit of the
ground; and it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel: Add your burnt offerings to your sacrifices, and eat meat.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I didn't speak to your fathers, nor
command them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> but this thing I commanded them, saying,
Listen to my voice, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people;
and walk in all the way that I command you, that it may be well with
you.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> But they didn't listen nor turn their
ear, but walked in \[their own\] counsels \[and\] in the stubbornness of
their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Since the day that your fathers came
forth out of the land of Egypt to this day, I have sent to you all my
servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them:

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> yet they didn't listen to me, nor
inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff: they did worse than their
fathers.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> You shall speak all these words to them;
but they will not listen to you: you shall also call to them; but they
will not answer you.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> You shall tell them, This is the nation
that has not listened to the voice of Yahweh their God, nor received
instruction: truth is perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Cut off your hair, \[Jerusalem\], and
cast it away, and take up a lamentation on the bare heights; for Yahweh
has rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> For the children of Judah have done that
which is evil in my sight, says Yahweh: they have set their abominations
in the house which is called by my name, to defile it.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> They have built the high places of
Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons
and their daughters in the fire; which I didn't command, nor did it come
into my mind.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, says
Yahweh, that it shall no more be called Topheth, nor The valley of the
son of Hinnom, but The valley of Slaughter: for they shall bury in
Topheth, until there be no place \[to bury\].

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> The dead bodies of this people shall be
food for the birds of the sky, and for the animals of the earth; and
none shall frighten them away.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> Then will I cause to cease from the
cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth
and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of
the bride; for the land shall become a waste.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> At that time, says Yahweh, they shall bring
out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and
the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves;

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> and they shall spread them before the sun,
and the moon, and all the army of the sky, which they have loved, and
which they have served, and after which they have walked, and which they
have sought, and which they have worshiped: they shall not be gathered,
nor be buried, they shall be for dung on the surface of the earth.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Death shall be chosen rather than life by
all the residue that remain of this evil family, that remain in all the
places where I have driven them, says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Moreover you shall tell them, Thus says
Yahweh: Shall men fall, and not rise up again? Shall one turn away, and
not return?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Why then is this people of Jerusalem
slidden back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they
refuse to return.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> I listened and heard, but they didn't speak
aright: no man repents him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done?
everyone turns to his course, as a horse that rushes headlong in the
battle.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Yes, the stork in the sky knows her
appointed times; and the turtledove and the swallow and the crane
observe the time of their coming; but my people don't know Yahweh's law.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> How do you say, We are wise, and the law of
Yahweh is with us? But, behold, the false pen of the scribes has worked
falsely.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> The wise men are disappointed, they are
dismayed and taken: behold, they have rejected the word of Yahweh; and
what kind of wisdom is in them?

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Therefore will I give their wives to
others, and their fields to those who shall possess them: for everyone
from the least even to the greatest is given to covetousness; from the
prophet even to the priest every one deals falsely.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> They have healed the hurt of the daughter
of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Were they ashamed when they had committed
abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they
blush: therefore shall they fall among those who fall; in the time of
their visitation they shall be cast down, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I will utterly consume them, says Yahweh:
no grapes shall be on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf
shall fade; and \[the things that\] I have given them shall pass away
from them.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Why do we sit still? Assemble yourselves,
and let us enter into the fortified cities, and let us be silent there;
for Yahweh our God has put us to silence, and given us water of gall to
drink, because we have sinned against Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> We looked for peace, but no good came;
\[and\] for a time of healing, and behold, dismay!

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> The snorting of his horses is heard from
Dan: at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones the whole land
trembles; for they are come, and have devoured the land and all that is
in it; the city and those who dwell therein.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For, behold, I will send serpents,
adders, among you, which will not be charmed; and they shall bite you,
says Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Oh that I could comfort myself against
sorrow! My heart is faint within me.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Behold, the voice of the cry of the
daughter of my people from a land that is very far off: isn't Yahweh in
Zion? Isn't her King in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with
their engraved images, and with foreign vanities?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> The harvest is past, the summer is ended,
and we are not saved.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> For the hurt of the daughter of my people
am I hurt: I mourn; dismay has taken hold on me.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no
physician there? why then isn't the health of the daughter of my people
recovered?

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Oh that my head were waters, and my eyes a
spring of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the
daughter of my people!

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging
place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them!
for they are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They bend their tongue, \[as it were\]
their bow, for falsehood; and they are grown strong in the land, but not
for truth: for they proceed from evil to evil, and they don't know me,
says Yahweh.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Take heed everyone of his neighbor, and
don't trust in any brother; for every brother will utterly supplant, and
every neighbor will go about with slanders.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> They will deceive everyone his neighbor,
and will not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak
lies; they weary themselves to commit iniquity.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Your habitation is in the midst of deceit;
through deceit they refuse to know me, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies,
Behold, I will melt them, and try them; for how \[else\] should I do,
because of the daughter of my people?

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Their tongue is a deadly arrow; it speaks
deceit: one speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in his
heart he lays wait for him.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Shall I not visit them for these things?
says Yahweh; shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> For the mountains will I take up a
weeping and wailing, and for the pastures of the wilderness a
lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none passes through;
neither can men hear the voice of the livestock; both the birds of the
sky and the animals are fled, they are gone.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> I will make Jerusalem heaps, a dwelling
place of jackals; and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation,
without inhabitant.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Who is the wise man, that may understand
this? and \[who is\] he to whom the mouth of Yahweh has spoken, that he
may declare it? why is the land perished and burned up like a
wilderness, so that none passes through?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Yahweh says, Because they have forsaken
my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither
walked therein,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> but have walked after the stubbornness of
their own heart, and after the Baals, which their fathers taught them;

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies, the
God of Israel, Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with
wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> I will scatter them also among the
nations, whom neither they nor their fathers have known; and I will send
the sword after them, until I have consumed them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, Consider, and
call for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for the
skillful women, that they may come:

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and let them make haste, and take up a
wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids
gush out with waters.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For a voice of wailing is heard out of
Zion, How are we ruined! we are greatly confounded, because we have
forsaken the land, because they have cast down our dwellings.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Yet hear the word of Yahweh, you women,
and let your ear receive the word of his mouth; and teach your daughters
wailing, and everyone her neighbor lamentation.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For death is come up into our windows, it
is entered into our palaces; to cut off the children from outside,
\[and\] the young men from the streets.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Speak, Thus says Yahweh, The dead bodies
of men shall fall as dung on the open field, and as the handful after
the harvester; and none shall gather \[them\].

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Thus says Yahweh, Don't let the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might,
don't let the rich man glory in his riches;

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> but let him who glories glory in this,
that he has understanding, and knows me, that I am Yahweh who exercises
loving kindness, justice, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these
things I delight, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Behold, the days come, says Yahweh, that
I will punish all those who are circumcised in \[their\] uncircumcision:

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the
children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that have the corners \[of their
hair\] cut off, who dwell in the wilderness; for all the nations are
uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Hear the word which Yahweh speaks to you,
house of Israel!

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Thus says Yahweh, "Don't learn the way of
the nations, and don't be dismayed at the signs of the sky; for the
nations are dismayed at them.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For the customs of the peoples are
vanity; for one cuts a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of
the workman with the axe.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> They deck it with silver and with gold;
they fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it not move.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> They are like a palm tree, of turned
work, and don't speak: they must be carried, because they can't go.
Don't be afraid of them; for they can't do evil, neither is it in them
to do good."

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> There is none like you, Yahweh; you are
great, and your name is great in might.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Who should not fear you, King of the
nations? For it appertains to you; because among all the wise men of the
nations, and in all their royal estate, there is none like you.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But they are together brutish and
foolish: the instruction of idols! it is but a stock.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> There is silver beaten into plates, which
is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the artificer
and of the hands of the goldsmith; blue and purple for their clothing;
they are all the work of skillful men.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> But Yahweh is the true God; he is the
living God, and an everlasting King: at his wrath the earth trembles,
and the nations are not able to withstand his indignation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> You shall say this to them: The gods
that have not made the heavens and the earth, these shall perish from
the earth, and from under the heavens.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> He has made the earth by his power, he
has established the world by his wisdom, and by his understanding has he
stretched out the heavens:

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> when he utters his voice, there is a
tumult of waters in the heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from
the ends of the earth; he makes lightnings for the rain, and brings
forth the wind out of his treasuries.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Every man is become brutish \[and is\]
without knowledge; every goldsmith is disappointed by his engraved
image; for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in
them.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> They are vanity, a work of delusion: in
the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The portion of Jacob is not like these;
for he is the former of all things; and Israel is the tribe of his
inheritance: Yahweh of Armies is his name.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Gather up your wares out of the land,
you who live under siege.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> For thus says Yahweh, Behold, I will
sling out the inhabitants of the land at this time, and will distress
them, that they may feel \[it\].

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Woe is me because of my hurt! my wound
is grievous: but I said, Truly this is \[my\] grief, and I must bear it.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> My tent is destroyed, and all my cords
are broken: my children are gone forth from me, and they are no more:
there is none to spread my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> For the shepherds are become brutish,
and have not inquired of Yahweh: therefore they have not prospered, and
all their flocks are scattered.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The voice of news, behold, it comes,
and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of
Judah a desolation, a dwelling place of jackals.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Yahweh, I know that the way of man is
not in himself: it is not in man who walks to direct his steps.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Yahweh, correct me, but in measure: not
in your anger, lest you bring me to nothing.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Pour out your wrath on the nations that
don't know you, and on the families that don't call on your name: for
they have devoured Jacob, yes, they have devoured him and consumed him,
and have laid waste his habitation.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Hear the words of this covenant, and
speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and say to them, Thus says Yahweh, the
God of Israel: Cursed is the man who doesn't hear the words of this
covenant,

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> which I commanded your fathers in the day
that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron
furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I
command you: so you shall be my people, and I will be your God;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> that I may establish the oath which I
swore to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey,
as at this day. Then answered I, and said, Amen, Yahweh.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Yahweh said to me, Proclaim all these
words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying,
Hear the words of this covenant, and do them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> For I earnestly protested to your fathers
in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even to this
day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Yet they didn't obey, nor turn their ear,
but walked everyone in the stubbornness of their evil heart: therefore I
brought on them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them
to do, but they didn't do them.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Yahweh said to me, A conspiracy is found
among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They are turned back to the iniquities
of their forefathers, who refused to hear my words; and they are gone
after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and the house of
Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh, Behold, I
will bring evil on them, which they shall not be able to escape; and
they shall cry to me, but I will not listen to them.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Then shall the cities of Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem go and cry to the gods to which they offer
incense: but they will not save them at all in the time of their
trouble.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For according to the number of your
cities are your gods, Judah; and according to the number of the streets
of Jerusalem have you set up altars to the shameful thing, even altars
to burn incense to Baal.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Therefore don't pray for this people,
neither lift up cry nor prayer for them; for I will not hear them in the
time that they cry to me because of their trouble.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> What has my beloved to do in my house,
since she has worked lewdness \[with\] many, and the holy flesh is
passed from you? when you do evil, then you rejoice.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Yahweh called your name, A green olive
tree, beautiful with goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he
has kindled fire on it, and its branches are broken.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> For Yahweh of Armies, who planted you,
has pronounced evil against you, because of the evil of the house of
Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have worked for themselves
in provoking me to anger by offering incense to Baal.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Yahweh gave me knowledge of it, and I
knew it: then you showed me their doings.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> But I was like a gentle lamb that is
led to the slaughter; and I didn't know that they had devised devices
against me, \[saying\], Let us destroy the tree with its fruit, and let
us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may be no more
remembered.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But, Yahweh of Armies, who judges
righteously, who tests the heart and the mind, I shall see your
vengeance on them; for to you have I revealed my cause.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh concerning
the men of Anathoth, who seek your life, saying, You shall not prophesy
in the name of Yahweh, that you not die by our hand;

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies,
Behold, I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their
sons and their daughters shall die by famine;

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> and there shall be no remnant to them:
for I will bring evil on the men of Anathoth, even the year of their
visitation.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> You are righteous, Yahweh, when I contend
with you; yet I would reason the cause with you: why does the way of the
wicked prosper? why are all they at ease who deal very treacherously?

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> You have planted them, yes, they have
taken root; they grow, yes, they bring forth fruit: you are near in
their mouth, and far from their heart.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But you, Yahweh, know me; you see me, and
try my heart toward you: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and
prepare them for the day of slaughter.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> How long shall the land mourn, and the
herbs of the whole country wither? for the wickedness of those who dwell
therein, the animals are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He
shall not see our latter end.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> If you have run with the footmen, and
they have wearied you, then how can you contend with horses? and though
in a land of peace you are secure, yet how will you do in the pride of
the Jordan?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For even your brothers, and the house of
your father, even they have dealt treacherously with you; even they have
cried aloud after you: don't believe them, though they speak beautiful
words to you.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> I have forsaken my house, I have cast off
my heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of
her enemies.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> My heritage is become to me as a lion in
the forest: she has uttered her voice against me; therefore I have hated
her.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Is my heritage to me as a speckled bird
of prey? are the birds of prey against her all around? Go, assemble all
the animals of the field, bring them to devour.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Many shepherds have destroyed my
vineyard, they have trodden my portion under foot, they have made my
pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> They have made it a desolation; it
mourns to me, being desolate; the whole land is made desolate, because
no man lays it to heart.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Destroyers are come on all the bare
heights in the wilderness; for the sword of Yahweh devours from the one
end of the land even to the other end of the land: no flesh has peace.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> They have sown wheat, and have reaped
thorns; they have put themselves to pain, and profit nothing: and you
shall be ashamed of your fruits, because of the fierce anger of Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Thus says Yahweh against all my evil
neighbors, who touch the inheritance which I have caused my people
Israel to inherit: behold, I will pluck them up from off their land, and
will pluck up the house of Judah from among them.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> It shall happen, after that I have
plucked them up, I will return and have compassion on them; and I will
bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> It shall happen, if they will
diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, As Yahweh
lives; even as they taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they
be built up in the midst of my people.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But if they will not hear, then will I
pluck up that nation, plucking up and destroying it, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Thus says Yahweh to me, Go, and buy
yourself a linen belt, and put it on your waist, and don't put it in
water.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> So I bought a belt according to the word
of Yahweh, and put it on my waist.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> The word of Yahweh came to me the second
time, saying,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Take the belt that you have bought, which
is on your waist, and arise, go to the Euphrates, and hide it there in a
cleft of the rock.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> So I went, and hid it by the Euphrates,
as Yahweh commanded me.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> It happened after many days, that Yahweh
said to me, Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take the belt from there,
which I commanded you to hide there.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Then I went to the Euphrates, and dug,
and took the belt from the place where I had hidden it; and behold, the
belt was marred, it was profitable for nothing.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Thus says Yahweh, In this way I will mar
the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> This evil people, who refuse to hear my
words, who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and are gone after
other gods to serve them, and to worship them, shall even be as this
belt, which is profitable for nothing.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For as the belt clings to the waist of
a man, so have I caused to cling to me the whole house of Israel and the
whole house of Judah, says Yahweh; that they may be to me for a people,
and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not
hear.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Therefore you shall speak to them this
word: Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled
with wine: and they shall tell you, Do we not certainly know that every
bottle shall be filled with wine?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Then you shall tell them, Thus says
Yahweh, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the
kings who sit on David's throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and
all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> I will dash them one against another,
even the fathers and the sons together, says Yahweh: I will not pity,
nor spare, nor have compassion, that I should not destroy them.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Hear, and give ear; don't be proud; for
Yahweh has spoken.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Give glory to Yahweh your God, before
he causes darkness, and before your feet stumble on the dark mountains,
and, while you look for light, he turns it into the shadow of death, and
makes it gross darkness.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> But if you will not hear it, my soul
shall weep in secret for \[your\] pride; and my eye shall weep bitterly,
and run down with tears, because Yahweh's flock is taken captive.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Say to the king and to the queen
mother, Humble yourselves, sit down; for your headdresses have come
down, even the crown of your glory.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The cities of the South are shut up,
and there is none to open them: Judah is carried away captive, all of
it; it is wholly carried away captive.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Lift up your eyes, and see those who
come from the north: where is the flock that was given you, your
beautiful flock?

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> What will you say, when he shall set
over you as head those whom you have yourself taught to be friends to
you? shall not sorrows take hold of you, as of a woman in travail?

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> If you say in your heart, Why are these
things come on me? for the greatness of your iniquity are your skirts
uncovered, and your heels suffer violence.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the leopard his spots? then may you also do good, who are accustomed to
do evil.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Therefore will I scatter them, as the
stubble that passes away, by the wind of the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> This is your lot, the portion measured
to you from me, says Yahweh; because you have forgotten me, and trusted
in falsehood.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Therefore will I also uncover your
skirts on your face, and your shame shall appear.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> I have seen your abominations, even
your adulteries, and your neighing, the lewdness of your prostitution,
on the hills in the field. Woe to you, Jerusalem! You will not be made
clean; how long shall it yet be?

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> The word of Yahweh that came to Jeremiah
concerning the drought.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Judah mourns, and its gates languish,
they sit in black on the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Their nobles send their little ones to
the waters: they come to the cisterns, and find no water; they return
with their vessels empty; they are disappointed and confounded, and
cover their heads.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Because of the ground which is cracked,
because no rain has been in the land, the plowmen are disappointed, they
cover their heads.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Yes, the hind also in the field calves,
and forsakes \[her young\], because there is no grass.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> The wild donkeys stand on the bare
heights, they pant for air like jackals; their eyes fail, because there
is no herbage.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Though our iniquities testify against us,
work for your name's sake, Yahweh; for our backslidings are many; we
have sinned against you.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> You hope of Israel, its Savior in the
time of trouble, why should you be as a foreigner in the land, and as a
wayfaring man who turns aside to stay for a night?

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Why should you be like a scared man, as a
mighty man who can't save? Yet you, Yahweh, are in the midst of us, and
we are called by your name; don't leave us.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Thus says Yahweh to this people, Even
so have they loved to wander; they have not refrained their feet:
therefore Yahweh does not accept them; now he will remember their
iniquity, and visit their sins.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Yahweh said to me, Don't pray for this
people for \[their\] good.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> When they fast, I will not hear their
cry; and when they offer burnt offering and meal offering, I will not
accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine,
and by the pestilence.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Then I said, Ah, Lord Yahweh! behold,
the prophets tell them, You shall not see the sword, neither shall you
have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Then Yahweh said to me, The prophets
prophesy lies in my name; I didn't send them, neither have I commanded
them, neither spoke I to them: they prophesy to you a lying vision, and
divination, and a thing of nothing, and the deceit of their own heart.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh concerning
the prophets who prophesy in my name, and I didn't send them, yet they
say, Sword and famine shall not be in this land: By sword and famine
shall those prophets be consumed.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> The people to whom they prophesy shall
be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the
sword; and they shall have none to bury them--them, their wives, nor
their sons, nor their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness on
them.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> You shall say this word to them, Let my
eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease; for the
virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very
grievous wound.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> If I go forth into the field, then,
behold, the slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, then,
behold, those who are sick with famine! for both the prophet and the
priest go about in the land, and have no knowledge.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Have you utterly rejected Judah? has
your soul loathed Zion? why have you struck us, and there is no healing
for us? We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of
healing, and behold, dismay!

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> We acknowledge, Yahweh, our wickedness,
and the iniquity of our fathers; for we have sinned against you.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Do not abhor \[us\], for your name's
sake; do not disgrace the throne of your glory: remember, don't break
your covenant with us.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Are there any among the vanities of the
nations that can cause rain? or can the sky give showers? Aren't you he,
Yahweh our God? therefore we will wait for you; for you have made all
these things.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then Yahweh said to me, Though Moses and
Samuel stood before me, yet my mind would not be toward this people:
cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> It shall happen, when they tell you,
Where shall we go forth? Then you shall tell them, Thus says Yahweh:
Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the
sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are
for captivity, to captivity.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> I will appoint over them four kinds, says
Yahweh: the sword to kill, and the dogs to tear, and the birds of the
sky, and the animals of the earth, to devour and to destroy.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> I will cause them to be tossed back and
forth among all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh, the son
of Hezekiah, king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For who will have pity on you, Jerusalem?
or who will bemoan you? or who will turn aside to ask of your welfare?

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> You have rejected me, says Yahweh, you
have gone backward: therefore have I stretched out my hand against you,
and destroyed you; I am weary with repenting.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> I have winnowed them with a fan in the
gates of the land; I have bereaved \[them\] of children, I have
destroyed my people; they didn't return from their ways.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Their widows are increased to me above
the sand of the seas; I have brought on them against the mother of the
young men a destroyer at noonday: I have caused anguish and terrors to
fall on her suddenly.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> She who has borne seven languishes; she
has given up the spirit; her sun is gone down while it was yet day; she
has been disappointed and confounded: and the residue of them will I
deliver to the sword before their enemies, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Woe is me, my mother, that you have
borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I
have not lent, neither have men lent to me; \[yet\] everyone of them
does curse me.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Yahweh said, Most certainly I will
strengthen you for good; most certainly I will cause the enemy to make
supplication to you in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Can one break iron, even iron from the
north, and brass?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Your substance and your treasures will
I give for a spoil without price, and that for all your sins, even in
all your borders.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> I will make \[them\] to pass with your
enemies into a land which you don't know; for a fire is kindled in my
anger, which shall burn on you.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Yahweh, you know; remember me, and
visit me, and avenge me of my persecutors; don't take me away in your
longsuffering: know that for your sake I have suffered reproach.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Your words were found, and I ate them;
and your words were to me a joy and the rejoicing of my heart: for I am
called by your name, Yahweh, God of Armies.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I didn't sit in the assembly of those
who make merry, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of your hand; for you
have filled me with indignation.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound
incurable, which refuses to be healed? will you indeed be to me as a
deceitful \[brook\], as waters that fail?

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh, If you
return, then will I bring you again, that you may stand before me; and
if you take forth the precious from the vile, you shall be as my mouth:
they shall return to you, but you shall not return to them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> I will make you to this people a
fortified bronze wall; and they shall fight against you, but they shall
not prevail against you; for I am with you to save you and to deliver
you, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> I will deliver you out of the hand of
the wicked, and I will redeem you out of the hand of the terrible.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The word of Yahweh came also to me,
saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> You shall not take a wife, neither shall
you have sons or daughters, in this place.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> For thus says Yahweh concerning the sons
and concerning the daughters who are born in this place, and concerning
their mothers who bore them, and concerning their fathers who became the
father of them in this land:

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> They shall die grievous deaths: they
shall not be lamented, neither shall they be buried; they shall be as
dung on the surface of the ground; and they shall be consumed by the
sword, and by famine; and their dead bodies shall be food for the birds
of the sky, and for the animals of the earth.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> For thus says Yahweh, Don't enter into
the house of mourning, neither go to lament, neither bemoan them; for I
have taken away my peace from this people, says Yahweh, even loving
kindness and tender mercies.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Both great and small shall die in this
land; they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor
cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> neither shall men break \[bread\] for
them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shall men give
them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their
mother.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> You shall not go into the house of
feasting to sit with them, to eat and to drink.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> For thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel: Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place, before your
eyes and in your days, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the
voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> It shall happen, when you shall show
this people all these words, and they shall tell you, Why has Yahweh
pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or
what is our sin that we have committed against Yahweh our God?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Then you shall tell them, Because your
fathers have forsaken me, says Yahweh, and have walked after other gods,
and have served them, and have worshiped them, and have forsaken me, and
have not kept my law;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> and you have done evil more than your
fathers; for, behold, you walk every one after the stubbornness of his
evil heart, so that you don't listen to me:

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> therefore will I cast you forth out of
this land into the land that you have not known, neither you nor your
fathers; and there you shall serve other gods day and night; for I will
show you no favor.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, says
Yahweh, that it shall no more be said, As Yahweh lives, who brought up
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> but, As Yahweh lives, who brought up
the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the
countries where he had driven them. I will bring them again into their
land that I gave to their fathers.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Behold, I will send for many fishermen,
says Yahweh, and they shall fish them up; and afterward I will send for
many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from
every hill, and out of the clefts of the rocks.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> For my eyes are on all their ways; they
are not hidden from my face, neither is their iniquity concealed from my
eyes.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> First I will recompense their iniquity
and their sin double, because they have polluted my land with the
carcasses of their detestable things, and have filled my inheritance
with their abominations.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Yahweh, my strength, and my stronghold,
and my refuge in the day of affliction, to you shall the nations come
from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Our fathers have inherited
nothing but lies, \[even\] vanity and things in which there is no
profit.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Shall a man make to himself gods, which
yet are no gods?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Therefore, behold, I will cause them to
know, this once will I cause them to know my hand and my might; and they
shall know that my name is Yahweh.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> The sin of Judah is written with a pen of
iron, \[and\] with the point of a diamond: it is engraved on the tablet
of their heart, and on the horns of your altars;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> while their children remember their
altars and their Asherim by the green trees on the high hills.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> My mountain in the field, I will give
your substance and all your treasures for a spoil, \[and\] your high
places, because of sin, throughout all your borders.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> You, even of yourself, shall discontinue
from your heritage that I gave you; and I will cause you to serve your
enemies in the land which you don't know: for you have kindled a fire in
my anger which shall burn forever.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Thus says Yahweh: Cursed is the man who
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from
Yahweh.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> For he shall be like the heath in the
desert, and shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched
places in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Blessed is the man who trusts in Yahweh,
and whose trust Yahweh is.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> For he shall be as a tree planted by the
waters, who spreads out its roots by the river, and shall not fear when
heat comes, but its leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the
year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> The heart is deceitful above all things,
and it is exceedingly corrupt: who can know it?

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> I, Yahweh, search the mind, I try the
heart, even to give every man according to his ways, according to the
fruit of his doings.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> As the partridge that sits on \[eggs\]
which she has not laid, so is he who gets riches, and not by right; in
the midst of his days they shall leave him, and at his end he shall be a
fool.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> A glorious throne, \[set\] on high from
the beginning, is the place of our sanctuary.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Yahweh, the hope of Israel, all who
forsake you shall be disappointed. Those who depart from me shall be
written in the earth, because they have forsaken Yahweh, the spring of
living waters.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Heal me, O Yahweh, and I shall be
healed; save me, and I shall be saved: for you are my praise.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Behold, they tell me, Where is the word
of Yahweh? let it come now.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> As for me, I have not hurried from
being a shepherd after you; neither have I desired the woeful day; you
know: that which came out of my lips was before your face.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Don't be a terror to me: you are my
refuge in the day of evil.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Let them be disappointed who persecute
me, but let not me be disappointed; let them be dismayed, but don't let
me be dismayed; bring on them the day of evil, and destroy them with
double destruction.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Thus said Yahweh to me: Go, and stand
in the gate of the children of the people, through which the kings of
Judah come in, and by which they go out, and in all the gates of
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> and tell them, Hear the word of Yahweh,
you kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
that enter in by these gates:

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Thus says Yahweh, Take heed to
yourselves, and bear no burden on the Sabbath day, nor bring it in by
the gates of Jerusalem;

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> neither carry forth a burden out of
your houses on the Sabbath day holy, neither do any work: but make the
Sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> But they didn't listen, neither turn
their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, and
might not receive instruction.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> It shall happen, if you diligently
listen to me, says Yahweh, to bring in no burden through the gates of
this city on the Sabbath day, but to make the Sabbath day holy, to do no
work therein;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> then shall there enter in by the gates
of this city kings and princes sitting on the throne of David, riding in
chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city shall remain forever.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> They shall come from the cities of
Judah, and from the places around Jerusalem, and from the land of
Benjamin, and from the lowland, and from the hill country, and from the
South, bringing burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and meal offerings, and
frankincense, and bringing \[sacrifices of\] thanksgiving, to the house
of Yahweh.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> But if you will not listen to me to
make the Sabbath day holy, and not to bear a burden and enter in at the
gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in its
gates, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Arise, and go down to the potter's house,
and there I will cause you to hear my words.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Then I went down to the potter's house,
and behold, he was making a work on the wheels.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> When the vessel that he made of the clay
was marred in the hand of the potter, he made it again another vessel,
as seemed good to the potter to make it.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Then the word of Yahweh came to me,
saying,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> House of Israel, can't I do with you as
this potter? says Yahweh. Behold, as the clay in the potter's hand, so
are you in my hand, house of Israel.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> At what instant I shall speak concerning
a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to break down and to
destroy it;

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> if that nation, concerning which I have
spoken, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do to them.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> At what instant I shall speak concerning
a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it;

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> if they do that which is evil in my
sight, that they not obey my voice, then I will repent of the good, with
which I said I would benefit them.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now therefore, speak to the men of
Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says Yahweh:
Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you:
return you now everyone from his evil way, and amend your ways and your
doings.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> But they say, It is in vain; for we
will walk after our own devices, and we will do everyone after the
stubbornness of his evil heart.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh: Ask now
among the nations, who has heard such things; the virgin of Israel has
done a very horrible thing.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Shall the snow of Lebanon fail from the
rock of the field? \[or\] shall the cold waters that flow down from afar
be dried up?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> For my people have forgotten me, they
have burned incense to false \[gods\]; and they have been made to
stumble in their ways, in the ancient paths, to walk in byways, in a way
not built up;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> to make their land an astonishment, and
a perpetual hissing; everyone who passes thereby shall be astonished,
and shake his head.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> I will scatter them as with an east
wind before the enemy; I will show them the back, and not the face, in
the day of their calamity.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Then they said, Come, and let us devise
devices against Jeremiah; for the law shall not perish from the priest,
nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let
us strike him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his
words.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Give heed to me, Yahweh, and listen to
the voice of those who contend with me.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Shall evil be recompensed for good? for
they have dug a pit for my soul. Remember how I stood before you to
speak good for them, to turn away your wrath from them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Therefore deliver up their children to
the famine, and give them over to the power of the sword; and let their
wives become childless, and widows; and let their men be slain of death,
\[and\] their young men struck of the sword in battle.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Let a cry be heard from their houses,
when you shall bring a troop suddenly on them; for they have dug a pit
to take me, and hid snares for my feet.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Yet, Yahweh, you know all their counsel
against me to kill me; don't forgive their iniquity, neither blot out
their sin from your sight; but let them be overthrown before you; deal
you with them in the time of your anger.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Thus said Yahweh, Go, and buy a potter's
earthen bottle, and \[take\] of the elders of the people, and of the
elders of the priests;

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> and go forth to the valley of the son of
Hinnom, which is by the entry of the gate Harsith, and proclaim there
the words that I shall tell you;

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> and say, Hear the word of Yahweh, kings
of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem: thus says Yahweh of Armies, the
God of Israel, Behold, I will bring evil on this place, which whoever
hears, his ears shall tingle.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Because they have forsaken me, and have
estranged this place, and have burned incense in it to other gods, that
they didn't know, they and their fathers and the kings of Judah; and
have filled this place with the blood of innocents,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> and have built the high places of Baal,
to burn their sons in the fire for burnt offerings to Baal; which I
didn't command, nor spoke it, neither came it into my mind:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> therefore, behold, the days come, says
Yahweh, that this place shall no more be called Topheth, nor The valley
of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of Slaughter.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> I will make void the counsel of Judah and
Jerusalem in this place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword
before their enemies, and by the hand of those who seek their life: and
their dead bodies will I give to be food for the birds of the sky, and
for the animals of the earth.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> I will make this city an astonishment,
and a hissing; everyone who passes thereby shall be astonished and hiss
because of all its plagues.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> I will cause them to eat the flesh of
their sons and the flesh of their daughters; and they shall eat everyone
the flesh of his friend, in the siege and in the distress, with which
their enemies, and those who seek their life, shall distress them.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Then you shall break the bottle in the
sight of the men who go with you,

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> and shall tell them, Thus says Yahweh
of Armies: Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaks
a potter's vessel, that can't be made whole again; and they shall bury
in Topheth, until there be no place to bury.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Thus will I do to this place, says
Yahweh, and to its inhabitants, even making this city as Topheth:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> and the houses of Jerusalem, and the
houses of the kings of Judah, which are defiled, shall be as the place
of Topheth, even all the houses on whose roofs they have burned incense
to all the army of the sky, and have poured out drink offerings to other
gods.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Then came Jeremiah from Topheth, where
Yahweh had sent him to prophesy; and he stood in the court of Yahweh's
house, and said to all the people:

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, Behold, I will bring on this city and on all its towns all the
evil that I have pronounced against it; because they have made their
neck stiff, that they may not hear my words.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Now Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest,
who was chief officer in the house of Yahweh, heard Jeremiah prophesying
these things.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Then Pashhur struck Jeremiah the prophet,
and put him in the stocks that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, which
was in the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> It happened on the next day, that Pashhur
brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then Jeremiah said to him,
Yahweh has not called your name Pashhur, but Magormissabib.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> For thus says Yahweh, Behold, I will make
you a terror to yourself, and to all your friends; and they shall fall
by the sword of their enemies, and your eyes shall see it; and I will
give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry
them captive to Babylon, and shall kill them with the sword.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Moreover I will give all the riches of
this city, and all its gains, and all the precious things of it, yes,
all the treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of
their enemies; and they shall make them a prey, and take them, and carry
them to Babylon.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> You, Pashhur, and all who dwell in your
house shall go into captivity; and you shall come to Babylon, and there
you shall die, and there you shall be buried, you, and all your friends,
to whom you have prophesied falsely.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Yahweh, you have persuaded me, and I was
persuaded; you are stronger than I, and have prevailed: I am become a
laughing-stock all the day, every one mocks me.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> For as often as I speak, I cry out; I
cry, Violence and destruction! because the word of Yahweh is made a
reproach to me, and a derision, all the day.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> If I say, I will not make mention of him,
nor speak any more in his name, then there is in my heart as it were a
burning fire shut up in my bones, and I am weary with forbearing, and I
can't \[contain\].

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> For I have heard the defaming of many,
terror on every side. Denounce, and we will denounce him, \[say\] all my
familiar friends, those who watch for my fall; perhaps he will be
persuaded, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our
revenge on him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> But Yahweh is with me as an awesome
mighty one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not
prevail; they shall be utterly disappointed, because they have not dealt
wisely, even with an everlasting dishonor which shall never be
forgotten.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> But, Yahweh of Armies, who tests the
righteous, who sees the heart and the mind, let me see your vengeance on
them; for to you have I revealed my cause.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Sing to Yahweh, praise Yahweh; for he
has delivered the soul of the needy from the hand of evildoers.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Cursed is the day in which I was born:
don't let the day in which my mother bore me be blessed.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Cursed is the man who brought news to
my father, saying, A boy is born to you; making him very glad.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Let that man be as the cities which
Yahweh overthrew, and didn't repent: and let him hear a cry in the
morning, and shouting at noontime;

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> because he didn't kill me from the
womb; and so my mother would have been my grave, and her womb always
great.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Why came I forth out of the womb to see
labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh, when king Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur the son of Malchijah, and
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, saying,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Please inquire of Yahweh for us; for
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon makes war against us: perhaps Yahweh will
deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from
us.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Then Jeremiah said to them, You shall
tell Zedekiah:

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel,
Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, with
which you fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans
who besiege you, without the walls; and I will gather them into the
midst of this city.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> I myself will fight against you with an
outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in wrath,
and in great indignation.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> I will strike the inhabitants of this
city, both man and animal: they shall die of a great pestilence.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Afterward, says Yahweh, I will deliver
Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, even such as
are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the
famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into the
hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life:
and he shall strike them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare
them, neither have pity, nor have mercy.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> To this people you shall say, Thus says
Yahweh: Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> He who remains in this city shall die by
the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; but he who goes
out, and passes over to the Chaldeans who besiege you, he shall live,
and his life shall be to him for a prey.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> For I have set my face on this city for
evil, and not for good, says Yahweh: it shall be given into the hand of
the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Touching the house of the king of
Judah, hear the word of Yahweh:

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> House of David, thus says Yahweh,
Execute justice in the morning, and deliver him who is robbed out of the
hand of the oppressor, lest my wrath go forth like fire, and burn so
that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Behold, I am against you, O inhabitant
of the valley, \[and\] of the rock of the plain, says Yahweh; you that
say, Who shall come down against us? or who shall enter into our
habitations?

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> I will punish you according to the
fruit of your doings, says Yahweh; and I will kindle a fire in her
forest, and it shall devour all that is around her.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Thus said Yahweh: Go down to the house of
the king of Judah, and speak there this word,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Say, Hear the word of Yahweh, king of
Judah, who sits on the throne of David, you, and your servants, and your
people who enter in by these gates.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Thus says Yahweh: Execute justice and
righteousness, and deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of the
oppressor: and do no wrong, do no violence, to the foreigner, the
fatherless, nor the widow; neither shed innocent blood in this place.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> For if you do this thing indeed, then
shall there enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting on the
throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants,
and his people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> But if you will not hear these words, I
swear by myself, says Yahweh, that this house shall become a desolation.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thus says Yahweh concerning the house
of the king of Judah: You are Gilead to me, \[and\] the head of Lebanon;
\[yet\] surely I will make you a wilderness, \[and\] cities which are
not inhabited.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> I will prepare destroyers against you,
everyone with his weapons; and they shall cut down your choice cedars,
and cast them into the fire.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Many nations shall pass by this city, and
they shall say every man to his neighbor, Why has Yahweh done thus to
this great city?

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then they shall answer, Because they
forsook the covenant of Yahweh their God, and worshiped other gods, and
served them.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Don't weep for the dead, neither bemoan
him; but weep bitterly for him who goes away; for he shall return no
more, nor see his native country.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> For thus says Yahweh touching Shallum
the son of Josiah, king of Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah his
father, \[and\] who went forth out of this place: He shall not return
there any more.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> But in the place where they have led
him captive, there shall he die, and he shall see this land no more.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Woe to him who builds his house by
unrighteousness, and his rooms by injustice; who uses his neighbor's
service without wages, and doesn't give him his hire;

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> who says, I will build me a wide house
and spacious rooms, and cuts him out windows; and it is ceiling with
cedar, and painted with vermilion.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Shall you reign, because you strive to
excel in cedar? Didn't your father eat and drink, and do justice and
righteousness? then it was well with him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He judged the cause of the poor and
needy; then it was well. Wasn't this to know me? says Yahweh.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> But your eyes and your heart are not
but for your covetousness, and for shedding innocent blood, and for
oppression, and for violence, to do it.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh concerning
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah: they shall not lament for
him, \[saying\], Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! They shall not lament for
him, \[saying\] Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> He shall be buried with the burial of a
donkey, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up
your voice in Bashan, and cry from Abarim; for all your lovers are
destroyed.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> I spoke to you in your prosperity; but
you said, I will not hear. This has been your way from your youth, that
you didn't obey my voice.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> The wind shall feed all your shepherds,
and your lovers shall go into captivity: surely then you will be ashamed
and confounded for all your wickedness.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Inhabitant of Lebanon, who makes your
nest in the cedars, how greatly to be pitied you will be when pangs come
on you, the pain as of a woman in travail!

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> As I live, says Yahweh, though Coniah
the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet on my right hand, yet
would I pluck you there;

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> and I will give you into the hand of
those who seek your life, and into the hand of them of whom you are
afraid, even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into
the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> I will cast you out, and your mother
who bore you, into another country, where you were not born; and there
you will die.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> But to the land whereunto their soul
longs to return, there shall they not return.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Is this man Coniah a despised broken
vessel? is he a vessel in which none delights? why are they cast out, he
and his seed, and are cast into the land which they don't know?

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of
Yahweh.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Thus says Yahweh, Write you this man
childless, a man who shall not prosper in his days; for no more shall a
man of his seed prosper, sitting on the throne of David, and ruling in
Judah.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Woe to the shepherds who destroy and
scatter the sheep of my pasture! says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh, the God of
Israel, against the shepherds who feed my people: You have scattered my
flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them; behold, I will
visit on you the evil of your doings, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> I will gather the remnant of my flock out
of all the countries where I have driven them, and will bring them again
to their folds; and they shall be fruitful and multiply.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I will set up shepherds over them, who
shall feed them; and they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither
shall any be lacking, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Behold, the days come, says Yahweh, that
I will raise to David a righteous Branch, and he shall reign as king and
deal wisely, and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely; and this is his name by which he shall be
called: Yahweh our righteousness.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, says
Yahweh, that they shall no more say, As Yahweh lives, who brought up the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> but, As Yahweh lives, who brought up and
who led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and
from all the countries where I had driven them. They shall dwell in
their own land.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Concerning the prophets. My heart within
me is broken, all my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a
man whom wine has overcome, because of Yahweh, and because of his holy
words.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> For the land is full of adulterers; for
because of swearing the land mourns; the pastures of the wilderness are
dried up. Their course is evil, and their might is not right;

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> for both prophet and priest are
profane; yes, in my house have I found their wickedness, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Therefore their way shall be to them as
slippery places in the darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall
therein; for I will bring evil on them, even the year of their
visitation, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> I have seen folly in the prophets of
Samaria; they prophesied by Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> In the prophets of Jerusalem also I
have seen a horrible thing: they commit adultery, and walk in lies; and
they strengthen the hands of evildoers, so that none does return from
his wickedness: they are all of them become to me as Sodom, and its
inhabitants as Gomorrah.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies
concerning the prophets: Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and
make them drink the water of gall; for from the prophets of Jerusalem is
ungodliness gone forth into all the land.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, Don't
listen to the words of the prophets who prophesy to you: they teach you
vanity; they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth
of Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> They say continually to those who
despise me, Yahweh has said, You shall have peace; and to everyone who
walks in the stubbornness of his own heart they say, No evil shall come
on you.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> For who has stood in the council of
Yahweh, that he should perceive and hear his word? who has marked my
word, and heard it?

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Behold, the storm of Yahweh, \[even
his\] wrath, is gone forth, yes, a whirling storm: it shall burst on the
head of the wicked.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> The anger of Yahweh shall not return,
until he has executed, and until he have performed the intents of his
heart: in the latter days you shall understand it perfectly.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> I sent not these prophets, yet they
ran: I didn't speak to them, yet they prophesied.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if they had stood in my council,
then had they caused my people to hear my words, and had turned them
from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Am I a God at hand, says Yahweh, and
not a God afar off?

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Can any hide himself in secret places
so that I shall not see him? says Yahweh. Don't I fill heaven and earth?
says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> I have heard what the prophets have
said, who prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have
dreamed.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> How long shall this be in the heart of
the prophets who prophesy lies, even the prophets of the deceit of their
own heart?

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> who think to cause my people to forget
my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbor, as
their fathers forgot my name for Baal.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> The prophet who has a dream, let him
tell a dream; and he who has my word, let him speak my word faithfully.
What is the straw to the wheat? says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Isn't my word like fire? says Yahweh;
and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Therefore, behold, I am against the
prophets, says Yahweh, who steal my words everyone from his neighbor.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Behold, I am against the prophets, says
Yahweh, who use their tongues, and say, He says.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Behold, I am against those who prophesy
lying dreams, says Yahweh, and do tell them, and cause my people to err
by their lies, and by their vain boasting: yet I didn't send them, nor
commanded them; neither do they profit this people at all, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> When this people, or the prophet, or a
priest, shall ask you, saying, What is the burden of Yahweh? Then you
shall tell them, What burden! I will cast you off, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> As for the prophet, and the priest, and
the people, who shall say, The burden of Yahweh, I will even punish that
man and his house.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> You shall say everyone to his neighbor,
and everyone to his brother, What has Yahweh answered? and, What has
Yahweh spoken?

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> You shall mention the burden of Yahweh
no more: for every man's own word shall be his burden; for you have
perverted the words of the living God, of Yahweh of Armies our God.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> You shall say to the prophet, What has
Yahweh answered you? and, What has Yahweh spoken?

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> But if you say, The burden of Yahweh;
therefore thus says Yahweh: Because you say this word, The burden of
Yahweh, and I have sent to you, saying, You shall not say, The burden of
Yahweh;

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> therefore, behold, I will utterly
forget you, and I will cast you off, and the city that I gave to you and
to your fathers, away from my presence:

<span id="an_23:40">23:40</span> and I will bring an everlasting
reproach on you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Yahweh showed me, and behold, two baskets
of figs set before the temple of Yahweh, after that Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king
of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the craftsmen and smiths, from
Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> One basket had very good figs, like the
figs that are first-ripe; and the other basket had very bad figs, which
could not be eaten, they were so bad.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Then Yahweh said to me, What do you see,
Jeremiah? I said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the bad, very bad,
that can't be eaten, they are so bad.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> The word of Yahweh came to me, saying,

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel: Like
these good figs, so will I regard the captives of Judah, whom I have
sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans, for good.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> For I will set my eyes on them for good,
and I will bring them again to this land: and I will build them, and not
pull them down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> I will give them a heart to know me, that
I am Yahweh: and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; for
they shall return to me with their whole heart.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> As the bad figs, which can't be eaten,
they are so bad, surely thus says Yahweh, So will I give up Zedekiah the
king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, who remain
in this land, and those who dwell in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> I will even give them up to be tossed
back and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil; to be a
reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places where I shall
drive them.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> I will send the sword, the famine, and
the pestilence, among them, until they be consumed from off the land
that I gave to them and to their fathers.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning
all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah, king of Judah (the same was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon),

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> which Jeremiah the prophet spoke to all
the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying:

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> From the thirteenth year of Josiah the
son of Amon, king of Judah, even to this day, these twenty-three years,
the word of Yahweh has come to me, and I have spoken to you, rising up
early and speaking; but you have not listened.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Yahweh has sent to you all his servants
the prophets, rising up early and sending them (but you have not
listened, nor inclined your ear to hear)

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> saying, Return now everyone from his evil
way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that Yahweh
has given to you and to your fathers, from of old and even forevermore;

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> and don't go after other gods to serve
them or worship them, and don't provoke me to anger with the work of
your hands; and I will do you no harm.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Yet you have not listened to me, says
Yahweh; that you may provoke me to anger with the work of your hands to
your own hurt.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies:
Because you have not heard my words,

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> behold, I will send and take all the
families of the north, says Yahweh, and \[I will send\] to
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them
against this land, and against its inhabitants, and against all these
nations around; and I will utterly destroy them, and make them an
astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual desolations.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Moreover I will take from them the
voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom
and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light
of the lamp.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> This whole land shall be a desolation,
and an astonishment; and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon
seventy years.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> It shall happen, when seventy years are
accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation,
says Yahweh, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans; and I
will make it desolate forever.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> I will bring on that land all my words
which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this
book, which Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> For many nations and great kings shall
make bondservants of them, even of them; and I will recompense them
according to their deeds, and according to the work of their hands.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> For thus says Yahweh, the God of
Israel, to me: take this cup of the wine of wrath at my hand, and cause
all the nations, to whom I send you, to drink it.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> They shall drink, and reel back and
forth, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Then took I the cup at Yahweh's hand,
and made all the nations to drink, to whom Yahweh had sent me:

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> \[to wit\], Jerusalem, and the cities
of Judah, and its kings, and its princes, to make them a desolation, an
astonishment, a hissing, and a curse, as it is this day;

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his
servants, and his princes, and all his people;

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> and all the mixed people, and all the
kings of the land of the Uz, and all the kings of the Philistines, and
Ashkelon, and Gaza, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod;

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> Edom, and Moab, and the children of
Ammon;

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> and all the kings of Tyre, and all the
kings of Sidon, and the kings of the isle which is beyond the sea;

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all who
have the corners \[of their hair\] cut off;

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> and all the kings of Arabia, and all
the kings of the mixed people who dwell in the wilderness;

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> and all the kings of Zimri, and all the
kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes;

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> and all the kings of the north, far and
near, one with another; and all the kingdoms of the world, which are on
the surface of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall drink after
them.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> You shall tell them, Thus says Yahweh
of Armies, the God of Israel: Drink, and be drunk, vomit, fall, and rise
no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> It shall be, if they refuse to take the
cup at your hand to drink, then you shall tell them, Thus says Yahweh of
Armies: You shall surely drink.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For, behold, I begin to work evil at
the city which is called by my name; and should you be utterly
unpunished? You shall not be unpunished; for I will call for a sword on
all the inhabitants of the earth, says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> Therefore prophesy you against them all
these words, and tell them, Yahweh will roar from on high, and utter his
voice from his holy habitation; he will mightily roar against his fold;
he will give a shout, as those who tread \[the grapes\], against all the
inhabitants of the earth.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> A noise shall come even to the end of
the earth; for Yahweh has a controversy with the nations; he will enter
into judgment with all flesh: as for the wicked, he will give them to
the sword, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, Behold,
evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great storm shall be
raised up from the uttermost parts of the earth.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> The slain of Yahweh shall be at that
day from one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth: they
shall not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung
on the surface of the ground.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Wail, you shepherds, and cry; and
wallow \[in ashes\], you principal of the flock; for the days of your
slaughter and of your dispersions are fully come, and you shall fall
like a goodly vessel.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> The shepherds shall have no way to
flee, nor the principal of the flock to escape.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> A voice of the cry of the shepherds,
and the wailing of the principal of the flock! for Yahweh lays waste
their pasture.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> The peaceable folds are brought to
silence because of the fierce anger of Yahweh.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> He has left his covert, as the lion;
for their land is become an astonishment because of the fierceness of
the oppressing \[sword\], and because of his fierce anger.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, came this word from Yahweh,
saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Thus says Yahweh: Stand in the court of
Yahweh's house, and speak to all the cities of Judah, which come to
worship in Yahweh's house, all the words that I command you to speak to
them; don't diminish a word.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> It may be they will listen, and turn
every man from his evil way; that I may repent me of the evil which I
purpose to do to them because of the evil of their doings.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> You shall tell them, Thus says Yahweh: If
you will not listen to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before
you,

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> to listen to the words of my servants the
prophets, whom I send to you, even rising up early and sending them, but
you have not listened;

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> then will I make this house like Shiloh,
and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The priests and the prophets and all the
people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> It happened, when Jeremiah had made an
end of speaking all that Yahweh had commanded him to speak to all the
people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people laid hold
on him, saying, You shall surely die.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Why have you prophesied in the name of
Yahweh, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be
desolate, without inhabitant? All the people were gathered to Jeremiah
in the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> When the princes of Judah heard these
things, they came up from the king's house to the house of Yahweh; and
they sat in the entry of the new gate of Yahweh's \[house\].

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Then spoke the priests and the prophets
to the princes and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy of
death; for he has prophesied against this city, as you have heard with
your ears.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Then spoke Jeremiah to all the princes
and to all the people, saying, Yahweh sent me to prophesy against this
house and against this city all the words that you have heard.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Now therefore amend your ways and your
doings, and obey the voice of Yahweh your God; and Yahweh will repent
him of the evil that he has pronounced against you.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> But as for me, behold, I am in your
hand: do with me as is good and right in your eyes.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Only know for certain that, if you put
me to death, you will bring innocent blood on yourselves, and on this
city, and on its inhabitants; for of a truth Yahweh has sent me to you
to speak all these words in your ears.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Then the princes and all the people
said to the priests and to the prophets: This man is not worthy of
death; for he has spoken to us in the name of Yahweh our God.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Then rose up certain of the elders of
the land, and spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying,

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Micah the Morashtite prophesied in the
days of Hezekiah king of Judah; and he spoke to all the people of Judah,
saying, Thus says Yahweh of Armies: Zion shall be plowed as a field, and
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high
places of a forest.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all
Judah put him to death? Didn't he fear Yahweh, and entreat the favor of
Yahweh, and Yahweh relented of the disaster which he had pronounced
against them? Thus should we commit great evil against our own souls.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> There was also a man who prophesied in
the name of Yahweh, Uriah the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath Jearim; and he
prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the
words of Jeremiah:

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> and when Jehoiakim the king, with all
his mighty men, and all the princes, heard his words, the king sought to
put him to death; but when Uriah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and
went into Egypt:

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> and Jehoiakim the king sent men into
Egypt, \[namely\], Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him,
into Egypt;

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> and they fetched forth Uriah out of
Egypt, and brought him to Jehoiakim the king, who killed him with the
sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> But the hand of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand
of the people to put him to death.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> In the beginning of the reign of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, came this word to Jeremiah
from Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Thus says Yahweh to me: Make bonds and
bars, and put them on your neck;

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> and send them to the king of Edom, and to
the king of Moab, and to the king of the children of Ammon, and to the
king of Tyre, and to the king of Sidon, by the hand of the messengers
who come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah;

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> and give them a command to their masters,
saying, Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, You shall tell
your masters:

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> I have made the earth, the men and the
animals that are on the surface of the earth, by my great power and by
my outstretched arm; and I give it to whom it seems right to me.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Now have I given all these lands into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the animals
of the field also have I given him to serve him.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> All the nations shall serve him, and his
son, and his son's son, until the time of his own land come: and then
many nations and great kings shall make him their bondservant.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> It shall happen, that the nation and the
kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,
and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon,
that nation will I punish, says Yahweh, with the sword, and with the
famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> But as for you, don't you listen to your
prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreams, nor to your
soothsayers, nor to your sorcerers, who speak to you, saying, You shall
not serve the king of Babylon:

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> for they prophesy a lie to you, to
remove you far from your land, and that I should drive you out, and you
should perish.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the nation that shall bring their
neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, that
\[nation\] will I let remain in their own land, says Yahweh; and they
shall till it, and dwell therein.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> I spoke to Zedekiah king of Judah
according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of
the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Why will you die, you and your people,
by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as Yahweh has spoken
concerning the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> Don't listen to the words of the
prophets who speak to you, saying, You shall not serve the king of
Babylon; for they prophesy a lie to you.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> For I have not sent them, says Yahweh,
but they prophesy falsely in my name; that I may drive you out, and that
you may perish, you, and the prophets who prophesy to you.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> Also I spoke to the priests and to all
this people, saying, Thus says Yahweh: Don't listen to the words of your
prophets who prophesy to you, saying, Behold, the vessels of Yahweh's
house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon; for they prophesy
a lie to you.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Don't listen to them; serve the king of
Babylon, and live: why should this city become a desolation?

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> But if they be prophets, and if the
word of Yahweh be with them, let them now make intercession to Yahweh of
Armies, that the vessels which are left in the house of Yahweh, and in
the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, don't go to Babylon.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> For thus says Yahweh of Armies
concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the
bases, and concerning the residue of the vessels that are left in this
city,

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
didn't take, when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim,
king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah
and Jerusalem;

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> yes, thus says Yahweh of Armies, the
God of Israel, concerning the vessels that are left in the house of
Yahweh, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem:

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> They shall be carried to Babylon, and
there shall they be, until the day that I visit them, says Yahweh; then
will I bring them up, and restore them to this place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> It happened the same year, in the
beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, in
the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azzur, the prophet, who was of
Gibeon, spoke to me in the house of Yahweh, in the presence of the
priests and of all the people, saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Thus speaks Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Within two full years will I bring again
into this place all the vessels of Yahweh's house, that Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried to Babylon:

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> and I will bring again to this place
Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the captives of
Judah, who went to Babylon, says Yahweh; for I will break the yoke of
the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Then the prophet Jeremiah said to the
prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of
all the people who stood in the house of Yahweh,

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen:
Yahweh do so; Yahweh perform your words which you have prophesied, to
bring again the vessels of Yahweh's house, and all them of the
captivity, from Babylon to this place.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Nevertheless hear you now this word that
I speak in your ears, and in the ears of all the people:

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The prophets who have been before me and
before you of old prophesied against many countries, and against great
kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The prophet who prophesies of peace, when
the word of the prophet shall happen, then shall the prophet be known,
that Yahweh has truly sent him.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then Hananiah the prophet took the bar
from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and broke it.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Hananiah spoke in the presence of all
the people, saying, Thus says Yahweh: Even so will I break the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon within two full years from off the neck
of all the nations. The prophet Jeremiah went his way.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> Then the word of Yahweh came to
Jeremiah, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the bar from off
the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Go, and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus
says Yahweh: You have broken the bars of wood; but you have made in
their place bars of iron.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> For thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel: I have put a yoke of iron on the neck of all these nations,
that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve
him: and I have given him the animals of the field also.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Then the prophet Jeremiah said to
Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah: Yahweh has not sent you; but
you make this people to trust in a lie.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh, Behold, I
will send you away from off the surface of the earth: this year you
shall die, because you have spoken rebellion against Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> So Hananiah the prophet died the same
year in the seventh month.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Now these are the words of the letter
that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the
elders of the captivity, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to
all the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from
Jerusalem to Babylon,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> (after that Jeconiah the king, and the
queen mother, and the eunuchs, \[and\] the princes of Judah and
Jerusalem, and the craftsmen, and the smiths, were departed from
Jerusalem),

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> by the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan,
and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to
Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon), saying,

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, to all the captivity, whom I have caused to be carried away
captive from Jerusalem to Babylon:

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Build houses, and dwell in them; and
plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Take wives, and father sons and
daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to
husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; and multiply there, and
don't be diminished.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Seek the peace of the city where I have
caused you to be carried away captive, and pray to Yahweh for it; for in
its peace you shall have peace.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> For thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel: Don't let your prophets who are in the midst of you, and your
diviners, deceive you; neither listen to your dreams which you cause to
be dreamed.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> For they prophesy falsely to you in my
name: I have not sent them, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> For thus says Yahweh, After seventy
years are accomplished for Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my
good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> For I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, says Yahweh, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you
hope and a future.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> You shall call on me, and you shall go
and pray to me, and I will listen to you.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> You shall seek me, and find me, when
you shall search for me with all your heart.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> I will be found by you, says Yahweh,
and I will turn again your captivity, and I will gather you from all the
nations, and from all the places where I have driven you, says Yahweh;
and I will bring you again to the place from where I caused you to be
carried away captive.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Because you have said, Yahweh has
raised us up prophets in Babylon;

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> thus says Yahweh concerning the king
who sits on the throne of David, and concerning all the people who dwell
in this city, your brothers who haven't gone forth with you into
captivity;

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> thus says Yahweh of Armies; Behold, I
will send on them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will
make them like vile figs, that can't be eaten, they are so bad.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> I will pursue after them with the
sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them
to be tossed back and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth, to be
an object of horror, and an astonishment, and a hissing, and a reproach,
among all the nations where I have driven them;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> because they have not listened to my
words, says Yahweh, with which I sent to them my servants the prophets,
rising up early and sending them; but you would not hear, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Hear therefore the word of Yahweh, all
you of the captivity, whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah the
son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie to you in my name: Behold, I will
deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and he
shall kill them before your eyes;

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> and of them shall be taken up a curse
by all the captives of Judah who are in Babylon, saying, Yahweh make you
like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the
fire;

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> because they have worked folly in
Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors' wives, and
have spoken words in my name falsely, which I didn't command them; and I
am he who knows, and am witness, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite you
shall speak, saying,

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> Thus speaks Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel, saying, Because you have sent letters in your own name to all
the people who are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah,
the priest, and to all the priests, saying,

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Yahweh has made you priest in the place
of Jehoiada the priest, that there may be officers in the house of
Yahweh, for every man who is mad, and makes himself a prophet, that you
should put him in the stocks and in shackles.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> Now therefore, why have you not rebuked
Jeremiah of Anathoth, who makes himself a prophet to you,

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> because he has sent to us in Babylon,
saying, \[The captivity\] is long: build houses, and dwell in them; and
plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them?

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> Zephaniah the priest read this letter
in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> Then came the word of Yahweh to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> Send to all them of the captivity,
saying, Thus says Yahweh concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite: Because
Shemaiah has prophesied to you, and I didn't send him, and he has caused
you to trust in a lie;

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> therefore thus says Yahweh, Behold, I
will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed; he shall not have a
man to dwell among this people, neither shall he see the good that I
will do to my people, says Yahweh, because he has spoken rebellion
against Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Thus speaks Yahweh, the God of Israel,
saying, Write all the words that I have spoken to you in a book.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> For, behold, the days come, says Yahweh,
that I will turn again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, says
Yahweh; and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their
fathers, and they shall possess it.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> These are the words that Yahweh spoke
concerning Israel and concerning Judah.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> For thus says Yahweh: We have heard a
voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Ask now, and see whether a man does
travail with child: why do I see every man with his hands on his waist,
as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Alas! for that day is great, so that none
is like it: it is even the time of Jacob's trouble; but he shall be
saved out of it.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> It shall come to pass in that day, says
Yahweh of Armies, that I will break his yoke from off your neck, and
will burst your bonds; and strangers shall no more make him their
bondservant;

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> but they shall serve Yahweh their God,
and David their king, whom I will raise up to them.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Therefore don't you be afraid, O Jacob
my servant, says Yahweh; neither be dismayed, Israel: for, behold, I
will save you from afar, and your seed from the land of their captivity;
and Jacob shall return, and shall be quiet and at ease, and none shall
make him afraid.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For I am with you, says Yahweh, to save
you: for I will make a full end of all the nations where I have
scattered you, but I will not make a full end of you; but I will correct
you in measure, and will in no way leave you unpunished.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> For thus says Yahweh, Your hurt is
incurable, and your wound grievous.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is none to plead your cause, that
you may be bound up: you have no healing medicines.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> All your lovers have forgotten you;
they don't seek you: for I have wounded you with the wound of an enemy,
with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the greatness of your
iniquity, because your sins were increased.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> Why do you cry for your hurt? Your pain
is incurable: for the greatness of your iniquity, because your sins were
increased, I have done these things to you.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Therefore all those who devour you
shall be devoured; and all your adversaries, everyone of them, shall go
into captivity; and those who despoil you shall be a spoil, and all who
prey on you will I give for a prey.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> For I will restore health to you, and I
will heal you of your wounds, says Yahweh; because they have called you
an outcast, \[saying\], It is Zion, whom no man seeks after.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Thus says Yahweh: Behold, I will turn
again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have compassion on his
dwelling places; and the city shall be built on its own hill, and the
palace shall be inhabited in its own way.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Out of them shall proceed thanksgiving
and the voice of those who make merry: and I will multiply them, and
they shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they shall not be
small.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Their children also shall be as before,
and their congregation shall be established before me; and I will punish
all who oppress them.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Their prince shall be of themselves,
and their ruler shall proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause
him to draw near, and he shall approach to me: for who is he who has had
boldness to approach to me? says Yahweh.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> You shall be my people, and I will be
your God.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Behold, the storm of Yahweh, \[even
his\] wrath, is gone forth, a sweeping storm: it shall burst on the head
of the wicked.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> The fierce anger of Yahweh will not
return, until he has executed, and until he has performed the intentions
of his heart. In the latter days you will understand it.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> At that time, says Yahweh, will I be the
God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Thus says Yahweh, The people who were
left of the sword found favor in the wilderness; even Israel, when I
went to cause him to rest.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Yahweh appeared of old to me, \[saying\],
Yes, I have loved you with an everlasting love: therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn you.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Again will I build you, and you shall be
built, O virgin of Israel: again you shall be adorned with your
tambourines, and shall go forth in the dances of those who make merry.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Again you shall plant vineyards on the
mountains of Samaria; the planters shall plant, and shall enjoy \[its
fruit\].

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> For there shall be a day, that the
watchmen on the hills of Ephraim shall cry, Arise, and let us go up to
Zion to Yahweh our God.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> For thus says Yahweh, Sing with gladness
for Jacob, and shout for the chief of the nations: publish, praise, and
say, Yahweh, save your people, the remnant of Israel.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Behold, I will bring them from the north
country, and gather them from the uttermost parts of the earth, \[and\]
with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her who
travails with child together: a great company shall they return here.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> They shall come with weeping; and with
petitions will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by rivers of
waters, in a straight way in which they shall not stumble; for I am a
father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Hear the word of Yahweh, you nations,
and declare it in the islands afar off; and say, He who scattered Israel
will gather him, and keep him, as shepherd does his flock.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For Yahweh has ransomed Jacob, and
redeemed him from the hand of him who was stronger than he.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> They shall come and sing in the height
of Zion, and shall flow to the goodness of Yahweh, to the grain, and to
the new wine, and to the oil, and to the young of the flock and of the
herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not
sorrow any more at all.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Then shall the virgin rejoice in the
dance, and the young men and the old together; for I will turn their
mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from
their sorrow.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> I will satiate the soul of the priests
with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, says
Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Thus says Yahweh: A voice is heard in
Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children;
she refuses to be comforted for her children, because they are no more.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Thus says Yahweh: Refrain your voice
from weeping, and your eyes from tears; for your work shall be rewarded,
says Yahweh; and they shall come again from the land of the enemy.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> There is hope for your latter end, says
Yahweh; and \[your\] children shall come again to their own border.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself \[thus\], You have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a calf
unaccustomed \[to the yoke\]: turn me, and I shall be turned; for you
are Yahweh my God.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> Surely after that I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I struck on my thigh: I was
ashamed, yes, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my
youth.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a darling
child? for as often as I speak against him, I do earnestly remember him
still: therefore my heart yearns for him; I will surely have mercy on
him, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> Set up road signs, make guideposts; set
your heart toward the highway, even the way by which you went: turn
again, virgin of Israel, turn again to these your cities.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> How long will you go here and there,
you backsliding daughter? for Yahweh has created a new thing in the
earth: a woman shall encompass a man.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, Yet again shall they use this speech in the land of Judah and in
its cities, when I shall bring again their captivity: Yahweh bless you,
habitation of righteousness, mountain of holiness.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> Judah and all its cities shall dwell
therein together, the farmers, and those who go about with flocks.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> For I have satiated the weary soul, and
every sorrowful soul have I replenished.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> On this I awakened, and saw; and my
sleep was sweet to me.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> Behold, the days come, says Yahweh,
that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed
of man, and with the seed of animal.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> It shall happen that, like as I have
watched over them to pluck up and to break down and to overthrow and to
destroy and to afflict, so will I watch over them to build and to plant,
says Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> In those days they shall say no more,
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on
edge.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> But everyone shall die for his own
iniquity: every man who eats the sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on
edge.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Behold, the days come, says Yahweh,
that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the
house of Judah:

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> not according to the covenant that I
made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring
them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they broke, although I
was a husband to them, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> But this is the covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel after those days, says Yahweh: I will put
my law in their inward parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I
will be their God, and they shall be my people:

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> and they shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know Yahweh; for they
shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says
Yahweh: for I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember
no more.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Thus says Yahweh, who gives the sun for
a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a
light by night, who stirs up the sea, so that its waves roar; Yahweh of
Armies is his name:

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> If these ordinances depart from before
me, says Yahweh, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a
nation before me forever.

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> Thus says Yahweh: If heaven above can
be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, then
will I also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done,
says Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> Behold, the days come, says Yahweh,
that the city shall be built to Yahweh from the tower of Hananel to the
gate of the corner.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> The measuring line shall go out further
straight onward to the hill Gareb, and shall turn about to Goah.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> The whole valley of the dead bodies and
of the ashes, and all the fields to the brook Kidron, to the corner of
the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy to Yahweh; it shall not be
plucked up, nor thrown down any more forever.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the
eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> Now at that time the king of Babylon's
army was besieging Jerusalem; and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in
the court of the guard, which was in the king of Judah's house.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him
up, saying, Why do you prophesy, and say, Thus says Yahweh, Behold, I
will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall
take it;

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> and Zedekiah king of Judah shall not
escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered
into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to
mouth, and his eyes shall see his eyes;

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> and he shall bring Zedekiah to Babylon,
and he shall be there until I visit him, says Yahweh: though you fight
with the Chaldeans, you shall not prosper?

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Jeremiah said, The word of Yahweh came to
me, saying,

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Behold, Hanamel the son of Shallum your
uncle shall come to you, saying, Buy my field that is in Anathoth; for
the right of redemption is yours to buy it.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> So Hanamel my uncle's son came to me in
the court of the guard according to the word of Yahweh, and said to me,
Please buy my field that is in Anathoth, which is in the land of
Benjamin; for the right of inheritance is yours, and the redemption is
yours; buy it for yourself. Then I knew that this was the word of
Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> I bought the field that was in Anathoth
of Hanamel my uncle's son, and weighed him the money, even seventeen
shekels of silver.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> I subscribed the deed, and sealed it,
and called witnesses, and weighed him the money in the balances.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> So I took the deed of the purchase,
both that which was sealed, containing the terms and conditions, and
that which was open;

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> and I delivered the deed of the
purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, in the
presence of Hanamel my uncle's son, and in the presence of the witnesses
who subscribed the deed of the purchase, before all the Jews who sat in
the court of the guard.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> I commanded Baruch before them, saying,

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel: Take these deeds, this deed of the purchase which is sealed, and
this deed which is open, and put them in an earthen vessel; that they
may continue many days.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> For thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel: Houses and fields and vineyards shall yet again be bought in
this land.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> Now after I had delivered the deed of
the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed to Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> Ah Lord Yahweh! Behold, you have made
the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched
arm; there is nothing too hard for you,

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> who show loving kindness to thousands,
and recompense the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their
children after them; the great, the mighty God, Yahweh of Armies is his
name;

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> great in counsel, and mighty in work;
whose eyes are open on all the ways of the sons of men, to give everyone
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings:

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> who performed signs and wonders in the
land of Egypt, even to this day, both in Israel and among \[other\] men;
and made yourself a name, as in this day;

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> and brought forth your people Israel
out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong
hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terror;

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> and gave them this land, which you
swore to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey;

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> and they came in, and possessed it, but
they didn't obey your voice, neither walked in your law; they have done
nothing of all that you commanded them to do: therefore you have caused
all this evil to come on them.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Behold, the mounds, they are come to
the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the
Chaldeans who fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine,
and of the pestilence; and what you have spoken has happened; and
behold, you see it.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> You have said to me, Lord Yahweh, Buy
the field for money, and call witnesses; whereas the city is given into
the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Then came the word of Yahweh to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> Behold, I am Yahweh, the God of all
flesh: is there anything too hard for me?

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh: Behold, I
will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it:

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> and the Chaldeans, who fight against
this city, shall come and set this city on fire, and burn it, with the
houses, on whose roofs they have offered incense to Baal, and poured out
drink offerings to other gods, to provoke me to anger.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> For the children of Israel and the
children of Judah have done only that which was evil in my sight from
their youth; for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger
with the work of their hands, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> For this city has been to me a
provocation of my anger and of my wrath from the day that they built it
even to this day; that I should remove it from before my face,

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> because of all the evil of the children
of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke
me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their
prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> They have turned to me the back, and
not the face: and though I taught them, rising up early and teaching
them, yet they have not listened to receive instruction.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> But they set their abominations in the
house which is called by my name, to defile it.

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> They built the high places of Baal,
which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and
their daughters to pass through \[the fire\] to Molech; which I didn't
command them, neither did it come into my mind, that they should do this
abomination, to cause Judah to sin.

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> Now therefore thus says Yahweh, the God
of Israel, concerning this city, about which you say, It is given into
the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by
the pestilence:

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> Behold, I will gather them out of all
the countries, where I have driven them in my anger, and in my wrath,
and in great indignation; and I will bring them again to this place, and
I will cause them to dwell safely:

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God:

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> and I will give them one heart and one
way, that they may fear me forever, for the good of them, and of their
children after them:

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> and I will make an everlasting covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from following them, to do them
good; and I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart
from me.

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> Yes, I will rejoice over them to do
them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole
heart and with my whole soul.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> For thus says Yahweh: Like as I have
brought all this great evil on this people, so will I bring on them all
the good that I have promised them.

<span id="an_32:43">32:43</span> Fields shall be bought in this land,
about which you say, It is desolate, without man or animal; it is given
into the hand of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_32:44">32:44</span> Men shall buy fields for money, and
subscribe the deeds, and seal them, and call witnesses, in the land of
Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah,
and in the cities of the hill country, and in the cities of the lowland,
and in the cities of the South: for I will cause their captivity to
return, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Moreover the word of Yahweh came to
Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the
guard, saying,

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Thus says Yahweh who does it, Yahweh who
forms it to establish it; Yahweh is his name:

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> Call to me, and I will answer you, and
will show you great things, and difficult, which you don't know.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> For thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel,
concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the
kings of Judah, which are broken down \[to make a defense\] against the
mounds and against the sword;

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> while \[men\] come to fight with the
Chaldeans, and to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have
killed in my anger and in my wrath, and for all whose wickedness I have
hidden my face from this city:

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Behold, I will bring it health and cure,
and I will cure them; and I will reveal to them abundance of peace and
truth.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> I will cause the captivity of Judah and
the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity, by which they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all
their iniquities, by which they have sinned against me, and by which
they have transgressed against me.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> \[This city\] shall be to me for a name
of joy, for a praise and for a glory, before all the nations of the
earth, which shall hear all the good that I do to them, and shall fear
and tremble for all the good and for all the peace that I procure to it.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Thus says Yahweh: Yet again there shall
be heard in this place, about which you say, It is waste, without man
and without animal, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man and without inhabitant and
without animal,

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> the voice of joy and the voice of
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the
voice of those who say, Give thanks to Yahweh of Armies, for Yahweh is
good, for his loving kindness endures forever; \[and of them\] who bring
\[sacrifices of\] thanksgiving into the house of Yahweh. For I will
cause the captivity of the land to return as at the first, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies: Yet again
shall there be in this place, which is waste, without man and without
animal, and in all its cities, a habitation of shepherds causing their
flocks to lie down.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> In the cities of the hill country, in
the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the South, and in the
land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities
of Judah, shall the flocks again pass under the hands of him who numbers
them, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> Behold, the days come, says Yahweh,
that I will perform that good word which I have spoken concerning the
house of Israel and concerning the house of Judah.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> In those days, and at that time, will I
cause a Branch of righteousness to grow up to David; and he shall
execute justice and righteousness in the land.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> In those days shall Judah be saved, and
Jerusalem shall dwell safely; and this is \[the name\] by which she
shall be called: Yahweh our righteousness.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> For thus says Yahweh: David shall never
want a man to sit on the throne of the house of Israel;

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> neither shall the priests the Levites
want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and to burn meal
offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> The word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah,
saying,

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Thus says Yahweh: If you can break my
covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, so that there shall
not be day and night in their season;

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> then may also my covenant be broken
with David my servant, that he shall not have a son to reign on his
throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> As the army of the sky can't be
numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured; so will I multiply the
seed of David my servant, and the Levites who minister to me.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> The word of Yahweh came to Jeremiah,
saying,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Don't consider what this people has
spoken, saying, The two families which Yahweh did choose, he has cast
them off? thus do they despise my people, that they should be no more a
nation before them.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> Thus says Yahweh: If my covenant of day
and night fails, if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and
earth;

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> then will I also cast away the seed of
Jacob, and of David my servant, so that I will not take of his seed to
be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will cause
their captivity to return, and will have mercy on them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all
the kingdoms of the earth that were under his dominion, and all the
peoples, were fighting against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of
it, saying:

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel, Go,
and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Thus says Yahweh,
Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and
he shall burn it with fire:

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> and you shall not escape out of his hand,
but shall surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and your eyes
shall see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with you
mouth to mouth, and you shall go to Babylon.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Yet hear the word of Yahweh, O Zedekiah
king of Judah: thus says Yahweh concerning you, You shall not die by the
sword;

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> you shall die in peace; and with the
burnings of your fathers, the former kings who were before you, so shall
they make a burning for you; and they shall lament you, \[saying\], Ah
Lord! for I have spoken the word, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke all these
words to Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem,

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> when the king of Babylon's army was
fighting against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that
were left, against Lachish and against Azekah; for these \[alone\]
remained of the cities of Judah \[as\] fortified cities.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> The word that came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh, after that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the
people who were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to them;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> that every man should let his male
servant, and every man his female servant, who is a Hebrew or a
Hebrewess, go free; that none should make bondservants of them, \[to
wit\], of a Jew his brother.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> All the princes and all the people
obeyed, who had entered into the covenant, that everyone should let his
male servant, and everyone his female servant, go free, that none should
make bondservants of them any more; they obeyed, and let them go:

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> but afterwards they turned, and caused
the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return,
and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Therefore the word of Yahweh came to
Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel: I
made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying,

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> At the end of seven years you shall let
go every man his brother who is a Hebrew, who has been sold to you, and
has served you six years, you shall let him go free from you: but your
fathers didn't listen to me, neither inclined their ear.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> You had now turned, and had done that
which is right in my eyes, in proclaiming liberty every man to his
neighbor; and you had made a covenant before me in the house which is
called by my name:

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> but you turned and profaned my name,
and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom you
had let go free at their pleasure, to return; and you brought them into
subjection, to be to you for servants and for handmaids.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh: you have
not listened to me, to proclaim liberty, every man to his brother, and
every man to his neighbor: behold, I proclaim to you a liberty, says
Yahweh, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will
make you to be tossed back and forth among all the kingdoms of the
earth.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> I will give the men who have
transgressed my covenant, who have not performed the words of the
covenant which they made before me, when they cut the calf in two and
passed between its parts;

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> the princes of Judah, and the princes
of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the
land, who passed between the parts of the calf;

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> I will even give them into the hand of
their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life; and their
dead bodies shall be for food to the birds of the sky, and to the
animals of the earth.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes
will I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those
who seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's army,
who have gone away from you.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Behold, I will command, says Yahweh,
and cause them to return to this city; and they shall fight against it,
and take it, and burn it with fire: and I will make the cities of Judah
a desolation, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah,
saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Go to the house of the Rechabites, and
speak to them, and bring them into the house of Yahweh, into one of the
rooms, and give them wine to drink.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Then I took Jaazaniah the son of
Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah, and his brothers, and all his sons,
and the whole house of the Rechabites;

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> and I brought them into the house of
Yahweh, into the room of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the man
of God, which was by the room of the princes, which was above the room
of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the threshold.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> I set before the sons of the house of the
Rechabites bowls full of wine, and cups; and I said to them, Drink wine!

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> But they said, We will drink no wine; for
Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying, You shall
drink no wine, neither you, nor your sons, forever:

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> neither shall you build house, nor sow
seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any; but all your days you shall
dwell in tents; that you may live many days in the land in which you
live.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> We have obeyed the voice of Jonadab the
son of Rechab, our father, in all that he commanded us, to drink no wine
all our days, we, our wives, our sons, or our daughters;

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> nor to build houses for us to dwell in;
neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed:

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> but we have lived in tents, and have
obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> But it happened, when Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go
to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the
army of the Syrians; so we dwell at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> Then came the word of Yahweh to
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel: Go, and tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Will you not receive instruction to listen to my words? says Yahweh.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab,
that he commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed; and to
this day they drink none, for they obey their father's commandment: but
I have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking; and you have not
listened to me.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> I have sent also to you all my servants
the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return now every
man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and don't go after other
gods to serve them, and you shall dwell in the land which I have given
to you and to your fathers: but you have not inclined your ear, nor
listened to me.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> Because the sons of Jonadab the son of
Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded
them, but this people has not listened to me;

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> therefore thus says Yahweh, the God of
Armies, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring on Judah and on all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against
them; because I have spoken to them, but they have not heard; and I have
called to them, but they have not answered.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> Jeremiah said to the house of the
Rechabites, Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel: Because you
have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his
precepts, and done according to all that he commanded you;

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies,
the God of Israel: Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to
stand before me forever.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> It happened in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, that this word came to
Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Take a scroll of a book, and write
therein all the words that I have spoken to you against Israel, and
against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spoke to you,
from the days of Josiah, even to this day.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> It may be that the house of Judah will
hear all the evil which I purpose to do to them; that they may return
every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their
sin.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of
Neriah; and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of
Yahweh, which he had spoken to him, on a scroll of a book.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am
shut up; I can't go into the house of Yahweh:

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> therefore you go, and read in the scroll,
which you have written from my mouth, the words of Yahweh in the ears of
the people in Yahweh's house on the fast day; and also you shall read
them in the ears of all Judah who come out of their cities.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> It may be they will present their
supplication before Yahweh, and will return everyone from his evil way;
for great is the anger and the wrath that Yahweh has pronounced against
this people.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Baruch the son of Neriah did according to
all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the
words of Yahweh in Yahweh's house.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> Now it happened in the fifth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, that all
the people in Jerusalem, and all the people who came from the cities of
Judah to Jerusalem, proclaimed a fast before Yahweh.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> Then read Baruch in the book the words
of Jeremiah in the house of Yahweh, in the room of Gemariah the son of
Shaphan, the scribe, in the upper court, at the entry of the new gate of
Yahweh's house, in the ears of all the people.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> When Micaiah the son of Gemariah, the
son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of Yahweh,

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> he went down into the king's house,
into the scribe's room: and behold, all the princes were sitting there,
\[to wit\], Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and
Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and
Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Then Micaiah declared to them all the
words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the
people.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi
the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch,
saying, Take in your hand the scroll in which you have read in the ears
of the people, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the scroll in
his hand, and came to them.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> They said to him, Sit down now, and
read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their ears.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Now it happened, when they had heard
all the words, they turned in fear one toward another, and said to
Baruch, We will surely tell the king of all these words.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> They asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now,
How did you write all these words at his mouth?

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Then Baruch answered them, He
pronounced all these words to me with his mouth, and I wrote them with
ink in the book.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Then the princes said to Baruch, Go,
hide, you and Jeremiah; and let no man know where you are.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> They went in to the king into the
court; but they had laid up the scroll in the room of Elishama the
scribe; and they told all the words in the ears of the king.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> So the king sent Jehudi to get the
scroll; and he took it out of the room of Elishama the scribe. Jehudi
read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the princes who
stood beside the king.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Now the king was sitting in the winter
house in the ninth month: and \[there was a fire in\] the brazier
burning before him.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> It happened, when Jehudi had read three
or four leaves, that \[the king\] cut it with the penknife, and cast it
into the fire that was in the brazier, until all the scroll was consumed
in the fire that was in the brazier.

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> They were not afraid, nor tore their
garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants who heard all these
words.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> Moreover Elnathan and Delaiah and
Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the
scroll; but he would not hear them.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> The king commanded Jerahmeel the king's
son, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to
take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet; but Yahweh hid them.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> Then the word of Yahweh came to
Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the scroll, and the words which
Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Take again another scroll, and write in
it all the former words that were in the first scroll, which Jehoiakim
the king of Judah has burned.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> Concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah you
shall say, Thus says Yahweh: You have burned this scroll, saying, Why
have you written therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly
come and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from there man and
animal?

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh concerning
Jehoiakim king of Judah: He shall have none to sit on the throne of
David; and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and
in the night to the frost.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> I will punish him and his seed and his
servants for their iniquity; and I will bring on them, and on the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and on the men of Judah, all the evil that I
have pronounced against them, but they didn't listen.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> Then took Jeremiah another scroll, and
gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote therein from
the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of
Judah had burned in the fire; and there were added besides to them many
like words.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as
king, instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon made king in the land of Judah.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> But neither he, nor his servants, nor the
people of the land, did listen to the words of Yahweh, which he spoke by
the prophet Jeremiah.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of
Shelemiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, to the prophet
Jeremiah, saying, Pray now to Yahweh our God for us.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> Now Jeremiah came in and went out among
the people; for they had not put him into prison.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> Pharaoh's army was come forth out of
Egypt; and when the Chaldeans who were besieging Jerusalem heard news of
them, they broke up from Jerusalem.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> Then came the word of Yahweh to the
prophet Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel, You
shall tell the king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me:
Behold, Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to
Egypt into their own land.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> The Chaldeans shall come again, and fight
against this city; and they shall take it, and burn it with fire.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Thus says Yahweh, Don't deceive
yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us; for they
shall not depart.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> For though you had struck the whole
army of the Chaldeans who fight against you, and there remained but
wounded men among them, yes would they rise up every man in his tent,
and burn this city with fire.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> It happened that, when the army of the
Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army,

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> then Jeremiah went forth out of
Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to receive his portion there,
in the midst of the people.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> When he was in the gate of Benjamin, a
captain of the guard was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of
Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he laid hold on Jeremiah the
prophet, saying, You are falling away to the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Then Jeremiah said, It is false; I am
not falling away to the Chaldeans. But he didn't listen to him; so
Irijah laid hold on Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> The princes were angry with Jeremiah,
and struck him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the
scribe; for they had made that the prison.

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> When Jeremiah was come into the dungeon
house, and into the cells, and Jeremiah had remained there many days;

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Then Zedekiah the king sent, and
fetched him: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is
there any word from Yahweh? Jeremiah said, There is. He said also, You
shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Moreover Jeremiah said to king
Zedekiah, Wherein have I sinned against you, or against your servants,
or against this people, that you have put me in prison?

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Where now are your prophets who
prophesied to you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against
you, nor against this land?

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Now please hear, my lord the king:
please let my supplication be presented before you, that you not cause
me to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> Then Zedekiah the king commanded, and
they committed Jeremiah into the court of the guard; and they gave him
daily a loaf of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in
the city was spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and
Gedaliah the son of Pashhur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur
the son of Malchijah, heard the words that Jeremiah spoke to all the
people, saying,

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Thus says Yahweh, He who remains in this
city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; but
he who goes forth to the Chaldeans shall live, and his life shall be to
him for a prey, and he shall live.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Thus says Yahweh, This city shall surely
be given into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon, and he shall
take it.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Then the princes said to the king,
"Please let this man be put to death; because he weakens the hands of
the men of war who remain in this city, and the hands of all the people,
in speaking such words to them: for this man doesn't seek the welfare of
this people, but the hurt."

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in
your hand; for the king is not he who can do anything against you.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him
into the dungeon of Malchijah the king's son, that was in the court of
the guard: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. In the dungeon there
was no water, but mire; and Jeremiah sank in the mire.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, a
eunuch, who was in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in
the dungeon (the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin),

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Ebedmelech went forth out of the king's
house, and spoke to the king, saying,

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> My lord the king, these men have done
evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have
cast into the dungeon; and he is likely to die in the place where he is,
because of the famine; for there is no more bread in the city.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Then the king commanded Ebedmelech the
Ethiopian, saying, Take from here thirty men with you, and take up
Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he dies.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> So Ebedmelech took the men with him,
and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took there
rags and worn-out garments, and let them down by cords into the dungeon
to Jeremiah.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said to
Jeremiah, Put now these rags and worn-out garments under your armpits
under the cords. Jeremiah did so.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> So they drew up Jeremiah with the
cords, and took him up out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the
court of the guard.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took
Jeremiah the prophet to him into the third entry that is in the house of
Yahweh: and the king said to Jeremiah, I will ask you something. Hide
nothing from me.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, If I
declare it to you, will you not surely put me to death? and if I give
you counsel, you will not listen to me.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> So Zedekiah the king swore secretly to
Jeremiah, saying, As Yahweh lives, who made us this soul, I will not put
you to death, neither will I give you into the hand of these men who
seek your life.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, Thus
says Yahweh, the God of Armies, the God of Israel: If you will go forth
to the king of Babylon's princes, then your soul shall live, and this
city shall not be burned with fire; and you shall live, and your house.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> But if you will not go forth to the
king of Babylon's princes, then shall this city be given into the hand
of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and you shall not
escape out of their hand.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> Zedekiah the king said to Jeremiah, I
am afraid of the Jews who are fallen away to the Chaldeans, lest they
deliver me into their hand, and they mock me.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> But Jeremiah said, They shall not
deliver you. Obey, I beg you, the voice of Yahweh, in that which I speak
to you: so it shall be well with you, and your soul shall live.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> But if you refuse to go forth, this is
the word that Yahweh has shown me:

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> behold, all the women who are left in
the king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of
Babylon's princes, and those women shall say, Your familiar friends have
set you on, and have prevailed over you: \[now that\] your feet are sunk
in the mire, they are turned away back.

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> They shall bring out all your wives and
your children to the Chaldeans; and you shall not escape out of their
hand, but shall be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and you
shall cause this city to be burned with fire.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, Let no
man know of these words, and you shall not die.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> But if the princes hear that I have
talked with you, and they come to you, and tell you, Declare to us now
what you have said to the king; don't hide it from us, and we will not
put you to death; also what the king said to you:

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> then you shall tell them, I presented
my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to
Jonathan's house, to die there.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> Then came all the princes to Jeremiah,
and asked him; and he told them according to all these words that the
king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him; for the matter
was not perceived.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> So Jeremiah stayed in the court of the
guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> It happened when Jerusalem was taken, (in
the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and
besieged it;

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the
fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the
city),

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> that all the princes of the king of
Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, \[to wit\], Nergal
Sharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergal Sharezer, Rabmag, with
all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> It happened that, when Zedekiah the king
of Judah and all the men of war saw them, then they fled, and went forth
out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, through the
gate between the two walls; and he went out toward the Arabah.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> But the army of the Chaldeans pursued
after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: and when
they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; and he gave judgment on him.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Then the king of Babylon killed the sons
of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king of Babylon killed
all the nobles of Judah.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and
bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> The Chaldeans burned the king's house,
and the houses of the people, with fire, and broke down the walls of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
carried away captive into Babylon the residue of the people who remained
in the city, the deserters also who fell away to him, and the residue of
the people who remained.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> But Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard left of the poor of the people, who had nothing, in the land of
Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Now Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon
commanded Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard concerning Jeremiah,
saying,

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Take him, and look well to him, and do
him no harm; but do to him even as he shall tell you.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
sent, and Nebushazban, Rabsaris, and Nergal Sharezer, Rabmag, and all
the chief officers of the king of Babylon;

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the
court of the guard, and committed him to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the
son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he lived among the
people.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> Now the word of Yahweh came to
Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the guard, saying,

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> Go, and speak to Ebedmelech the
Ethiopian, saying, Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel:
Behold, I will bring my words on this city for evil, and not for good;
and they shall be accomplished before you in that day.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> But I will deliver you in that day,
says Yahweh; and you shall not be given into the hand of the men of whom
you are afraid.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> For I will surely save you, and you
shall not fall by the sword, but your life shall be for a prey to you;
because you have put your trust in me, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> The word which came to Jeremiah from
Yahweh, after that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go
from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all the
captives of Jerusalem and Judah, who were carried away captive to
Babylon.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> The captain of the guard took Jeremiah,
and said to him, Yahweh your God pronounced this evil on this place;

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> and Yahweh has brought it, and done
according as he spoke: because you have sinned against Yahweh, and have
not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing has come on you.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Now, behold, I release you this day from
the chains which are on your hand. If it seems good to you to come with
me into Babylon, come, and I will take care of you; but if it seems bad
to you to come with me into Babylon, don't: behold, all the land is
before you; where it seems good and right to you to go, there go.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> Now while he was not yet gone back, Go
back then, \[said he\], to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of
Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon has made governor over the cities of
Judah, and dwell with him among the people; or go wherever it seems
right to you to go. So the captain of the guard gave him food and a
present, and let him go.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Then went Jeremiah to Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam to Mizpah, and lived with him among the people who were left in
the land.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Now when all the captains of the forces
who were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of
Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and
had committed to him men, and women, and children, and of the poorest of
the land, of those who were not carried away captive to Babylon;

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
\[to wit\], Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the
sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai
the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their
men.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan swore to them and to their men, saying, Don't be afraid to serve
the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it
shall be well with you.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> As for me, behold, I will dwell at
Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans who shall come to us: but you,
gather wine and summer fruits and oil, and put them in your vessels, and
dwell in your cities that you have taken.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> Likewise when all the Jews who were in
Moab, and among the children of Ammon, and in Edom, and who were in all
the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of
Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son
of Shaphan;

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> then all the Jews returned out of all
places where they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to
Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and gathered wine and summer fruits very much.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and
all the captains of the forces who were in the fields, came to Gedaliah
to Mizpah,

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> and said to him, Do you know that
Baalis the king of the children of Ammon has sent Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah to take your life? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam didn't
believe them.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to
Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Please let me go, and I will kill
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: why should he
take your life, that all the Jews who are gathered to you should be
scattered, and the remnant of Judah perish?

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said to
Johanan the son of Kareah, You shall not do this thing; for you speak
falsely of Ishmael.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> Now it happened in the seventh month,
that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed
royal and \[one of\] the chief officers of the king, and ten men with
him, came to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they ate
bread together in Mizpah.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah,
and the ten men who were with him, and struck Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
the son of Shaphan with the sword, and killed him, whom the king of
Babylon had made governor over the land.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> Ishmael also killed all the Jews who were
with him, \[to wit\], with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans who
were found there, the men of war.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> It happened the second day after he had
killed Gedaliah, and no man knew it,

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> that there came men from Shechem, from
Shiloh, and from Samaria, even eighty men, having their beards shaved
and their clothes torn, and having cut themselves, with meal offerings
and frankincense in their hand, to bring them to the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth
from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went: and it happened,
as he met them, he said to them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> It was so, when they came into the midst
of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah killed them, \[and cast
them\] into the midst of the pit, he, and the men who were with him.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> But ten men were found among those who
said to Ishmael, Don't kill us; for we have stores hidden in the field,
of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he stopped, and
didn't kill them among their brothers.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> Now the pit in which Ishmael cast all the
dead bodies of the men whom he had killed, by the side of Gedaliah (the
same was who which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of
Israel), Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with those who were
killed.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Then Ishmael carried away captive all
the residue of the people who were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters,
and all the people who remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain
of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam; Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to
the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and
all the captains of the forces who were with him, heard of all the evil
that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done,

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> then they took all the men, and went to
fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great
waters that are in Gibeon.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> Now it happened that, when all the
people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces who were with him, then they were glad.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> So all the people who Ishmael had
carried away captive from Mizpah turned about and came back, and went to
Johanan the son of Kareah.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah
escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> Then took Johanan the son of Kareah,
and all the captains of the forces who were with him, all the remnant of
the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from
Mizpah, after that he had killed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, \[to wit\],
the men of war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom
he had brought back from Gibeon:

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> and they departed, and lived in Geruth
Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt,

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> because of the Chaldeans; for they were
afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had killed Gedaliah
the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor over the land.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Then all the captains of the forces, and
Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the
people from the least even to the greatest, came near,

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> and said to Jeremiah the prophet, Please
let our supplication be presented before you, and pray for us to Yahweh
your God, even for all this remnant; for we are left but a few of many,
as your eyes do see us:

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> that Yahweh your God may show us the way
in which we should walk, and the thing that we should do.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Then Jeremiah the prophet said to them, I
have heard you; behold, I will pray to Yahweh your God according to your
words; and it shall happen that whatever thing Yahweh shall answer you,
I will declare it to you; I will keep nothing back from you.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Then they said to Jeremiah, Yahweh be a
true and faithful witness among us, if we don't do according to all the
word with which Yahweh your God shall send you to us.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Whether it be good, or whether it be
evil, we will obey the voice of Yahweh our God, to whom we send you;
that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of Yahweh our God.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> It happened after ten days, that the word
of Yahweh came to Jeremiah.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah,
and all the captains of the forces who were with him, and all the people
from the least even to the greatest,

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> and said to them, Thus says Yahweh, the
God of Israel, to whom you sent me to present your supplication before
him:

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> If you will still live in this land,
then will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and
not pluck you up; for I grieve over the distress that I have brought on
you.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Don't be afraid of the king of Babylon,
of whom you are afraid; don't be afraid of him, says Yahweh: for I am
with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> I will grant you mercy, that he may
have mercy on you, and cause you to return to your own land.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> But if you say, We will not dwell in
this land; so that you don't obey the voice of Yahweh your God,

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> saying, No; but we will go into the
land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell:

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> now therefore hear the word of Yahweh,
O remnant of Judah: Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, If
you indeed set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to live there;

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> then it shall happen, that the sword,
which you fear, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt; and the
famine, about which you are afraid, shall follow close behind you there
in Egypt; and there you shall die.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> So shall it be with all the men who set
their faces to go into Egypt to live there: they shall die by the sword,
by the famine, and by the pestilence; and none of them shall remain or
escape from the evil that I will bring on them.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> For thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel: As my anger and my wrath has been poured forth on the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, so shall my wrath be poured forth on you, when
you shall enter into Egypt; and you shall be an object of horror, and an
astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and you shall see this place
no more.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> Yahweh has spoken concerning you,
remnant of Judah, Don't you go into Egypt: know certainly that I have
testified to you this day.

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> For you have dealt deceitfully against
your own souls; for you sent me to Yahweh your God, saying, Pray for us
to Yahweh our God; and according to all that Yahweh our God shall say,
so declare to us, and we will do it:

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> and I have this day declared it to you;
but you have not obeyed the voice of Yahweh your God in anything for
which he has sent me to you.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> Now therefore know certainly that you
shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the
place where you desire to go to live there.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> It happened that, when Jeremiah had made
an end of speaking to all the people all the words of Yahweh their God,
with which Yahweh their God had sent him to them, even all these words,

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> then spoke Azariah the son of Hoshaiah,
and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying to
Jeremiah, You speak falsely: Yahweh our God has not sent you to say, You
shall not go into Egypt to live there;

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> but Baruch the son of Neriah sets you on
against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they may
put us to death, and carry us away captive to Babylon.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the
captains of the forces, and all the people, didn't obey the voice of
Yahweh, to dwell in the land of Judah.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, who were
returned from all the nations where they had been driven, to live in the
land of Judah;

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> the men, and the women, and the children,
and the king's daughters, and every person who Nebuzaradan the captain
of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of
Shaphan; and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah;

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> and they came into the land of Egypt; for
they didn't obey the voice of Yahweh: and they came to Tahpanhes.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> Then came the word of Yahweh to Jeremiah
in Tahpanhes, saying,

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> Take great stones in your hand, and hide
them in mortar in the brick work, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's
house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah;

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> and tell them, Thus says Yahweh of
Armies, the God of Israel: Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar
the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne on these stones
that I have hidden; and he shall spread his royal pavilion over them.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> He shall come, and shall strike the
land of Egypt; such as are for death \[shall be given\] to death, and
such as are for captivity to captivity, and such as are for the sword to
the sword.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> I will kindle a fire in the houses of
the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away captive:
and he shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd puts on
his garment; and he shall go forth from there in peace.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> He shall also break the pillars of Beth
Shemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of
Egypt shall he burn with fire.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> The word that came to Jeremiah concerning
all the Jews who lived in the land of Egypt, who lived at Migdol, and at
Tahpanhes, and at Memphis, and in the country of Pathros, saying,

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel: You have seen all the evil that I have brought on Jerusalem, and
on all the cities of Judah; and behold, this day they are a desolation,
and no man dwells therein,

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> because of their wickedness which they
have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn
incense, \[and\] to serve other gods, that they didn't know, neither
they, nor you, nor your fathers.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> However I sent to you all my servants the
prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Oh, don't do this
abominable thing that I hate.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> But they didn't listen, nor inclined
their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense to other
gods.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> Therefore my wrath and my anger was
poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets
of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as it is this day.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> Therefore now thus says Yahweh, the God
of Armies, the God of Israel: Why do you commit great evil against your
own souls, to cut off from yourselves man and woman, infant and nursing
child out of the midst of Judah, to leave yourselves none remaining;

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> in that you provoke me to anger with the
works of your hands, burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt,
where you have gone to live; that you may be cut off, and that you may
be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> Have you forgotten the wickedness of your
fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of
their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives
which they committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem?

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> They are not humbled even to this day,
neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that
I set before you and before your fathers.

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies,
the God of Israel: Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, even
to cut off all Judah.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> I will take the remnant of Judah, that
have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to live there, and
they shall all be consumed; in the land of Egypt shall they fall; they
shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine; they shall die, from
the least even to the greatest, by the sword and by the famine; and they
shall be an object of horror, \[and\] an astonishment, and a curse, and
a reproach.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> For I will punish those who dwell in
the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the
famine, and by the pestilence;

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> so that none of the remnant of Judah,
who have gone into the land of Egypt to live there, shall escape or be
left, to return into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to
return to dwell there: for none shall return save such as shall escape.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> Then all the men who knew that their
wives burned incense to other gods, and all the women who stood by, a
great assembly, even all the people who lived in the land of Egypt, in
Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> As for the word that you have spoken to
us in the name of Yahweh, we will not listen to you.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> But we will certainly perform every
word that is gone forth out of our mouth, to burn incense to the queen
of the sky, and to pour out drink offerings to her, as we have done, we
and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and
in the streets of Jerusalem; for then had we plenty of food, and were
well, and saw no evil.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> But since we left off burning incense
to the queen of the sky, and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have
wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the
famine.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> When we burned incense to the queen of
the sky, and poured out drink offerings to her, did we make her cakes to
worship her, and pour out drink offerings to her, without our husbands?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Then Jeremiah said to all the people,
to the men, and to the women, even to all the people who had given him
an answer, saying,

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> The incense that you burned in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, you and your fathers,
your kings and your princes, and the people of the land, didn't Yahweh
remember them, and didn't it come into his mind?

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> so that Yahweh could no longer bear,
because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations
which you have committed; therefore your land has become a desolation,
and an astonishment, and a curse, without inhabitant, as it is this day.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> Because you have burned incense, and
because you have sinned against Yahweh, and have not obeyed the voice of
Yahweh, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his
testimonies; therefore this evil has happened to you, as it is this day.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> Moreover Jeremiah said to all the
people, and to all the women, Hear the word of Yahweh, all Judah who are
in the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, saying, You and your wives have both spoken with your mouths,
and with your hands have fulfilled it, saying, We will surely perform
our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of the sky,
and to pour out drink offerings to her: establish then your vows, and
perform your vows.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> Therefore hear the word of Yahweh, all
Judah who dwell in the land of Egypt: Behold, I have sworn by my great
name, says Yahweh, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of
any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, As the Lord Yahweh
lives.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> Behold, I watch over them for evil, and
not for good; and all the men of Judah who are in the land of Egypt
shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end
of them.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> Those who escape the sword shall return
out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, few in number; and all
the remnant of Judah, who have gone into the land of Egypt to live
there, shall know whose word shall stand, mine, or theirs.

<span id="an_44:29">44:29</span> This shall be the sign to you, says
Yahweh, that I will punish you in this place, that you may know that my
words shall surely stand against you for evil:

<span id="an_44:30">44:30</span> Thus says Yahweh, Behold, I will give
Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the
hand of those who seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, who was his enemy, and
sought his life.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> The message that Jeremiah the prophet
spoke to Baruch the son of Neriah, when he wrote these words in a book
at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah, king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel, to
you, Baruch:

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> You said, Woe is me now! for Yahweh has
added sorrow to my pain; I am weary with my groaning, and I find no
rest.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> You shall tell him, Thus says Yahweh:
Behold, that which I have built will I break down, and that which I have
planted I will pluck up; and this in the whole land.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> Do you seek great things for yourself?
Don't seek them; for, behold, I will bring evil on all flesh, says
Yahweh; but your life will I give to you for a prey in all places where
you go.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> The word of Yahweh which came to Jeremiah
the prophet concerning the nations.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> Of Egypt: concerning the army of Pharaoh
Necoh king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish,
which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon struck in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Prepare the buckler and shield, and draw
near to battle!

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Harness the horses, and get up, you
horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, put on
the coats of mail.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> Why have I seen it? they are dismayed and
are turned backward; and their mighty ones are beaten down, and have
fled apace, and don't look back: terror is on every side, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> Don't let the swift flee away, nor the
mighty man escape; in the north by the river Euphrates have they
stumbled and fallen.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> Who is this who rises up like the Nile,
whose waters toss themselves like the rivers?

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> Egypt rises up like the Nile, and his
waters toss themselves like the rivers: and he says, I will rise up, I
will cover the earth; I will destroy cities and its inhabitants.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Go up, you horses; and rage, you
chariots; and let the mighty men go forth: Cush and Put, who handle the
shield; and the Ludim, who handle and bend the bow.

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> For that day is \[a day\] of the Lord,
Yahweh of Armies, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his
adversaries: and the sword shall devour and be satiate, and shall drink
its fill of their blood; for the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, has a sacrifice
in the north country by the river Euphrates.

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> Go up into Gilead, and take balm,
virgin daughter of Egypt: in vain do you use many medicines; there is no
healing for you.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> The nations have heard of your shame,
and the earth is full of your cry; for the mighty man has stumbled
against the mighty, they are fallen both of them together.

<span id="an_46:13">46:13</span> The word that Yahweh spoke to Jeremiah
the prophet, how that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon should come and
strike the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_46:14">46:14</span> Declare in Egypt, and publish in
Migdol, and publish in Memphis and in Tahpanhes: say, Stand forth, and
prepare; for the sword has devoured around you.

<span id="an_46:15">46:15</span> Why are your strong ones swept away?
they didn't stand, because Yahweh did drive them.

<span id="an_46:16">46:16</span> He made many to stumble, yes, they fell
one on another: and they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own
people, and to the land of our birth, from the oppressing sword.

<span id="an_46:17">46:17</span> They cried there, Pharaoh king of Egypt
is but a noise; he has let the appointed time pass by.

<span id="an_46:18">46:18</span> As I live, says the King, whose name is
Yahweh of Armies, surely like Tabor among the mountains, and like Carmel
by the sea, so shall he come.

<span id="an_46:19">46:19</span> You daughter who dwells in Egypt,
furnish yourself to go into captivity; for Memphis shall become a
desolation, and shall be burnt up, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_46:20">46:20</span> Egypt is a very beautiful heifer;
\[but\] destruction out of the north is come, it is come.

<span id="an_46:21">46:21</span> Also her hired men in the midst of her
are like calves of the stall; for they also are turned back, they are
fled away together, they didn't stand: for the day of their calamity is
come on them, the time of their visitation.

<span id="an_46:22">46:22</span> The sound of it shall go like the
serpent; for they shall march with an army, and come against her with
axes, as wood cutters.

<span id="an_46:23">46:23</span> They shall cut down her forest, says
Yahweh, though it can't be searched; because they are more than the
locusts, and are innumerable.

<span id="an_46:24">46:24</span> The daughter of Egypt shall be
disappointed; she shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the
north.

<span id="an_46:25">46:25</span> Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel,
says: Behold, I will punish Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with her
gods, and her kings; even Pharaoh, and those who trust in him:

<span id="an_46:26">46:26</span> and I will deliver them into the hand
of those who seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants; and afterwards it shall
be inhabited, as in the days of old, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_46:27">46:27</span> But don't you be afraid, Jacob my
servant, neither be dismayed, Israel: for, behold, I will save you from
afar, and your seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall
return, and shall be quiet and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.

<span id="an_46:28">46:28</span> Don't you be afraid, O Jacob my
servant, says Yahweh; for I am with you: for I will make a full end of
all the nations where I have driven you; but I will not make a full end
of you, but I will correct you in measure, and will in no way leave you
unpunished.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> The word of Yahweh that came to Jeremiah
the prophet concerning the Philistines, before that Pharaoh struck Gaza.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Thus says Yahweh: Behold, waters rise up
out of the north, and shall become an overflowing stream, and shall
overflow the land and all that is therein, the city and those who dwell
therein; and the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land
shall wail.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs
of his strong ones, at the rushing of his chariots, at the rumbling of
his wheels, the fathers don't look back to their children for feebleness
of hands;

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> because of the day that comes to destroy
all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Sidon every helper who
remains: for Yahweh will destroy the Philistines, the remnant of the
isle of Caphtor.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Baldness is come on Gaza; Ashkelon is
brought to nothing, the remnant of their valley: how long will you cut
yourself?

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> You sword of Yahweh, how long will it be
before you be quiet? Put up yourself into your scabbard; rest, and be
still.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> How can you be quiet, since Yahweh has
given you a command? Against Ashkelon, and against the seashore, there
has he appointed it.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> Of Moab. Thus says Yahweh of Armies, the
God of Israel: Woe to Nebo! for it is laid waste; Kiriathaim is
disappointed, it is taken; Misgab is put to shame and broken down.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> The praise of Moab is no more; in Heshbon
they have devised evil against her: Come, and let us cut her off from
being a nation. You also, Madmen, shall be brought to silence: the sword
shall pursue you.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> The sound of a cry from Horonaim,
desolation and great destruction!

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> Moab is destroyed; her little ones have
caused a cry to be heard.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> For by the ascent of Luhith with
continual weeping shall they go up; for at the descent of Horonaim they
have heard the distress of the cry of destruction.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> Flee, save your lives, and be like the
heath in the wilderness.

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> For, because you have trusted in your
works and in your treasures, you also shall be taken: and Chemosh shall
go forth into captivity, his priests and his princes together.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> The destroyer shall come on every city,
and no city shall escape; the valley also shall perish, and the plain
shall be destroyed; as Yahweh has spoken.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> Give wings to Moab, that she may fly and
get her away: and her cities shall become a desolation, without any to
dwell therein.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Cursed is he who does the work of
Yahweh negligently; and cursed is he who keeps back his sword from
blood.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> Moab has been at ease from his youth,
and he has settled on his lees, and has not been emptied from vessel to
vessel, neither has he gone into captivity: therefore his taste remains
in him, and his scent is not changed.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, says
Yahweh, that I will send to him those who pour off, and they shall pour
him off; and they shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles in
pieces.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as
the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> How do you say, We are mighty men, and
valiant men for the war?

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> Moab is laid waste, and they are gone
up into his cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the
slaughter, says the King, whose name is Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> The calamity of Moab is near to come,
and his affliction hurries fast.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> All you who are around him, bemoan him,
and all you who know his name; say, How is the strong staff broken, the
beautiful rod!

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> You daughter who dwells in Dibon, come
down from your glory, and sit in thirst; for the destroyer of Moab has
come up against you, he has destroyed your strongholds.

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> Inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way,
and watch: ask him who flees, and her who escapes; say, What has been
done?

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Moab is disappointed; for it is broken
down: wail and cry; tell it by the Arnon, that Moab is laid waste.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> Judgment is come on the plain country,
on Holon, and on Jahzah, and on Mephaath,

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> and on Dibon, and on Nebo, and on Beth
Diblathaim,

<span id="an_48:23">48:23</span> and on Kiriathaim, and on Beth Gamul,
and on Beth Meon,

<span id="an_48:24">48:24</span> and on Kerioth, and on Bozrah, and on
all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.

<span id="an_48:25">48:25</span> The horn of Moab is cut off, and his
arm is broken, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:26">48:26</span> Make him drunken; for he magnified
himself against Yahweh: and Moab shall wallow in his vomit, and he also
shall be in derision.

<span id="an_48:27">48:27</span> For wasn't Israel a derision to you?
was he found among thieves? for as often as you speak of him, you shake
your head.

<span id="an_48:28">48:28</span> You inhabitants of Moab, leave the
cities, and dwell in the rock; and be like the dove that makes her nest
over the mouth of the abyss.

<span id="an_48:29">48:29</span> We have heard of the pride of Moab,
\[that\] he is very proud; his loftiness, and his pride, and his
arrogance, and the haughtiness of his heart.

<span id="an_48:30">48:30</span> I know his wrath, says Yahweh, that it
is nothing; his boastings have worked nothing.

<span id="an_48:31">48:31</span> Therefore will I wail for Moab; yes, I
will cry out for all Moab: for the men of Kir Heres shall they mourn.

<span id="an_48:32">48:32</span> With more than the weeping of Jazer
will I weep for you, vine of Sibmah: your branches passed over the sea,
they reached even to the sea of Jazer: on your summer fruits and on your
vintage the destroyer is fallen.

<span id="an_48:33">48:33</span> Gladness and joy is taken away from the
fruitful field and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to
cease from the wine presses: none shall tread with shouting; the
shouting shall be no shouting.

<span id="an_48:34">48:34</span> From the cry of Heshbon even to
Elealeh, even to Jahaz have they uttered their voice, from Zoar even to
Horonaim, to Eglath Shelishiyah: for the waters of Nimrim also shall
become desolate.

<span id="an_48:35">48:35</span> Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab,
says Yahweh, him who offers in the high place, and him who burns incense
to his gods.

<span id="an_48:36">48:36</span> Therefore my heart sounds for Moab like
pipes, and my heart sounds like pipes for the men of Kir Heres:
therefore the abundance that he has gotten is perished.

<span id="an_48:37">48:37</span> For every head is bald, and every beard
clipped: on all the hands are cuttings, and on the waist sackcloth.

<span id="an_48:38">48:38</span> On all the housetops of Moab and in its
streets there is lamentation every where; for I have broken Moab like a
vessel in which none delights, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:39">48:39</span> How is it broken down! \[how\] do they
wail! how has Moab turned the back with shame! so shall Moab become a
derision and a terror to all who are around him.

<span id="an_48:40">48:40</span> For thus says Yahweh: Behold, he shall
fly as an eagle, and shall spread out his wings against Moab.

<span id="an_48:41">48:41</span> Kerioth is taken, and the strongholds
are seized, and the heart of the mighty men of Moab at that day shall be
as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

<span id="an_48:42">48:42</span> Moab shall be destroyed from being a
people, because he has magnified himself against Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:43">48:43</span> Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are
on you, inhabitant of Moab, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:44">48:44</span> He who flees from the fear shall fall
into the pit; and he who gets up out of the pit shall be taken in the
snare: for I will bring on him, even on Moab, the year of their
visitation, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_48:45">48:45</span> Those who fled stand without strength
under the shadow of Heshbon; for a fire is gone forth out of Heshbon,
and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and has devoured the corner of
Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.

<span id="an_48:46">48:46</span> Woe to you, O Moab! the people of
Chemosh is undone; for your sons are taken away captive, and your
daughters into captivity.

<span id="an_48:47">48:47</span> Yet will I bring back the captivity of
Moab in the latter days, says Yahweh. Thus far is the judgment of Moab.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> Of the children of Ammon. Thus says
Yahweh: Has Israel no sons? has he no heir? why then does Malcam possess
Gad, and his people well in its cities?

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, says
Yahweh, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard against Rabbah of
the children of Ammon; and it shall become a desolate heap, and her
daughters shall be burned with fire: then shall Israel possess those who
did possess him, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> Wail, Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste; cry,
you daughters of Rabbah, clothe yourself in sackcloth: lament, and run
back and forth among the fences; for Malcam shall go into captivity, his
priests and his princes together.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> Why do you glory in the valleys, your
flowing valley, backsliding daughter? who trusted in her treasures,
\[saying\], Who shall come to me?

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> Behold, I will bring a fear on you, says
the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, from all who are around you; and you shall
be driven out every man right forth, and there shall be none to gather
together the fugitives.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> But afterward I will bring back the
captivity of the children of Ammon, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Of Edom. Thus says Yahweh of Armies: Is
wisdom no more in Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their
wisdom vanished?

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Flee, turn back, dwell in the depths,
inhabitants of Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau on him, the
time that I shall visit him.

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> If grape gatherers came to you, would
they not leave some gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, wouldn't they
destroy until they had enough?

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> But I have made Esau bare, I have
uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself:
his seed is destroyed, and his brothers, and his neighbors; and he is no
more.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> Leave your fatherless children, I will
preserve them alive; and let your widows trust in me.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> For thus says Yahweh: Behold, they to
whom it didn't pertain to drink of the cup shall certainly drink; and
are you he who shall altogether go unpunished? You shall not go
unpunished, but you shall surely drink.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> For I have sworn by myself, says
Yahweh, that Bozrah shall become an astonishment, a reproach, a waste,
and a curse; and all its cities shall be perpetual wastes.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> I have heard news from Yahweh, and an
ambassador is sent among the nations, \[saying\], Gather yourselves
together, and come against her, and rise up to the battle.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> For, behold, I have made you small
among the nations, and despised among men.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> As for your terror, the pride of your
heart has deceived you, O you who dwell in the clefts of the rock, who
hold the height of the hill: though you should make your nest as high as
the eagle, I will bring you down from there, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Edom shall become an astonishment:
everyone who passes by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all its
plagues.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> As in the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah and the neighbor cities of it, says Yahweh, no man shall dwell
there, neither shall any son of man live therein.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> Behold, he shall come up like a lion
from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation: for I will
suddenly make them run away from it; and whoever is chosen, him will I
appoint over it: for who is like me? and who will appoint me a time? and
who is the shepherd who will stand before me?

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> Therefore hear the counsel of Yahweh,
that he has taken against Edom; and his purposes, that he has purposed
against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely they shall drag them away,
\[even\] the little ones of the flock; surely he shall make their
habitation desolate over them.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> The earth trembles at the noise of
their fall; there is a cry, the noise which is heard in the Red Sea.

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Behold, he shall come up and fly as the
eagle, and spread out his wings against Bozrah: and the heart of the
mighty men of Edom at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her
pangs.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> Of Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and
Arpad; for they have heard evil news, they are melted away: there is
sorrow on the sea; it can't be quiet.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Damascus has grown feeble, she turns
herself to flee, and trembling has seized on her: anguish and sorrows
have taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail.

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> How is the city of praise not forsaken,
the city of my joy?

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> Therefore her young men shall fall in
her streets, and all the men of war shall be brought to silence in that
day, says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_49:27">49:27</span> I will kindle a fire in the wall of
Damascus, and it shall devour the palaces of Ben Hadad.

<span id="an_49:28">49:28</span> Of Kedar, and of the kingdoms of Hazor,
which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon struck. Thus says Yahweh: Arise, go
up to Kedar, and destroy the children of the east.

<span id="an_49:29">49:29</span> Their tents and their flocks shall they
take; they shall carry away for themselves their curtains, and all their
vessels, and their camels; and they shall cry to them, Terror on every
side!

<span id="an_49:30">49:30</span> Flee, wander far off, dwell in the
depths, you inhabitants of Hazor, says Yahweh; for Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon has taken counsel against you, and has conceived a purpose
against you.

<span id="an_49:31">49:31</span> Arise, go up to a nation that is at
ease, that dwells without care, says Yahweh; that have neither gates nor
bars, that dwell alone.

<span id="an_49:32">49:32</span> Their camels shall be a booty, and the
multitude of their livestock a spoil: and I will scatter to all winds
those who have the corners \[of their hair\] cut off; and I will bring
their calamity from every side of them, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_49:33">49:33</span> Hazor shall be a dwelling place of
jackals, a desolation forever: no man shall dwell there, neither shall
any son of man live therein.

<span id="an_49:34">49:34</span> The word of Yahweh that came to
Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam, in the beginning of the reign of
Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,

<span id="an_49:35">49:35</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies: Behold, I
will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.

<span id="an_49:36">49:36</span> On Elam will I bring the four winds
from the four quarters of the sky, and will scatter them toward all
those winds; and there shall be no nation where the outcasts of Elam
shall not come.

<span id="an_49:37">49:37</span> I will cause Elam to be dismayed before
their enemies, and before those who seek their life; and I will bring
evil on them, even my fierce anger, says Yahweh; and I will send the
sword after them, until I have consumed them;

<span id="an_49:38">49:38</span> and I will set my throne in Elam, and
will destroy from there king and princes, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_49:39">49:39</span> But it shall happen in the latter days,
that I will bring back the captivity of Elam, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> The word that Yahweh spoke concerning
Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah the prophet.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> Declare among the nations and publish,
and set up a standard; publish, and don't conceal: say, Babylon is
taken, Bel is disappointed, Merodach is dismayed; her images are
disappointed, her idols are dismayed.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> For out of the north there comes up a
nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall
dwell therein: they are fled, they are gone, both man and animal.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> In those days, and in that time, says
Yahweh, the children of Israel shall come, they and the children of
Judah together; they shall go on their way weeping, and shall seek
Yahweh their God.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> They shall inquire concerning Zion with
their faces turned toward it, \[saying\], Come, and join yourselves to
Yahweh in an everlasting covenant that shall not be forgotten.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> My people have been lost sheep: their
shepherds have caused them to go astray; they have turned them away on
the mountains; they have gone from mountain to hill; they have forgotten
their resting place.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> All who found them have devoured them;
and their adversaries said, We are not guilty, because they have sinned
against Yahweh, the habitation of righteousness, even Yahweh, the hope
of their fathers.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and go
forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the male goats before
the flocks.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> For, behold, I will stir up and cause to
come up against Babylon a company of great nations from the north
country; and they shall set themselves in array against her; from there
she shall be taken: their arrows shall be as of an expert mighty man;
none shall return in vain.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> Chaldea shall be a prey: all who prey
on her shall be satisfied, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> Because you are glad, because you
rejoice, O you who plunder my heritage, because you are wanton as a
heifer that treads out \[the grain\], and neigh as strong horses;

<span id="an_50:12">50:12</span> your mother shall be utterly
disappointed; she who bore you shall be confounded: behold, she shall be
the least of the nations, a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.

<span id="an_50:13">50:13</span> Because of the wrath of Yahweh she
shall not be inhabited, but she shall be wholly desolate: everyone who
goes by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.

<span id="an_50:14">50:14</span> Set yourselves in array against Babylon
all around, all you who bend the bow; shoot at her, spare no arrows: for
she has sinned against Yahweh.

<span id="an_50:15">50:15</span> Shout against her all around: she has
submitted herself; her bulwarks are fallen, her walls are thrown down;
for it is the vengeance of Yahweh: take vengeance on her; as she has
done, do to her.

<span id="an_50:16">50:16</span> Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him
who handles the sickle in the time of harvest: for fear of the
oppressing sword they shall turn everyone to his people, and they shall
flee everyone to his own land.

<span id="an_50:17">50:17</span> Israel is a hunted sheep; the lions
have driven him away: first, the king of Assyria devoured him; and now
at last Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has broken his bones.

<span id="an_50:18">50:18</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh of Armies,
the God of Israel: Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his
land, as I have punished the king of Assyria.

<span id="an_50:19">50:19</span> I will bring Israel again to his
pasture, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be
satisfied on the hills of Ephraim and in Gilead.

<span id="an_50:20">50:20</span> In those days, and in that time, says
Yahweh, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will
pardon them whom I leave as a remnant.

<span id="an_50:21">50:21</span> Go up against the land of Merathaim,
even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod: kill and utterly
destroy after them, says Yahweh, and do according to all that I have
commanded you.

<span id="an_50:22">50:22</span> A sound of battle is in the land, and
of great destruction.

<span id="an_50:23">50:23</span> How is the hammer of the whole earth
cut apart and broken! how is Babylon become a desolation among the
nations!

<span id="an_50:24">50:24</span> I have laid a snare for you, and you
are also taken, Babylon, and you weren't aware: you are found, and also
caught, because you have striven against Yahweh.

<span id="an_50:25">50:25</span> Yahweh has opened his armory, and has
brought forth the weapons of his indignation; for the Lord, Yahweh of
Armies, has a work \[to do\] in the land of the Chaldeans.

<span id="an_50:26">50:26</span> Come against her from the utmost
border; open her storehouses; cast her up as heaps, and destroy her
utterly; let nothing of her be left.

<span id="an_50:27">50:27</span> Kill all her bulls; let them go down to
the slaughter: woe to them! for their day is come, the time of their
visitation.

<span id="an_50:28">50:28</span> The voice of those who flee and escape
out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of Yahweh
our God, the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="an_50:29">50:29</span> Call together the archers against
Babylon, all those who bend the bow; encamp against her all around; let
none of it escape: recompense her according to her work; according to
all that she has done, do to her; for she has been proud against Yahweh,
against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_50:30">50:30</span> Therefore her young men will fall in
her streets, and all her men of war will be brought to silence in that
day, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_50:31">50:31</span> Behold, I am against you, you proud
one, says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies; for your day has come, the time
that I will visit you.

<span id="an_50:32">50:32</span> The proud one shall stumble and fall,
and none shall raise him up; and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and
it shall devour all who are around him.

<span id="an_50:33">50:33</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies: The
children of Israel and the children of Judah are oppressed together; and
all who took them captive hold them fast; they refuse to let them go.

<span id="an_50:34">50:34</span> Their Redeemer is strong; Yahweh of
Armies is his name: he will thoroughly plead their cause, that he may
give rest to the earth, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:35">50:35</span> A sword is on the Chaldeans, says
Yahweh, and on the inhabitants of Babylon, and on her princes, and on
her wise men.

<span id="an_50:36">50:36</span> A sword is on the boasters, and they
shall become fools; a sword is on her mighty men, and they shall be
dismayed.

<span id="an_50:37">50:37</span> A sword is on their horses, and on
their chariots, and on all the mixed people who are in the midst of her;
and they shall become as women: a sword is on her treasures, and they
shall be robbed.

<span id="an_50:38">50:38</span> A drought is on her waters, and they
shall be dried up; for it is a land of engraved images, and they are mad
over idols.

<span id="an_50:39">50:39</span> Therefore the wild animals of the
desert with the wolves shall dwell there, and the ostriches shall dwell
therein: and it shall be no more inhabited forever; neither shall it be
lived in from generation to generation.

<span id="an_50:40">50:40</span> As when God overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah and the neighbor cities of it, says Yahweh, so shall no man
dwell there, neither shall any son of man live therein.

<span id="an_50:41">50:41</span> Behold, a people comes from the north;
and a great nation and many kings shall be stirred up from the uttermost
parts of the earth.

<span id="an_50:42">50:42</span> They lay hold on bow and spear; they
are cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roars like the sea; and they
ride on horses, everyone set in array, as a man to the battle, against
you, daughter of Babylon.

<span id="an_50:43">50:43</span> The king of Babylon has heard the news
of them, and his hands wax feeble: anguish has taken hold of him,
\[and\] pangs as of a woman in travail.

<span id="an_50:44">50:44</span> Behold, \[the enemy\] shall come up
like a lion from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation:
for I will suddenly make them run away from it; and whoever is chosen,
him will I appoint over it: for who is like me? and who will appoint me
a time? and who is the shepherd who can stand before me?

<span id="an_50:45">50:45</span> Therefore hear the counsel of Yahweh,
that he has taken against Babylon; and his purposes, that he has
purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely they shall drag them
away, \[even\] the little ones of the flock; surely he shall make their
habitation desolate over them.

<span id="an_50:46">50:46</span> At the noise of the taking of Babylon
the earth trembles, and the cry is heard among the nations.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> Thus says Yahweh: Behold, I will raise up
against Babylon, and against those who dwell in Lebkamai, a destroying
wind.

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> I will send to Babylon strangers, who
shall winnow her; and they shall empty her land: for in the day of
trouble they shall be against her around.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> Against \[him who\] bends let the archer
bend his bow, and against \[him who\] lifts himself up in his coat of
mail: and don't spare her young men; utterly destroy all her army.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> They shall fall down slain in the land of
the Chaldeans, and thrust through in her streets.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> For Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah, of
his God, of Yahweh of Armies; though their land is full of guilt against
the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and
save every man his life; don't be cut off in her iniquity: for it is the
time of Yahweh's vengeance; he will render to her a recompense.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Babylon has been a golden cup in Yahweh's
hand, who made all the earth drunken: the nations have drunk of her
wine; therefore the nations are mad.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed:
wail for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> We would have healed Babylon, but she is
not healed: forsake her, and let us go everyone into his own country;
for her judgment reaches to heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> Yahweh has brought forth our
righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of Yahweh our
God.

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> Make sharp the arrows; hold firm the
shields: Yahweh has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes;
because his purpose is against Babylon, to destroy it: for it is the
vengeance of Yahweh, the vengeance of his temple.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> Set up a standard against the walls of
Babylon, make the watch strong, set the watchmen, prepare the ambushes;
for Yahweh has both purposed and done that which he spoke concerning the
inhabitants of Babylon.

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> You who dwell on many waters, abundant
in treasures, your end has come, the measure of your covetousness.

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> Yahweh of Armies has sworn by himself,
\[saying\], Surely I will fill you with men, as with the canker worm;
and they shall lift up a shout against you.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> He has made the earth by his power, he
has established the world by his wisdom, and by his understanding has he
stretched out the heavens:

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> when he utters his voice, there is a
tumult of waters in the heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from
the ends of the earth; he makes lightning for the rain, and brings forth
the wind out of his treasuries.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Every man is become brutish \[and is\]
without knowledge; every goldsmith is disappointed by his image; for his
molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> They are vanity, a work of delusion: in
the time of their visitation they shall perish.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> The portion of Jacob is not like these;
for he is the former of all things; and \[Israel\] is the tribe of his
inheritance: Yahweh of Armies is his name.

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> You are my battle axe and weapons of
war: and with you will I break in pieces the nations; and with you will
I destroy kingdoms;

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> and with you will I break in pieces the
horse and his rider;

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> and with you will I break in pieces the
chariot and him who rides therein; and with you will I break in pieces
man and woman; and with you will I break in pieces the old man and the
youth; and with you will I break in pieces the young man and the virgin;

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> and with you will I break in pieces the
shepherd and his flock; and with you will I break in pieces the farmer
and his yoke \[of oxen\]; and with you will I break in pieces governors
and deputies.

<span id="an_51:24">51:24</span> I will render to Babylon and to all the
inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in
your sight, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_51:25">51:25</span> Behold, I am against you, destroying
mountain, says Yahweh, which destroys all the earth; and I will stretch
out my hand on you, and roll you down from the rocks, and will make you
a burnt mountain.

<span id="an_51:26">51:26</span> They shall not take of you a stone for
a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but you shall be desolate for
ever, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_51:27">51:27</span> Set up a standard in the land, blow the
trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her, call
together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz:
appoint a marshal against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough
canker worm.

<span id="an_51:28">51:28</span> Prepare against her the nations, the
kings of the Medes, its governors, and all its deputies, and all the
land of their dominion.

<span id="an_51:29">51:29</span> The land trembles and is in pain; for
the purposes of Yahweh against Babylon do stand, to make the land of
Babylon a desolation, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:30">51:30</span> The mighty men of Babylon have forborne
to fight, they remain in their strongholds; their might has failed; they
are become as women: her dwelling places are set on fire; her bars are
broken.

<span id="an_51:31">51:31</span> One runner will run to meet another,
and one messenger to meet another, to show the king of Babylon that his
city is taken on every quarter:

<span id="an_51:32">51:32</span> and the passages are seized, and the
reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are frightened.

<span id="an_51:33">51:33</span> For thus says Yahweh of Armies, the God
of Israel: The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor at the time
when it is trodden; yet a little while, and the time of harvest shall
come for her.

<span id="an_51:34">51:34</span> Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon has
devoured me, he has crushed me, he has made me an empty vessel, he has,
like a monster, swallowed me up, he has filled his maw with my
delicacies; he has cast me out.

<span id="an_51:35">51:35</span> The violence done to me and to my flesh
be on Babylon, shall the inhabitant of Zion say; and, My blood be on the
inhabitants of Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

<span id="an_51:36">51:36</span> Therefore thus says Yahweh: Behold, I
will plead your cause, and take vengeance for you; and I will dry up her
sea, and make her fountain dry.

<span id="an_51:37">51:37</span> Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling
place for jackals, an astonishment, and a hissing, without inhabitant.

<span id="an_51:38">51:38</span> They shall roar together like young
lions; they shall growl as lions' cubs.

<span id="an_51:39">51:39</span> When they are heated, I will make their
feast, and I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_51:40">51:40</span> I will bring them down like lambs to
the slaughter, like rams with male goats.

<span id="an_51:41">51:41</span> How is Sheshach taken! and the praise
of the whole earth seized! how is Babylon become a desolation among the
nations!

<span id="an_51:42">51:42</span> The sea is come up on Babylon; she is
covered with the multitude of its waves.

<span id="an_51:43">51:43</span> Her cities are become a desolation, a
dry land, and a desert, a land in which no man dwells, neither does any
son of man pass thereby.

<span id="an_51:44">51:44</span> I will execute judgment on Bel in
Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he has
swallowed up; and the nations shall not flow any more to him: yes, the
wall of Babylon shall fall.

<span id="an_51:45">51:45</span> My people, go away from the midst of
her, and save yourselves every man from the fierce anger of Yahweh.

<span id="an_51:46">51:46</span> Don't let your heart faint, neither
fear for the news that shall be heard in the land; for news shall come
one year, and after that in another year \[shall come\] news, and
violence in the land, ruler against ruler.

<span id="an_51:47">51:47</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, that
I will execute judgment on the engraved images of Babylon; and her whole
land shall be confounded; and all her slain shall fall in the midst of
her.

<span id="an_51:48">51:48</span> Then the heavens and the earth, and all
that is therein, shall sing for joy over Babylon; for the destroyers
shall come to her from the north, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_51:49">51:49</span> As Babylon has caused the slain of
Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the land.

<span id="an_51:50">51:50</span> You who have escaped the sword, go,
don't stand still; remember Yahweh from afar, and let Jerusalem come
into your mind.

<span id="an_51:51">51:51</span> We are confounded, because we have
heard reproach; confusion has covered our faces: for strangers are come
into the sanctuaries of Yahweh's house.

<span id="an_51:52">51:52</span> Therefore, behold, the days come, says
Yahweh, that I will execute judgment on her engraved images; and through
all her land the wounded shall groan.

<span id="an_51:53">51:53</span> Though Babylon should mount up to the
sky, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet from
me shall destroyers come to her, says Yahweh.

<span id="an_51:54">51:54</span> The sound of a cry from Babylon, and of
great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans!

<span id="an_51:55">51:55</span> For Yahweh lays Babylon waste, and
destroys out of her the great voice; and their waves roar like many
waters; the noise of their voice is uttered:

<span id="an_51:56">51:56</span> for the destroyer is come on her, even
on Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, their bows are broken in
pieces; for Yahweh is a God of recompenses, he will surely requite.

<span id="an_51:57">51:57</span> I will make drunk her princes and her
wise men, her governors and her deputies, and her mighty men; and they
shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake up, says the King, whose
name is Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_51:58">51:58</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies: The broad
walls of Babylon shall be utterly overthrown, and her high gates shall
be burned with fire; and the peoples shall labor for vanity, and the
nations for the fire; and they shall be weary.

<span id="an_51:59">51:59</span> The word which Jeremiah the prophet
commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went
with Zedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his
reign. Now Seraiah was chief quartermaster.

<span id="an_51:60">51:60</span> Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil
that should come on Babylon, even all these words that are written
concerning Babylon.

<span id="an_51:61">51:61</span> Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When you come
to Babylon, then see that you read all these words,

<span id="an_51:62">51:62</span> and say, Yahweh, you have spoken
concerning this place, to cut it off, that none shall dwell therein,
neither man nor animal, but that it shall be desolate forever.

<span id="an_51:63">51:63</span> It shall be, when you have made an end
of reading this book, that you shall bind a stone to it, and cast it
into the midst of the Euphrates:

<span id="an_51:64">51:64</span> and you shall say, Thus shall Babylon
sink, and shall not rise again because of the evil that I will bring on
her; and they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he
began to reign; and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and his
mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> He did that which was evil in the sight
of Yahweh, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> For through the anger of Yahweh did it
happen in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his
presence. Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> It happened in the ninth year of his
reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against
Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built forts against it
round about.

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> So the city was besieged to the eleventh
year of king Zedekiah.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> In the fourth month, in the ninth day of
the month, the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread
for the people of the land.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> Then a breach was made in the city, and
all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the
way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden;
(now the Chaldeans were against the city all around;) and they went
toward the Arabah.

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> But the army of the Chaldeans pursued
after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all
his army was scattered from him.

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> Then they took the king, and carried him
up to the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; and he gave
judgment on him.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> The king of Babylon killed the sons of
Zedekiah before his eyes: he killed also all the princes of Judah in
Riblah.

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> He put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and
the king of Babylon bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon,
and put him in prison until the day of his death.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> Now in the fifth month, in the tenth
day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar,
king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, who stood
before the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem:

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> and he burned the house of Yahweh, and
the king's house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great
house, burned he with fire.

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> All the army of the Chaldeans, who were
with the captain of the guard, broke down all the walls of Jerusalem all
around.

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard carried away captive of the poorest of the people, and the residue
of the people who were left in the city, and those who fell away, who
fell to the king of Babylon, and the residue of the multitude.

<span id="an_52:16">52:16</span> But Nebuzaradan the captain of the
guard left of the poorest of the land to be vineyard keepers and
farmers.

<span id="an_52:17">52:17</span> The pillars of brass that were in the
house of Yahweh, and the bases and the bronze sea that were in the house
of Yahweh, did the Chaldeans break in pieces, and carried all the brass
of them to Babylon.

<span id="an_52:18">52:18</span> The pots also, and the shovels, and the
snuffers, and the basins, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass
with which they ministered, took they away.

<span id="an_52:19">52:19</span> The cups, and the fire pans, and the
basins, and the pots, and the lampstands, and the spoons, and the
bowls--that which was of gold, in gold, and that which was of silver, in
silver,--the captain of the guard took away.

<span id="an_52:20">52:20</span> The two pillars, the one sea, and the
twelve bronze bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had
made for the house of Yahweh. The brass of all these vessels was without
weight.

<span id="an_52:21">52:21</span> As for the pillars, the height of the
one pillar was eighteen cubits; and a line of twelve cubits did compass
it; and its thickness was four fingers: it was hollow.

<span id="an_52:22">52:22</span> A capital of brass was on it; and the
height of the one capital was five cubits, with network and pomegranates
on the capital all around, all of brass: and the second pillar also had
like these, and pomegranates.

<span id="an_52:23">52:23</span> There were ninety-six pomegranates on
the sides; all the pomegranates were one hundred on the network all
around.

<span id="an_52:24">52:24</span> The captain of the guard took Seraiah
the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers
of the threshold:

<span id="an_52:25">52:25</span> and out of the city he took an officer
who was set over the men of war; and seven men of those who saw the
king's face, who were found in the city; and the scribe of the captain
of the army, who mustered the people of the land; and sixty men of the
people of the land, who were found in the midst of the city.

<span id="an_52:26">52:26</span> Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.

<span id="an_52:27">52:27</span> The king of Babylon struck them, and
put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried
away captive out of his land.

<span id="an_52:28">52:28</span> This is the people whom Nebuchadnezzar
carried away captive: in the seventh year three thousand twenty-three
Jews;

<span id="an_52:29">52:29</span> in the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadnezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred
thirty-two persons;

<span id="an_52:30">52:30</span> in the three and twentieth year of
Nebuchadnezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
of the Jews seven hundred forty-five persons: all the persons were four
thousand and six hundred.

<span id="an_52:31">52:31</span> It happened in the seven and thirtieth
year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month,
in the five and twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of
Babylon, in the \[first\] year of his reign, lifted up the head of
Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison;

<span id="an_52:32">52:32</span> and he spoke kindly to him, and set his
throne above the throne of the kings who were with him in Babylon,

<span id="an_52:33">52:33</span> and changed his prison garments.
\[Jehoiachin\] ate bread before him continually all the days of his
life:

<span id="an_52:34">52:34</span> and for his allowance, there was a
continual allowance given him by the king of Babylon, every day a
portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations](lam)
