[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe2)  [Next](jo2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 1 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> That which was from the beginning, that
which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which
we saw, and our hands touched, concerning the Word of life

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> (and the life was revealed, and we have
seen, and testify, and declare to you the life, the eternal life, which
was with the Father, and was revealed to us);

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> that which we have seen and heard we
declare to you, that you also may have fellowship with us. Yes, and our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son, Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And we write these things to you, that our
joy may be fulfilled.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> This is the message which we have heard
from him and announce to you, that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> If we say that we have fellowship with him
and walk in the darkness, we lie, and don't tell the truth.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But if we walk in the light, as he is in
the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all sin.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
righteous to forgive us the sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> If we say that we haven't sinned, we make
him a liar, and his word is not in us.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My little children, I write these things to
you so that you may not sin. If anyone sins, we have a Counselor with
the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And he is the atoning sacrifice for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> This is how we know that we know him: if we
keep his commandments.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> One who says, "I know him," and doesn't
keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth isn't in him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But whoever keeps his word, God's love has
most certainly been perfected in him. This is how we know that we are in
him:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> he who says he remains in him ought himself
also to walk just like he walked.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Brothers, I write no new commandment to
you, but an old commandment which you had from the beginning. The old
commandment is the word which you heard from the beginning.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Again, I write a new commandment to you,
which is true in him and in you; because the darkness is passing away,
and the true light already shines.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> He who says he is in the light and hates
his brother, is in the darkness even until now.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> He who loves his brother remains in the
light, and there is no occasion for stumbling in him.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But he who hates his brother is in the
darkness, and walks in the darkness, and doesn't know where he is going,
because the darkness has blinded his eyes.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I write to you, little children, because
your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I write to you, fathers, because you know
him who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you
have overcome the evil one. I write to you, little children, because you
know the Father.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> I have written to you, fathers, because
you know him who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young
men, because you are strong, and the word of God remains in you, and you
have overcome the evil one.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Don't love the world, neither the things
that are in the world. If anyone loves the world, the Father's love
isn't in him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For all that is in the world, the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, isn't the
Father's, but is the world's.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The world is passing away with its lusts,
but he who does God's will remains forever.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Little children, these are the end times,
and as you heard that the Antichrist is coming, even now many
antichrists have arisen. By this we know that it is the final hour.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They went out from us, but they didn't
belong to us; for if they had belonged to us, they would have continued
with us. But they left, that they might be revealed that none of them
belong to us.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> You have an anointing from the Holy One,
and you all have knowledge.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I have not written to you because you
don't know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie is of
the truth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who is the liar but he who denies that
Jesus is the Christ? This is the Antichrist, he who denies the Father
and the Son.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Whoever denies the Son, the same doesn't
have the Father. He who confesses the Son has the Father also.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Therefore, as for you, let that remain in
you which you heard from the beginning. If that which you heard from the
beginning remains in you, you also will remain in the Son, and in the
Father.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> This is the promise which he promised us,
the eternal life.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> These things I have written to you
concerning those who would lead you astray.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> As for you, the anointing which you
received from him remains in you, and you don't need for anyone to teach
you. But as his anointing teaches you concerning all things, and is
true, and is no lie, and even as it taught you, you will remain in him.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Now, little children, remain in him, that
when he appears, we may have boldness, and not be ashamed before him at
his coming.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> If you know that he is righteous, you
know that everyone who practices righteousness is born of him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Behold, how great a love the Father has
bestowed on us, that we should be called children of God! For this cause
the world doesn't know us, because it didn't know him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Beloved, now we are children of God, and it
is not yet revealed what we will be. But we know that, when he is
revealed, we will be like him; for we will see him just as he is.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Everyone who has this hope set on him
purifies himself, even as he is pure.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Everyone who sins also commits lawlessness.
Sin is lawlessness.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> You know that he was revealed to take away
our sins, and in him is no sin.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Whoever remains in him doesn't sin. Whoever
sins hasn't seen him, neither knows him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Little children, let no one lead you
astray. He who does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> He who sins is of the devil, for the devil
has been sinning from the beginning. To this end the Son of God was
revealed, that he might destroy the works of the devil.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Whoever is born of God doesn't commit sin,
because his seed remains in him; and he can't sin, because he is born of
God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In this the children of God are revealed,
and the children of the devil. Whoever doesn't do righteousness is not
of God, neither is he who doesn't love his brother.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For this is the message which you heard
from the beginning, that we should love one another;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> unlike Cain, who was of the evil one, and
killed his brother. Why did he kill him? Because his works were evil,
and his brother's righteous.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Don't be surprised, my brothers, if the
world hates you.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> We know that we have passed out of death
into life, because we love the brothers. He who doesn't love his brother
remains in death.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Whoever hates his brother is a murderer,
and you know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> By this we know love, because he laid
down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for the
brothers.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> But whoever has the world's goods, and
sees his brother in need, and closes his heart of compassion against
him, how does the love of God remain in him?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> My little children, let's not love in
word only, neither with the tongue only, but in deed and truth.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And by this we know that we are of the
truth, and persuade our hearts before him,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> because if our heart condemns us, God is
greater than our heart, and knows all things.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Beloved, if our hearts don't condemn us,
we have boldness toward God;

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> and whatever we ask, we receive from him,
because we keep his commandments and do the things that are pleasing in
his sight.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> This is his commandment, that we should
believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another, even
as he commanded.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> He who keeps his commandments remains in
him, and he in him. By this we know that he remains in us, by the Spirit
which he gave us.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Beloved, don't believe every spirit, but
test the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false prophets
have gone out into the world.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> By this you know the Spirit of God: every
spirit who confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and every spirit who doesn't confess that
Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not of God, and this is the spirit
of the Antichrist, of whom you have heard that it comes. Now it is in
the world already.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> You are of God, little children, and have
overcome them; because greater is he who is in you than he who is in the
world.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> They are of the world. Therefore they speak
of the world, and the world hears them.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> We are of God. He who knows God listens to
us. He who is not of God doesn't listen to us. By this we know the
spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Beloved, let us love one another, for love
is of God; and everyone who loves is born of God, and knows God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He who doesn't love doesn't know God, for
God is love.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> By this God's love was revealed in us, that
God has sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live
through him.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> In this is love, not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his Son as the atoning sacrifice for our
sins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Beloved, if God loved us in this way, we
also ought to love one another.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> No one has seen God at any time. If we
love one another, God remains in us, and his love has been perfected in
us.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> By this we know that we remain in him and
he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> We have seen and testify that the Father
has sent the Son as the Savior of the world.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son
of God, God remains in him, and he in God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> We know and have believed the love which
God has for us. God is love, and he who remains in love remains in God,
and God remains in him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In this love has been made perfect among
us, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is,
even so are we in this world.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> There is no fear in love; but perfect
love casts out fear, because fear has punishment. He who fears is not
made perfect in love.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> We love him, because he first loved us.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> If a man says, "I love God," and hates
his brother, he is a liar; for he who doesn't love his brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> This commandment we have from him, that
he who loves God should also love his brother.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ
is born of God. Whoever loves the Father also loves the child who is
born of him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> By this we know that we love the children
of God, when we love God and keep his commandments.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For this is the love of God, that we keep
his commandments. His commandments are not grievous.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For whatever is born of God overcomes the
world. This is the victory that has overcome the world: your faith.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Who is he who overcomes the world, but he
who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This is he who came by water and blood,
Jesus Christ; not with the water only, but with the water and the blood.
It is the Spirit who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For there are three who testify:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and
the three agree as one.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater; for this is God's testimony which he has
testified concerning his Son.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He who believes in the Son of God has the
testimony in himself. He who doesn't believe God has made him a liar,
because he has not believed in the testimony that God has given
concerning his Son.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> The testimony is this, that God gave to
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He who has the Son has the life. He who
doesn't have God's Son doesn't have the life.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> These things I have written to you who
believe in the name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have
eternal life, and that you may continue to believe in the name of the
Son of God.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> This is the boldness which we have toward
him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, he listens to us.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And if we know that he listens to us,
whatever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked
of him.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If anyone sees his brother sinning a sin
not leading to death, he shall ask, and God will give him life for those
who sin not leading to death. There is a sin leading to death. I don't
say that he should make a request concerning this.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> All unrighteousness is sin, and there is
a sin not leading to death.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> We know that whoever is born of God
doesn't sin, but he who was born of God keeps himself, and the evil one
doesn't touch him.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> We know that we are of God, and the whole
world lies in the power of the evil one.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> We know that the Son of God has come, and
has given us an understanding, that we know him who is true, and we are
in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Little children, keep yourselves from
idols.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John](jo2)
