[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](luk)  [Next](act) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> The same was in the beginning with God.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> All things were made through him. Without
him was not anything made that has been made.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> In him was life, and the life was the light
of men.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The light shines in the darkness, and the
darkness hasn't overcome it.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> There came a man, sent from God, whose name
was John.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The same came as a witness, that he might
testify about the light, that all might believe through him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> He was not the light, but was sent that he
might testify about the light.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> The true light that enlightens everyone was
coming into the world.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> He was in the world, and the world was
made through him, and the world didn't recognize him.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> He came to his own, and those who were
his own didn't receive him.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But as many as received him, to them he
gave the right to become God's children, to those who believe in his
name:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> who were born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The Word became flesh, and lived among
us. We saw his glory, such glory as of the one and only Son of the
Father, full of grace and truth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> John testified about him. He cried out,
saying, "This was he of whom I said, 'He who comes after me has
surpassed me, for he was before me.'"

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> From his fullness we all received grace
upon grace.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For the law was given through Moses.
Grace and truth were realized through Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> No one has seen God at any time. The one
and only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> This is John's testimony, when the Jews
sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, "Who are you?"

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> He declared, and didn't deny, but he
declared, "I am not the Christ."

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> They asked him, "What then? Are you
Elijah?" He said, "I am not." "Are you the prophet?" He answered, "No."

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> They said therefore to him, "Who are you?
Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. What do you say
about yourself?"

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> He said, "I am the voice of one crying in
the wilderness, 'Make straight the way of the Lord,' as Isaiah the
prophet said."

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> The ones who had been sent were from the
Pharisees.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> They asked him, "Why then do you baptize,
if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?"

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> John answered them, "I baptize in water,
but among you stands one whom you don't know.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> He is the one who comes after me, who is
preferred before me, whose sandal strap I'm not worthy to loosen."

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> These things were done in Bethany beyond
the Jordan, where John was baptizing.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> The next day, he saw Jesus coming to him,
and said, "Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> This is he of whom I said, 'After me
comes a man who is preferred before me, for he was before me.'

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> I didn't know him, but for this reason I
came baptizing in water: that he would be revealed to Israel."

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> John testified, saying, "I have seen the
Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven, and it remained on him.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> I didn't recognize him, but he who sent
me to baptize in water, he said to me, 'On whomever you will see the
Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he who baptizes in
the Holy Spirit.'

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> I have seen, and have testified that this
is the Son of God."

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Again, the next day, John was standing
with two of his disciples,

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> and he looked at Jesus as he walked, and
said, "Behold, the Lamb of God!"

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> The two disciples heard him speak, and
they followed Jesus.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Jesus turned, and saw them following, and
said to them, "What are you looking for?" They said to him, "Rabbi"
(which is to say, being interpreted, Teacher), "where are you staying?"

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> He said to them, "Come, and see." They
came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. It
was about the tenth hour.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> One of the two who heard John, and
followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> He first found his own brother, Simon,
and said to him, "We have found the Messiah!" (which is, being
interpreted, Christ).

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at
him, and said, "You are Simon the son of Jonah. You shall be called
Cephas" (which is by interpretation, Peter).

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> On the next day, he was determined to go
out into Galilee, and he found Philip. Jesus said to him, "Follow me."

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the
city of Andrew and Peter.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> Philip found Nathanael, and said to him,
"We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, wrote:
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph."

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> Nathanael said to him, "Can any good
thing come out of Nazareth?" Philip said to him, "Come and see."

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and
said about him, "Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit!"

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> Nathanael said to him, "How do you know
me?" Jesus answered him, "Before Philip called you, when you were under
the fig tree, I saw you."

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Nathanael answered him, "Rabbi, you are
the Son of God! You are King of Israel!"

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> Jesus answered him, "Because I told you,
'I saw you underneath the fig tree,' do you believe? You will see
greater things than these!"

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> He said to him, "Most certainly, I tell
you, hereafter you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God
ascending and descending on the Son of Man."

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> The third day, there was a marriage in Cana
of Galilee. Jesus' mother was there.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Jesus also was invited, with his disciples,
to the marriage.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> When the wine ran out, Jesus' mother said
to him, "They have no wine."

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Jesus said to her, "Woman, what does that
have to do with you and me? My hour has not yet come."

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> His mother said to the servants, "Whatever
he says to you, do it."

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Now there were six water pots of stone set
there after the Jews' way of purifying, containing two or three metretes
apiece.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Jesus said to them, "Fill the water pots
with water." They filled them up to the brim.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> He said to them, "Now draw some out, and
take it to the ruler of the feast." So they took it.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> When the ruler of the feast tasted the
water now become wine, and didn't know where it came from (but the
servants who had drawn the water knew), the ruler of the feast called
the bridegroom,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and said to him, "Everyone serves the
good wine first, and when the guests have drunk freely, then that which
is worse. You have kept the good wine until now!"

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> This beginning of his signs Jesus did in
Cana of Galilee, and revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in
him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> After this, he went down to Capernaum,
he, and his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; and they stayed
there a few days.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and
Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> He found in the temple those who sold
oxen, sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> He made a whip of cords, and threw all
out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he poured out the
changers' money, and overthrew their tables.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To those who sold the doves, he said,
"Take these things out of here! Don't make my Father's house a
marketplace!"

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> His disciples remembered that it was
written, "Zeal for your house will eat me up."

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The Jews therefore answered him, "What
sign do you show us, seeing that you do these things?"

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Jesus answered them, "Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it up."

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The Jews therefore said, "It took
forty-six years to build this temple! Will you raise it up in three
days?"

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> But he spoke of the temple of his body.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> When therefore he was raised from the
dead, his disciples remembered that he said this, and they believed the
Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Now when he was in Jerusalem at the
Passover, during the feast, many believed in his name, observing his
signs which he did.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But Jesus didn't trust himself to them,
because he knew everyone,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> and because he didn't need for anyone to
testify concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now there was a man of the Pharisees named
Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The same came to him by night, and said to
him, "Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one
can do these signs that you do, unless God is with him."

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Jesus answered him, "Most certainly, I tell
you, unless one is born anew, he can't see the Kingdom of God."

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Nicodemus said to him, "How can a man be
born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb,
and be born?"

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Jesus answered, "Most certainly I tell you,
unless one is born of water and spirit, he can't enter into the Kingdom
of God!

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> That which is born of the flesh is flesh.
That which is born of the Spirit is spirit.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Don't marvel that I said to you, 'You must
be born anew.'

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> The wind blows where it wants to, and you
hear its sound, but don't know where it comes from and where it is
going. So is everyone who is born of the Spirit."

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Nicodemus answered him, "How can these
things be?"

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Jesus answered him, "Are you the teacher
of Israel, and don't understand these things?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Most certainly I tell you, we speak that
which we know, and testify of that which we have seen, and you don't
receive our witness.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> If I told you earthly things and you
don't believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> No one has ascended into heaven, but he
who descended out of heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> As Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> that whoever believes in him should not
perish, but have eternal life.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For God so loved the world, that he gave
his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish,
but have eternal life.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For God didn't send his Son into the
world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved through
him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> He who believes in him is not judged. He
who doesn't believe has been judged already, because he has not believed
in the name of the one and only Son of God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> This is the judgment, that the light has
come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light;
for their works were evil.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For everyone who does evil hates the
light, and doesn't come to the light, lest his works would be exposed.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But he who does the truth comes to the
light, that his works may be revealed, that they have been done in God."

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> After these things, Jesus came with his
disciples into the land of Judea. He stayed there with them, and
baptized.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> John also was baptizing in Enon near
Salim, because there was much water there. They came, and were baptized.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> For John was not yet thrown into prison.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> There arose therefore a questioning on
the part of John's disciples with some Jews about purification.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> They came to John, and said to him,
"Rabbi, he who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you have
testified, behold, the same baptizes, and everyone is coming to him."

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> John answered, "A man can receive
nothing, unless it has been given him from heaven.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> You yourselves testify that I said, 'I am
not the Christ,' but, 'I have been sent before him.'

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> He who has the bride is the bridegroom;
but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices
greatly because of the bridegroom's voice. This, my joy, therefore is
made full.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> He must increase, but I must decrease.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> He who comes from above is above all. He
who is from the Earth belongs to the Earth, and speaks of the Earth. He
who comes from heaven is above all.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> What he has seen and heard, of that he
testifies; and no one receives his witness.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> He who has received his witness has set
his seal to this, that God is true.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> For he whom God has sent speaks the words
of God; for God gives the Spirit without measure.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The Father loves the Son, and has given
all things into his hand.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> One who believes in the Son has eternal
life, but one who disobeys the Son won't see life, but the wrath of God
remains on him."

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore when the Lord knew that the
Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples
than John

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> (although Jesus himself didn't baptize, but
his disciples),

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> he left Judea, and departed into Galilee.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> He needed to pass through Samaria.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> So he came to a city of Samaria, called
Sychar, near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son, Joseph.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore,
being tired from his journey, sat down by the well. It was about the
sixth hour.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> A woman of Samaria came to draw water.
Jesus said to her, "Give me a drink."

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For his disciples had gone away into the
city to buy food.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The Samaritan woman therefore said to him,
"How is it that you, being a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan
woman?" (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Jesus answered her, "If you knew the gift
of God, and who it is who says to you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have
asked him, and he would have given you living water."

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The woman said to him, "Sir, you have
nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. From where then have you
that living water?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Are you greater than our father, Jacob,
who gave us the well, and drank of it himself, as did his children, and
his livestock?"

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Jesus answered her, "Everyone who drinks
of this water will thirst again,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> but whoever drinks of the water that I
will give him will never thirst again; but the water that I will give
him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life."

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> The woman said to him, "Sir, give me this
water, so that I don't get thirsty, neither come all the way here to
draw."

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Jesus said to her, "Go, call your
husband, and come here."

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> The woman answered, "I have no husband."
Jesus said to her, "You said well, 'I have no husband,'

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> for you have had five husbands; and he
whom you now have is not your husband. This you have said truly."

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The woman said to him, "Sir, I perceive
that you are a prophet.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Our fathers worshiped in this mountain,
and you Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where people ought to
worship."

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Jesus said to her, "Woman, believe me,
the hour comes, when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, will
you worship the Father.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> You worship that which you don't know. We
worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> But the hour comes, and now is, when the
true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the
Father seeks such to be his worshippers.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> God is spirit, and those who worship him
must worship in spirit and truth."

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> The woman said to him, "I know that
Messiah comes," (he who is called Christ). "When he has come, he will
declare to us all things."

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Jesus said to her, "I am he, the one who
speaks to you."

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> At this, his disciples came. They
marveled that he was speaking with a woman; yet no one said, "What are
you looking for?" or, "Why do you speak with her?"

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> So the woman left her water pot, and went
away into the city, and said to the people,

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> "Come, see a man who told me everything
that I did. Can this be the Christ?"

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> They went out of the city, and were
coming to him.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> In the meanwhile, the disciples urged
him, saying, "Rabbi, eat."

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> But he said to them, "I have food to eat
that you don't know about."

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> The disciples therefore said one to
another, "Has anyone brought him something to eat?"

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Jesus said to them, "My food is to do the
will of him who sent me, and to accomplish his work.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> Don't you say, 'There are yet four months
until the harvest?' Behold, I tell you, lift up your eyes, and look at
the fields, that they are white for harvest already.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> He who reaps receives wages, and gathers
fruit to eternal life; that both he who sows and he who reaps may
rejoice together.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> For in this the saying is true, 'One
sows, and another reaps.'

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> I sent you to reap that for which you
haven't labored. Others have labored, and you have entered into their
labor."

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> From that city many of the Samaritans
believed in him because of the word of the woman, who testified, "He
told me everything that I did."

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> So when the Samaritans came to him, they
begged him to stay with them. He stayed there two days.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> Many more believed because of his word.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> They said to the woman, "Now we believe,
not because of your speaking; for we have heard for ourselves, and know
that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world."

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> After the two days he went out from there
and went into Galilee.

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> For Jesus himself testified that a
prophet has no honor in his own country.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> So when he came into Galilee, the
Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did in
Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> Jesus came therefore again to Cana of
Galilee, where he made the water into wine. There was a certain nobleman
whose son was sick at Capernaum.

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> When he heard that Jesus had come out of
Judea into Galilee, he went to him, and begged him that he would come
down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death.

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> Jesus therefore said to him, "Unless you
see signs and wonders, you will in no way believe."

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> The nobleman said to him, "Sir, come down
before my child dies."

<span id="an_4:50">4:50</span> Jesus said to him, "Go your way. Your son
lives." The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went
his way.

<span id="an_4:51">4:51</span> As he was now going down, his servants
met him and reported, saying "Your child lives!"

<span id="an_4:52">4:52</span> So he inquired of them the hour when he
began to get better. They said therefore to him, "Yesterday at the
seventh hour, the fever left him."

<span id="an_4:53">4:53</span> So the father knew that it was at that
hour in which Jesus said to him, "Your son lives." He believed, as did
his whole house.

<span id="an_4:54">4:54</span> This is again the second sign that Jesus
did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> After these things, there was a feast of
the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Now in Jerusalem by the sheep gate, there
is a pool, which is called in Hebrew, "Bethesda," having five porches.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> In these lay a great multitude of those who
were sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed, waiting for the moving of the
water;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> for an angel went down at certain times
into the pool, and stirred up the water. Whoever stepped in first after
the stirring of the water was made whole of whatever disease he had.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> A certain man was there, who had been sick
for thirty-eight years.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> When Jesus saw him lying there, and knew
that he had been sick for a long time, he asked him, "Do you want to be
made well?"

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The sick man answered him, "Sir, I have no
one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I'm
coming, another steps down before me."

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Jesus said to him, "Arise, take up your
mat, and walk."

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Immediately, the man was made well, and
took up his mat and walked. Now it was the Sabbath on that day.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So the Jews said to him who was cured,
"It is the Sabbath. It is not lawful for you to carry the mat."

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> He answered them, "He who made me well,
the same said to me, 'Take up your mat, and walk.'"

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then they asked him, "Who is the man who
said to you, 'Take up your mat, and walk'?"

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But he who was healed didn't know who it
was, for Jesus had withdrawn, a crowd being in the place.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Afterward Jesus found him in the temple,
and said to him, "Behold, you are made well. Sin no more, so that
nothing worse happens to you."

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The man went away, and told the Jews that
it was Jesus who had made him well.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> For this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus,
and sought to kill him, because he did these things on the Sabbath.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But Jesus answered them, "My Father is
still working, so I am working, too."

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For this cause therefore the Jews sought
all the more to kill him, because he not only broke the Sabbath, but
also called God his own Father, making himself equal with God.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Jesus therefore answered them, "Most
certainly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he
sees the Father doing. For whatever things he does, these the Son also
does likewise.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For the Father has affection for the Son,
and shows him all things that he himself does. He will show him greater
works than these, that you may marvel.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For as the Father raises the dead and
gives them life, even so the Son also gives life to whom he desires.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> For the Father judges no one, but he has
given all judgment to the Son,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> that all may honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father. He who doesn't honor the Son doesn't honor the Father
who sent him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> "Most certainly I tell you, he who hears
my word, and believes him who sent me, has eternal life, and doesn't
come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Most certainly, I tell you, the hour
comes, and now is, when the dead will hear the Son of God's voice; and
those who hear will live.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> For as the Father has life in himself,
even so he gave to the Son also to have life in himself.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> He also gave him authority to execute
judgment, because he is a son of man.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Don't marvel at this, for the hour comes,
in which all that are in the tombs will hear his voice,

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> and will come out; those who have done
good, to the resurrection of life; and those who have done evil, to the
resurrection of judgment.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> I can of myself do nothing. As I hear, I
judge, and my judgment is righteous; because I don't seek my own will,
but the will of my Father who sent me.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> "If I testify about myself, my witness is
not valid.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> It is another who testifies about me. I
know that the testimony which he testifies about me is true.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> You have sent to John, and he has
testified to the truth.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But the testimony which I receive is not
from man. However, I say these things that you may be saved.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> He was the burning and shining lamp, and
you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> But the testimony which I have is greater
than that of John, for the works which the Father gave me to accomplish,
the very works that I do, testify about me, that the Father has sent me.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> The Father himself, who sent me, has
testified about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time, nor
seen his form.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> You don't have his word living in you;
because you don't believe him whom he sent.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> "You search the Scriptures, because you
think that in them you have eternal life; and these are they which
testify about me.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> Yet you will not come to me, that you may
have life.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> I don't receive glory from men.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> But I know you, that you don't have God's
love in yourselves.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> I have come in my Father's name, and you
don't receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive
him.

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> How can you believe, who receive glory
from one another, and you don't seek the glory that comes from the only
God?

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> "Don't think that I will accuse you to
the Father. There is one who accuses you, even Moses, on whom you have
set your hope.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> For if you believed Moses, you would
believe me; for he wrote about me.

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> But if you don't believe his writings,
how will you believe my words?"

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> After these things, Jesus went away to the
other side of the sea of Galilee, which is also called the Sea of
Tiberias.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> A great multitude followed him, because
they saw his signs which he did on those who were sick.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Jesus went up into the mountain, and he sat
there with his disciples.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews,
was at hand.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Jesus therefore lifting up his eyes, and
seeing that a great multitude was coming to him, said to Philip, "Where
are we to buy bread, that these may eat?"

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> This he said to test him, for he himself
knew what he would do.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Philip answered him, "Two hundred denarii
worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that everyone of them may
receive a little."

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother, said to him,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> "There is a boy here who has five barley
loaves and two fish, but what are these among so many?"

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Jesus said, "Have the people sit down."
Now there was much grass in that place. So the men sat down, in number
about five thousand.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Jesus took the loaves; and having given
thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those who
were sitting down; likewise also of the fish as much as they desired.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> When they were filled, he said to his
disciples, "Gather up the broken pieces which are left over, that
nothing be lost."

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> So they gathered them up, and filled
twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which
were left over by those who had eaten.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> When therefore the people saw the sign
which Jesus did, they said, "This is truly the prophet who comes into
the world."

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Jesus therefore, perceiving that they
were about to come and take him by force, to make him king, withdrew
again to the mountain by himself.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> When evening came, his disciples went
down to the sea,

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> and they entered into the boat, and were
going over the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not come
to them.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The sea was tossed by a great wind
blowing.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> When therefore they had rowed about
twenty-five or thirty stadia, they saw Jesus walking on the sea, and
drawing near to the boat; and they were afraid.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But he said to them, "It is I. Don't be
afraid."

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> They were willing therefore to receive
him into the boat. Immediately the boat was at the land where they were
going.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> On the next day, the multitude that stood
on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there,
except the one in which his disciples had embarked, and that Jesus
hadn't entered with his disciples into the boat, but his disciples had
gone away alone.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> However boats from Tiberias came near to
the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> When the multitude therefore saw that
Jesus wasn't there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the
boats, and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> When they found him on the other side of
the sea, they asked him, "Rabbi, when did you come here?"

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Jesus answered them, "Most certainly I
tell you, you seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of
the loaves, and were filled.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Don't work for the food which perishes,
but for the food which remains to eternal life, which the Son of Man
will give to you. For God the Father has sealed him."

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> They said therefore to him, "What must we
do, that we may work the works of God?"

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Jesus answered them, "This is the work of
God, that you believe in him whom he has sent."

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> They said therefore to him, "What then do
you do for a sign, that we may see, and believe you? What work do you
do?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Our fathers ate the manna in the
wilderness. As it is written, 'He gave them bread out of heaven to
eat.'"

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> Jesus therefore said to them, "Most
certainly, I tell you, it wasn't Moses who gave you the bread out of
heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> For the bread of God is that which comes
down out of heaven, and gives life to the world."

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> They said therefore to him, "Lord, always
give us this bread."

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> Jesus said to them, "I am the bread of
life. He who comes to me will not be hungry, and he who believes in me
will never be thirsty.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> But I told you that you have seen me, and
yet you don't believe.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> All those who the Father gives me will
come to me. Him who comes to me I will in no way throw out.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> For I have come down from heaven, not to
do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> This is the will of my Father who sent
me, that of all he has given to me I should lose nothing, but should
raise him up at the last day.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> This is the will of the one who sent me,
that everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him, should have eternal
life; and I will raise him up at the last day."

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> The Jews therefore murmured concerning
him, because he said, "I am the bread which came down out of heaven."

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> They said, "Isn't this Jesus, the son of
Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then does he say, 'I have
come down out of heaven?'"

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> Therefore Jesus answered them, "Don't
murmur among yourselves.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> No one can come to me unless the Father
who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day.

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> It is written in the prophets, 'They will
all be taught by God.' Therefore everyone who hears from the Father, and
has learned, comes to me.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> Not that anyone has seen the Father,
except he who is from God. He has seen the Father.

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> Most certainly, I tell you, he who
believes in me has eternal life.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> I am the bread of life.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> Your fathers ate the manna in the
wilderness, and they died.

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> This is the bread which comes down out of
heaven, that anyone may eat of it and not die.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> I am the living bread which came down out
of heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. Yes, the
bread which I will give for the life of the world is my flesh."

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> The Jews therefore contended with one
another, saying, "How can this man give us his flesh to eat?"

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> Jesus therefore said to them, "Most
certainly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and
drink his blood, you don't have life in yourselves.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood
has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> For my flesh is food indeed, and my blood
is drink indeed.

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood
lives in me, and I in him.

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> As the living Father sent me, and I live
because of the Father; so he who feeds on me, he will also live because
of me.

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> This is the bread which came down out of
heaven--not as our fathers ate the manna, and died. He who eats this
bread will live forever."

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> He said these things in the synagogue, as
he taught in Capernaum.

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> Therefore many of his disciples, when
they heard this, said, "This is a hard saying! Who can listen to it?"

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> But Jesus knowing in himself that his
disciples murmured at this, said to them, "Does this cause you to
stumble?

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> Then what if you would see the Son of Man
ascending to where he was before?

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> It is the spirit who gives life. The
flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit, and are
life.

<span id="an_6:64">6:64</span> But there are some of you who don't
believe." For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who didn't
believe, and who it was who would betray him.

<span id="an_6:65">6:65</span> He said, "For this cause have I said to
you that no one can come to me, unless it is given to him by my Father."

<span id="an_6:66">6:66</span> At this, many of his disciples went back,
and walked no more with him.

<span id="an_6:67">6:67</span> Jesus said therefore to the twelve, "You
don't also want to go away, do you?"

<span id="an_6:68">6:68</span> Simon Peter answered him, "Lord, to whom
would we go? You have the words of eternal life.

<span id="an_6:69">6:69</span> We have come to believe and know that you
are the Christ, the Son of the living God."

<span id="an_6:70">6:70</span> Jesus answered them, "Didn't I choose
you, the twelve, and one of you is a devil?"

<span id="an_6:71">6:71</span> Now he spoke of Judas, the son of Simon
Iscariot, for it was he who would betray him, being one of the twelve.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> After these things, Jesus was walking in
Galilee, for he wouldn't walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill
him.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Now the feast of the Jews, the Feast of
Booths, was at hand.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> His brothers therefore said to him, "Depart
from here, and go into Judea, that your disciples also may see your
works which you do.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> For no one does anything in secret, and
himself seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, reveal
yourself to the world."

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For even his brothers didn't believe in
him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Jesus therefore said to them, "My time has
not yet come, but your time is always ready.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> The world can't hate you, but it hates me,
because I testify about it, that its works are evil.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> You go up to the feast. I am not yet going
up to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled."

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Having said these things to them, he stayed
in Galilee.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> But when his brothers had gone up to the
feast, then he also went up, not publicly, but as it were in secret.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> The Jews therefore sought him at the
feast, and said, "Where is he?"

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> There was much murmuring among the
multitudes concerning him. Some said, "He is a good man." Others said,
"Not so, but he leads the multitude astray."

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Yet no one spoke openly of him for fear
of the Jews.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> But when it was now the midst of the
feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The Jews therefore marveled, saying, "How
does this man know letters, having never been educated?"

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Jesus therefore answered them, "My
teaching is not mine, but his who sent me.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> If anyone desires to do his will, he will
know about the teaching, whether it is from God, or if I am speaking
from myself.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> He who speaks from himself seeks his own
glory, but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and no
unrighteousness is in him.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Didn't Moses give you the law, and yet
none of you keeps the law? Why do you seek to kill me?"

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The multitude answered, "You have a
demon! Who seeks to kill you?"

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Jesus answered them, "I did one work, and
you all marvel because of it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Moses has given you circumcision (not
that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and on the Sabbath you
circumcise a boy.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> If a boy receives circumcision on the
Sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me,
because I made a man completely healthy on the Sabbath?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Don't judge according to appearance, but
judge righteous judgment."

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Therefore some of them of Jerusalem said,
"Isn't this he whom they seek to kill?

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Behold, he speaks openly, and they say
nothing to him. Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this is truly
the Christ?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> However we know where this man comes
from, but when the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from."

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Jesus therefore cried out in the temple,
teaching and saying, "You both know me, and know where I am from. I have
not come of myself, but he who sent me is true, whom you don't know.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> I know him, because I am from him, and he
sent me."

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> They sought therefore to take him; but no
one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> But of the multitude, many believed in
him. They said, "When the Christ comes, he won't do more signs than
those which this man has done, will he?"

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The Pharisees heard the multitude
murmuring these things concerning him, and the chief priests and the
Pharisees sent officers to arrest him.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> Then Jesus said, "I will be with you a
little while longer, then I go to him who sent me.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> You will seek me, and won't find me; and
where I am, you can't come."

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> The Jews therefore said among themselves,
"Where will this man go that we won't find him? Will he go to the
Dispersion among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> What is this word that he said, 'You will
seek me, and won't find me; and where I am, you can't come'?"

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> Now on the last and greatest day of the
feast, Jesus stood and cried out, "If anyone is thirsty, let him come to
me and drink!

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> He who believes in me, as the Scripture
has said, from within him will flow rivers of living water."

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> But he said this about the Spirit, which
those believing in him were to receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet
given, because Jesus wasn't yet glorified.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> Many of the multitude therefore, when
they heard these words, said, "This is truly the prophet."

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> Others said, "This is the Christ." But
some said, "What, does the Christ come out of Galilee?

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> Hasn't the Scripture said that the Christ
comes of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David
was?"

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> So there arose a division in the
multitude because of him.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> Some of them would have arrested him, but
no one laid hands on him.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> The officers therefore came to the chief
priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, "Why didn't you bring
him?"

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> The officers answered, "No man ever spoke
like this man!"

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> The Pharisees therefore answered them,
"You aren't also led astray, are you?

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> Have any of the rulers believed in him,
or of the Pharisees?

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> But this multitude that doesn't know the
law is accursed."

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Nicodemus (he who came to him by night,
being one of them) said to them,

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> "Does our law judge a man, unless it
first hears from him personally and knows what he does?"

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> They answered him, "Are you also from
Galilee? Search, and see that no prophet has arisen out of Galilee."

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> Everyone went to his own house,

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Now very early in the morning, he came
again into the temple, and all the people came to him. He sat down, and
taught them.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> The scribes and the Pharisees brought a
woman taken in adultery. Having set her in the midst,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> they told him, "Teacher, we found this
woman in adultery, in the very act.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Now in our law, Moses commanded us to stone
such. What then do you say about her?"

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> They said this testing him, that they might
have something to accuse him of. But Jesus stooped down, and wrote on
the ground with his finger.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> But when they continued asking him, he
looked up and said to them, "He who is without sin among you, let him
throw the first stone at her."

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Again he stooped down, and with his finger
wrote on the ground.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They, when they heard it, being convicted
by their conscience, went out one by one, beginning from the oldest,
even to the last. Jesus was left alone with the woman where she was, in
the middle.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Jesus, standing up, saw her and said,
"Woman, where are your accusers? Did no one condemn you?"

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> She said, "No one, Lord." Jesus said,
"Neither do I condemn you. Go your way. From now on, sin no more."

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Again, therefore, Jesus spoke to them,
saying, "I am the light of the world. He who follows me will not walk in
the darkness, but will have the light of life."

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The Pharisees therefore said to him, "You
testify about yourself. Your testimony is not valid."

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Jesus answered them, "Even if I testify
about myself, my testimony is true, for I know where I came from, and
where I am going; but you don't know where I came from, or where I am
going.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> You judge according to the flesh. I judge
no one.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Even if I do judge, my judgment is true,
for I am not alone, but I am with the Father who sent me.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> It's also written in your law that the
testimony of two people is valid.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> I am one who testifies about myself, and
the Father who sent me testifies about me."

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> They said therefore to him, "Where is
your Father?" Jesus answered, "You know neither me, nor my Father. If
you knew me, you would know my Father also."

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Jesus spoke these words in the treasury,
as he taught in the temple. Yet no one arrested him, because his hour
had not yet come.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Jesus said therefore again to them, "I am
going away, and you will seek me, and you will die in your sins. Where I
go, you can't come."

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> The Jews therefore said, "Will he kill
himself, that he says, 'Where I am going, you can't come?'"

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> He said to them, "You are from beneath. I
am from above. You are of this world. I am not of this world.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> I said therefore to you that you will die
in your sins; for unless you believe that I am he, you will die in your
sins."

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They said therefore to him, "Who are
you?" Jesus said to them, "Just what I have been saying to you from the
beginning.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> I have many things to speak and to judge
concerning you. However he who sent me is true; and the things which I
heard from him, these I say to the world."

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> They didn't understand that he spoke to
them about the Father.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Jesus therefore said to them, "When you
have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and I do
nothing of myself, but as my Father taught me, I say these things.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> He who sent me is with me. The Father
hasn't left me alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to
him."

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> As he spoke these things, many believed
in him.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Jesus therefore said to those Jews who
had believed him, "If you remain in my word, then you are truly my
disciples.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> You will know the truth, and the truth
will make you free."

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> They answered him, "We are Abraham's
seed, and have never been in bondage to anyone. How do you say, 'You
will be made free?'"

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Jesus answered them, "Most certainly I
tell you, everyone who commits sin is the bondservant of sin.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> A bondservant doesn't live in the house
forever. A son remains forever.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> If therefore the Son makes you free, you
will be free indeed.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> I know that you are Abraham's seed, yet
you seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> I say the things which I have seen with
my Father; and you also do the things which you have seen with your
father."

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> They answered him, "Our father is
Abraham." Jesus said to them, "If you were Abraham's children, you would
do the works of Abraham.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But now you seek to kill me, a man who
has told you the truth, which I heard from God. Abraham didn't do this.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> You do the works of your father." They
said to him, "We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one Father,
God."

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> Therefore Jesus said to them, "If God
were your father, you would love me, for I came out and have come from
God. For I haven't come of myself, but he sent me.

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> Why don't you understand my speech?
Because you can't hear my word.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> You are of your father, the devil, and
you want to do the desires of your father. He was a murderer from the
beginning, and doesn't stand in the truth, because there is no truth in
him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks on his own; for he is a liar, and
its father.

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> But because I tell the truth, you don't
believe me.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> Which of you convicts me of sin? If I
tell the truth, why do you not believe me?

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> He who is of God hears the words of God.
For this cause you don't hear, because you are not of God."

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> Then the Jews answered him, "Don't we say
well that you are a Samaritan, and have a demon?"

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> Jesus answered, "I don't have a demon,
but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me.

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> But I don't seek my own glory. There is
one who seeks and judges.

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> Most certainly, I tell you, if a person
keeps my word, he will never see death."

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> Then the Jews said to him, "Now we know
that you have a demon. Abraham died, and the prophets; and you say, 'If
a man keeps my word, he will never taste of death.'

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> Are you greater than our father, Abraham,
who died? The prophets died. Who do you make yourself out to be?"

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> Jesus answered, "If I glorify myself, my
glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say that
he is our God.

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> You have not known him, but I know him.
If I said, 'I don't know him,' I would be like you, a liar. But I know
him, and keep his word.

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day. He saw it, and was glad."

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> The Jews therefore said to him, "You are
not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?"

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> Jesus said to them, "Most certainly, I
tell you, before Abraham came into existence, I AM."

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> Therefore they took up stones to throw at
him, but Jesus was hidden, and went out of the temple, having gone
through the midst of them, and so passed by.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> As he passed by, he saw a man blind from
birth.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> His disciples asked him, "Rabbi, who
sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?"

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Jesus answered, "Neither did this man sin,
nor his parents; but, that the works of God might be revealed in him.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> I must work the works of him who sent me,
while it is day. The night is coming, when no one can work.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> While I am in the world, I am the light of
the world."

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> When he had said this, he spat on the
ground, made mud with the saliva, anointed the blind man's eyes with the
mud,

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> and said to him, "Go, wash in the pool of
Siloam" (which means "Sent"). So he went away, washed, and came back
seeing.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The neighbors therefore, and those who saw
that he was blind before, said, "Isn't this he who sat and begged?"

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Others were saying, "It is he." Still
others were saying, "He looks like him." He said, "I am he."

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> They therefore were asking him, "How were
your eyes opened?"

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> He answered, "A man called Jesus made
mud, anointed my eyes, and said to me, 'Go to the pool of Siloam, and
wash.' So I went away and washed, and I received sight."

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Then they asked him, "Where is he?" He
said, "I don't know."

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> They brought him who had been blind to
the Pharisees.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud
and opened his eyes.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Again therefore the Pharisees also asked
him how he received his sight. He said to them, "He put mud on my eyes,
I washed, and I see."

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Some therefore of the Pharisees said,
"This man is not from God, because he doesn't keep the Sabbath." Others
said, "How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?" There was division
among them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Therefore they asked the blind man again,
"What do you say about him, because he opened your eyes?" He said, "He
is a prophet."

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> The Jews therefore did not believe
concerning him, that he had been blind, and had received his sight,
until they called the parents of him who had received his sight,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> and asked them, "Is this your son, who
you say was born blind? How then does he now see?"

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> His parents answered them, "We know that
this is our son, and that he was born blind;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> but how he now sees, we don't know; or
who opened his eyes, we don't know. He is of age. Ask him. He will speak
for himself."

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> His parents said these things because
they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that if any man
would confess him as Christ, he would be put out of the synagogue.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Therefore his parents said, "He is of
age. Ask him."

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> So they called the man who was blind a
second time, and said to him, "Give glory to God. We know that this man
is a sinner."

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> He therefore answered, "I don't know if
he is a sinner. One thing I do know: that though I was blind, now I
see."

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> They said to him again, "What did he do
to you? How did he open your eyes?"

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> He answered them, "I told you already,
and you didn't listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You don't also
want to become his disciples, do you?"

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> They insulted him and said, "You are his
disciple, but we are disciples of Moses.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> We know that God has spoken to Moses. But
as for this man, we don't know where he comes from."

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> The man answered them, "How amazing! You
don't know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> We know that God doesn't listen to
sinners, but if anyone is a worshipper of God, and does his will, he
listens to him.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Since the world began it has never been
heard of that anyone opened the eyes of someone born blind.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> If this man were not from God, he could
do nothing."

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> They answered him, "You were altogether
born in sins, and do you teach us?" They threw him out.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Jesus heard that they had thrown him out,
and finding him, he said, "Do you believe in the Son of God?"

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> He answered, "Who is he, Lord, that I may
believe in him?"

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Jesus said to him, "You have both seen
him, and it is he who speaks with you."

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> He said, "Lord, I believe!" and he
worshiped him.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> Jesus said, "I came into this world for
judgment, that those who don't see may see; and that those who see may
become blind."

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> Those of the Pharisees who were with him
heard these things, and said to him, "Are we also blind?"

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> Jesus said to them, "If you were blind,
you would have no sin; but now you say, 'We see.' Therefore your sin
remains.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> "Most certainly, I tell you, one who
doesn't enter by the door into the sheep fold, but climbs up some other
way, the same is a thief and a robber.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> But one who enters in by the door is the
shepherd of the sheep.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> The gatekeeper opens the gate for him,
and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name, and
leads them out.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Whenever he brings out his own sheep, he
goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> They will by no means follow a stranger,
but will flee from him; for they don't know the voice of strangers."

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Jesus spoke this parable to them, but
they didn't understand what he was telling them.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Jesus therefore said to them again, "Most
certainly, I tell you, I am the sheep's door.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> All who came before me are thieves and
robbers, but the sheep didn't listen to them.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> I am the door. If anyone enters in by me,
he will be saved, and will go in and go out, and will find pasture.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> The thief only comes to steal, kill,
and destroy. I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> I am the good shepherd. The good
shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> He who is a hired hand, and not a
shepherd, who doesn't own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, leaves the
sheep, and flees. The wolf snatches the sheep, and scatters them.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> The hired hand flees because he is a
hired hand, and doesn't care for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> I am the good shepherd. I know my own,
and I'm known by my own;

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> even as the Father knows me, and I know
the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> I have other sheep, which are not of
this fold. I must bring them also, and they will hear my voice. They
will become one flock with one shepherd.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Therefore the Father loves me, because
I lay down my life, that I may take it again.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> No one takes it away from me, but I lay
it down by myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again. I received this commandment from my Father."

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Therefore a division arose again among
the Jews because of these words.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Many of them said, "He has a demon, and
is insane! Why do you listen to him?"

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Others said, "These are not the sayings
of one possessed by a demon. It isn't possible for a demon to open the
eyes of the blind, is it?"

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> It was the Feast of the Dedication at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> It was winter, and Jesus was walking in
the temple, in Solomon's porch.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The Jews therefore came around him and
said to him, "How long will you hold us in suspense? If you are the
Christ, tell us plainly."

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Jesus answered them, "I told you, and
you don't believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these
testify about me.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But you don't believe, because you are
not of my sheep, as I told you.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> My sheep hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> I give eternal life to them. They will
never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> My Father, who has given them to me, is
greater than all. No one is able to snatch them out of my Father's hand.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> I and the Father are one."

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Therefore Jews took up stones again to
stone him.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Jesus answered them, "I have shown you
many good works from my Father. For which of those works do you stone
me?"

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> The Jews answered him, "We don't stone
you for a good work, but for blasphemy: because you, being a man, make
yourself God."

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Jesus answered them, "Isn't it written
in your law, 'I said, you are gods?'

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> If he called them gods, to whom the
word of God came (and the Scripture can't be broken),

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> do you say of him whom the Father
sanctified and sent into the world, 'You blaspheme,' because I said, 'I
am the Son of God?'

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> If I don't do the works of my Father,
don't believe me.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But if I do them, though you don't
believe me, believe the works; that you may know and believe that the
Father is in me, and I in the Father."

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> They sought again to seize him, and he
went out of their hand.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> He went away again beyond the Jordan
into the place where John was baptizing at first, and there he stayed.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Many came to him. They said, "John
indeed did no sign, but everything that John said about this man is
true."

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> Many believed in him there.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from
Bethany, of the village of Mary and her sister, Martha.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> It was that Mary who had anointed the
Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother,
Lazarus, was sick.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The sisters therefore sent to him,
saying, "Lord, behold, he for whom you have great affection is sick."

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But when Jesus heard it, he said, "This
sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God, that God's Son may
be glorified by it."

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister,
and Lazarus.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> When therefore he heard that he was sick,
he stayed two days in the place where he was.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then after this he said to the disciples,
"Let's go into Judea again."

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The disciples told him, "Rabbi, the Jews
were just trying to stone you, and are you going there again?"

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Jesus answered, "Aren't there twelve
hours of daylight? If a man walks in the day, he doesn't stumble,
because he sees the light of this world.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> But if a man walks in the night, he
stumbles, because the light isn't in him."

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> He said these things, and after that,
he said to them, "Our friend, Lazarus, has fallen asleep, but I am going
so that I may awake him out of sleep."

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> The disciples therefore said, "Lord, if
he has fallen asleep, he will recover."

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but
they thought that he spoke of taking rest in sleep.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> So Jesus said to them plainly then,
"Lazarus is dead.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> I am glad for your sakes that I was not
there, so that you may believe. Nevertheless, let's go to him."

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Thomas therefore, who is called
Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, "Let's go also, that we may die
with him."

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> So when Jesus came, he found that he
had been in the tomb four days already.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about
fifteen stadia away.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Many of the Jews had joined the women
around Martha and Mary, to console them concerning their brother.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then when Martha heard that Jesus was
coming, she went and met him, but Mary stayed in the house.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Therefore Martha said to Jesus, "Lord,
if you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Even now I know that, whatever you ask
of God, God will give you."

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Jesus said to her, "Your brother will
rise again."

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Martha said to him, "I know that he
will rise again in the resurrection at the last day."

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Jesus said to her, "I am the
resurrection and the life. He who believes in me will still live, even
if he dies.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Whoever lives and believes in me will
never die. Do you believe this?"

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> She said to him, "Yes, Lord. I have
come to believe that you are the Christ, God's Son, he who comes into
the world."

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> When she had said this, she went away,
and called Mary, her sister, secretly, saying, "The Teacher is here, and
is calling you."

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> When she heard this, she arose quickly,
and went to him.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Now Jesus had not yet come into the
village, but was in the place where Martha met him.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Then the Jews who were with her in the
house, and were consoling her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up
quickly and went out, followed her, saying, "She is going to the tomb to
weep there."

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> Therefore when Mary came to where Jesus
was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying to him, "Lord, if
you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died."

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> When Jesus therefore saw her weeping,
and the Jews weeping who came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and
was troubled,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> and said, "Where have you laid him?"
They told him, "Lord, come and see."

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Jesus wept.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> The Jews therefore said, "See how much
affection he had for him!"

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> Some of them said, "Couldn't this man,
who opened the eyes of him who was blind, have also kept this man from
dying?"

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Jesus therefore, again groaning in
himself, came to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against
it.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> Jesus said, "Take away the stone."
Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said to him, "Lord, by this time
there is a stench, for he has been dead four days."

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Jesus said to her, "Didn't I tell you
that if you believed, you would see God's glory?"

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> So they took away the stone from the
place where the dead man was lying. Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said,
"Father, I thank you that you listened to me.

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> I know that you always listen to me,
but because of the multitude that stands around I said this, that they
may believe that you sent me."

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> When he had said this, he cried with a
loud voice, "Lazarus, come out!"

<span id="an_11:44">11:44</span> He who was dead came out, bound hand
and foot with wrappings, and his face was wrapped around with a cloth.
Jesus said to them, "Free him, and let him go."

<span id="an_11:45">11:45</span> Therefore many of the Jews, who came to
Mary and saw what Jesus did, believed in him.

<span id="an_11:46">11:46</span> But some of them went away to the
Pharisees, and told them the things which Jesus had done.

<span id="an_11:47">11:47</span> The chief priests therefore and the
Pharisees gathered a council, and said, "What are we doing? For this man
does many signs.

<span id="an_11:48">11:48</span> If we leave him alone like this,
everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away
both our place and our nation."

<span id="an_11:49">11:49</span> But a certain one of them, Caiaphas,
being high priest that year, said to them, "You know nothing at all,

<span id="an_11:50">11:50</span> nor do you consider that it is
advantageous for us that one man should die for the people, and that the
whole nation not perish."

<span id="an_11:51">11:51</span> Now he didn't say this of himself, but
being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus would die for the
nation,

<span id="an_11:52">11:52</span> and not for the nation only, but that
he might also gather together into one the children of God who are
scattered abroad.

<span id="an_11:53">11:53</span> So from that day forward they took
counsel that they might put him to death.

<span id="an_11:54">11:54</span> Jesus therefore walked no more openly
among the Jews, but departed from there into the country near the
wilderness, to a city called Ephraim. He stayed there with his
disciples.

<span id="an_11:55">11:55</span> Now the Passover of the Jews was at
hand. Many went up from the country to Jerusalem before the Passover, to
purify themselves.

<span id="an_11:56">11:56</span> Then they sought for Jesus and spoke
one with another, as they stood in the temple, "What do you think--that
he isn't coming to the feast at all?"

<span id="an_11:57">11:57</span> Now the chief priests and the Pharisees
had commanded that if anyone knew where he was, he should report it,
that they might seize him.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Then six days before the Passover, Jesus
came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, who had been dead, whom he raised
from the dead.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> So they made him a supper there. Martha
served, but Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with him.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Mary, therefore, took a pound of ointment
of pure nard, very precious, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped
his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the
ointment.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, one of
his disciples, who would betray him, said,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> "Why wasn't this ointment sold for three
hundred denarii, and given to the poor?"

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Now he said this, not because he cared
for the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money box, used
to steal what was put into it.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But Jesus said, "Leave her alone. She has
kept this for the day of my burial.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For you always have the poor with you,
but you don't always have me."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> A large crowd therefore of the Jews
learned that he was there, and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but
that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But the chief priests conspired to put
Lazarus to death also,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> because on account of him many of the
Jews went away and believed in Jesus.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> On the next day a great multitude had
come to the feast. When they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> they took the branches of the palm
trees, and went out to meet him, and cried out, "Hosanna! Blessed is he
who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!"

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat
on it. As it is written,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> "Don't be afraid, daughter of Zion.
Behold, your King comes, sitting on a donkey's colt."

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> His disciples didn't understand these
things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that
these things were written about him, and that they had done these things
to him.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The multitude therefore that was with
him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb, and raised him from the
dead, was testifying about it.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> For this cause also the multitude went
and met him, because they heard that he had done this sign.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The Pharisees therefore said among
themselves, "See how you accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone
after him."

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now there were certain Greeks among
those that went up to worship at the feast.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> These, therefore, came to Philip, who
was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, "Sir, we want to
see Jesus."

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Philip came and told Andrew, and in
turn, Andrew came with Philip, and they told Jesus.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Jesus answered them, "The time has come
for the Son of Man to be glorified.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Most certainly I tell you, unless a
grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains by itself
alone. But if it dies, it bears much fruit.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> He who loves his life will lose it. He
who hates his life in this world will keep it to eternal life.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> If anyone serves me, let him follow me.
Where I am, there will my servant also be. If anyone serves me, the
Father will honor him.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> "Now my soul is troubled. What shall I
say? 'Father, save me from this time?' But for this cause I came to this
time.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Father, glorify your name!" Then there
came a voice out of the sky, saying, "I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again."

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> The multitude therefore, who stood by
and heard it, said that it had thundered. Others said, "An angel has
spoken to him."

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> Jesus answered, "This voice hasn't come
for my sake, but for your sakes.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Now is the judgment of this world. Now
the prince of this world will be cast out.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And I, if I am lifted up from the
earth, will draw all people to myself."

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> But he said this, signifying by what
kind of death he should die.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> The multitude answered him, "We have
heard out of the law that the Christ remains forever. How do you say,
'The Son of Man must be lifted up?' Who is this Son of Man?"

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> Jesus therefore said to them, "Yet a
little while the light is with you. Walk while you have the light, that
darkness doesn't overtake you. He who walks in the darkness doesn't know
where he is going.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> While you have the light, believe in
the light, that you may become children of light." Jesus said these
things, and he departed and hid himself from them.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> But though he had done so many signs
before them, yet they didn't believe in him,

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> that the word of Isaiah the prophet
might be fulfilled, which he spoke, "Lord, who has believed our report?
To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?"

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> For this cause they couldn't believe,
for Isaiah said again,

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> "He has blinded their eyes and he
hardened their heart, lest they should see with their eyes, and perceive
with their heart, and would turn, and I would heal them."

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> Isaiah said these things when he saw
his glory, and spoke of him.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> Nevertheless even of the rulers many
believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they didn't confess it, so
that they wouldn't be put out of the synagogue,

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> for they loved men's praise more than
God's praise.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Jesus cried out and said, "Whoever
believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> He who sees me sees him who sent me.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> I have come as a light into the world,
that whoever believes in me may not remain in the darkness.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> If anyone listens to my sayings, and
doesn't believe, I don't judge him. For I came not to judge the world,
but to save the world.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> He who rejects me, and doesn't receive
my sayings, has one who judges him. The word that I spoke, the same will
judge him in the last day.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> For I spoke not from myself, but the
Father who sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and
what I should speak.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> I know that his commandment is eternal
life. The things therefore which I speak, even as the Father has said to
me, so I speak."

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Now before the feast of the Passover,
Jesus, knowing that his time had come that he would depart from this
world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, he
loved them to the end.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> During supper, the devil having already
put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him,

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Jesus, knowing that the Father had given
all things into his hands, and that he came forth from God, and was
going to God,

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> arose from supper, and laid aside his
outer garments. He took a towel, and wrapped a towel around his waist.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Then he poured water into the basin, and
began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel that
was wrapped around him.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to
him, "Lord, do you wash my feet?"

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Jesus answered him, "You don't know what
I am doing now, but you will understand later."

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Peter said to him, "You will never wash
my feet!" Jesus answered him, "If I don't wash you, you have no part
with me."

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Simon Peter said to him, "Lord, not my
feet only, but also my hands and my head!"

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Jesus said to him, "Someone who has
bathed only needs to have his feet washed, but is completely clean. You
are clean, but not all of you."

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For he knew him who would betray him,
therefore he said, "You are not all clean."

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> So when he had washed their feet, put
his outer garment back on, and sat down again, he said to them, "Do you
know what I have done to you?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> You call me, 'Teacher' and 'Lord.' You
say so correctly, for so I am.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> If I then, the Lord and the Teacher,
have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For I have given you an example, that
you also should do as I have done to you.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Most certainly I tell you, a servant is
not greater than his lord, neither one who is sent greater than he who
sent him.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> If you know these things, blessed are
you if you do them.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> I don't speak concerning all of you. I
know whom I have chosen. But that the Scripture may be fulfilled, 'He
who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me.'

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> From now on, I tell you before it
happens, that when it happens, you may believe that I am he.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Most certainly I tell you, he who
receives whomever I send, receives me; and he who receives me, receives
him who sent me."

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> When Jesus had said this, he was
troubled in spirit, and testified, "Most certainly I tell you that one
of you will betray me."

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> The disciples looked at one another,
perplexed about whom he spoke.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved,
was at the table, leaning against Jesus' breast.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him,
and said to him, "Tell us who it is of whom he speaks."

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> He, leaning back, as he was, on Jesus'
breast, asked him, "Lord, who is it?"

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Jesus therefore answered, "It is he to
whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it." So when he
had dipped the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon
Iscariot.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> After the piece of bread, then Satan
entered into him. Then Jesus said to him, "What you do, do quickly."

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Now no man at the table knew why he
said this to him.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> For some thought, because Judas had the
money box, that Jesus said to him, "Buy what things we need for the
feast," or that he should give something to the poor.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Therefore, having received that morsel,
he went out immediately. It was night.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> When he had gone out, Jesus said, "Now
the Son of Man has been glorified, and God has been glorified in him.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> If God has been glorified in him, God
will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him immediately.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Little children, I will be with you a
little while longer. You will seek me, and as I said to the Jews, 'Where
I am going, you can't come,' so now I tell you.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> A new commandment I give to you, that
you love one another, just like I have loved you; that you also love one
another.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> By this everyone will know that you are
my disciples, if you have love for one another."

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Simon Peter said to him, "Lord, where
are you going?" Jesus answered, "Where I am going, you can't follow now,
but you will follow afterwards."

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> Peter said to him, "Lord, why can't I
follow you now? I will lay down my life for you."

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Jesus answered him, "Will you lay down
your life for me? Most certainly I tell you, the rooster won't crow
until you have denied me three times.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> "Don't let your heart be troubled.
Believe in God. Believe also in me.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> In my Father's house are many homes. If
it weren't so, I would have told you. I am going to prepare a place for
you.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> If I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again, and will receive you to myself; that where I am, you
may be there also.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Where I go, you know, and you know the
way."

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Thomas said to him, "Lord, we don't know
where you are going. How can we know the way?"

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Jesus said to him, "I am the way, the
truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father, except through me.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> If you had known me, you would have known
my Father also. From now on, you know him, and have seen him."

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Philip said to him, "Lord, show us the
Father, and that will be enough for us."

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Jesus said to him, "Have I been with you
such a long time, and do you not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has
seen the Father. How do you say, 'Show us the Father?'

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Don't you believe that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me? The words that I tell you, I speak not
from myself; but the Father who lives in me does his works.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Believe me that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works' sake.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Most certainly I tell you, he who
believes in me, the works that I do, he will do also; and he will do
greater works than these, because I am going to my Father.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Whatever you will ask in my name, that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> If you will ask anything in my name, I
will do it.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> If you love me, keep my commandments.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> I will pray to the Father, and he will
give you another Counselor, that he may be with you forever,--

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> the Spirit of truth, whom the world
can't receive; for it doesn't see him, neither knows him. You know him,
for he lives with you, and will be in you.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> I will not leave you orphans. I will
come to you.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Yet a little while, and the world will
see me no more; but you will see me. Because I live, you will live also.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> In that day you will know that I am in
my Father, and you in me, and I in you.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> One who has my commandments, and keeps
them, that person is one who loves me. One who loves me will be loved by
my Father, and I will love him, and will reveal myself to him."

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Judas (not Iscariot) said to him,
"Lord, what has happened that you are about to reveal yourself to us,
and not to the world?"

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> Jesus answered him, "If a man loves me,
he will keep my word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him,
and make our home with him.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> He who doesn't love me doesn't keep my
words. The word which you hear isn't mine, but the Father's who sent me.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> I have said these things to you, while
still living with you.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit,
whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and
will remind you of all that I said to you.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> Peace I leave with you. My peace I give
to you; not as the world gives, give I to you. Don't let your heart be
troubled, neither let it be fearful.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> You heard how I told you, 'I go away,
and I come to you.' If you loved me, you would have rejoiced, because I
said 'I am going to my Father;' for the Father is greater than I.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Now I have told you before it happens
so that, when it happens, you may believe.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> I will no more speak much with you, for
the prince of the world comes, and he has nothing in me.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But that the world may know that I love
the Father, and as the Father commanded me, even so I do. Arise, let us
go from here.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> "I am the true vine, and my Father is the
farmer.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Every branch in me that doesn't bear
fruit, he takes away. Every branch that bears fruit, he prunes, that it
may bear more fruit.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> You are already pruned clean because of
the word which I have spoken to you.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Remain in me, and I in you. As the branch
can't bear fruit by itself, unless it remains in the vine, so neither
can you, unless you remain in me.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> I am the vine. You are the branches. He
who remains in me, and I in him, the same bears much fruit, for apart
from me you can do nothing.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> If a man doesn't remain in me, he is
thrown out as a branch, and is withered; and they gather them, throw
them into the fire, and they are burned.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> If you remain in me, and my words remain
in you, you will ask whatever you desire, and it will be done for you.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> "In this is my Father glorified, that you
bear much fruit; and so you will be my disciples.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Even as the Father has loved me, I also
have loved you. Remain in my love.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> If you keep my commandments, you will
remain in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and
remain in his love.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> I have spoken these things to you, that
my joy may remain in you, and that your joy may be made full.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> "This is my commandment, that you love
one another, even as I have loved you.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Greater love has no one than this, that
someone lay down his life for his friends.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> You are my friends, if you do whatever
I command you.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> No longer do I call you servants, for
the servant doesn't know what his lord does. But I have called you
friends, for everything that I heard from my Father, I have made known
to you.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> You didn't choose me, but I chose you,
and appointed you, that you should go and bear fruit, and that your
fruit should remain; that whatever you will ask of the Father in my
name, he may give it to you.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> "I command these things to you, that
you may love one another.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> If the world hates you, you know that
it has hated me before it hated you.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> If you were of the world, the world
would love its own. But because you are not of the world, since I chose
you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Remember the word that I said to you:
'A servant is not greater than his lord.' If they persecuted me, they
will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will keep yours
also.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But all these things will they do to
you for my name's sake, because they don't know him who sent me.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> If I had not come and spoken to them,
they would not have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> He who hates me, hates my Father also.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> If I hadn't done among them the works
which no one else did, they wouldn't have had sin. But now have they
seen and also hated both me and my Father.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But this happened so that the word may
be fulfilled which was written in their law, 'They hated me without a
cause.'

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> "When the Counselor has come, whom I
will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from
the Father, he will testify about me.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> You will also testify, because you have
been with me from the beginning.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> "These things have I spoken to you, so
that you wouldn't be caused to stumble.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> They will put you out of the synagogues.
Yes, the time comes that whoever kills you will think that he offers
service to God.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> They will do these things because they
have not known the Father, nor me.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> But I have told you these things, so that
when the time comes, you may remember that I told you about them. I
didn't tell you these things from the beginning, because I was with you.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> But now I am going to him who sent me,
and none of you asks me, 'Where are you going?'

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> But because I have told you these things,
sorrow has filled your heart.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is
to your advantage that I go away, for if I don't go away, the Counselor
won't come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> When he has come, he will convict the
world about sin, about righteousness, and about judgment;

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> about sin, because they don't believe in
me;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> about righteousness, because I am going
to my Father, and you won't see me any more;

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> about judgment, because the prince of
this world has been judged.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> "I have yet many things to tell you,
but you can't bear them now.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> However when he, the Spirit of truth,
has come, he will guide you into all truth, for he will not speak from
himself; but whatever he hears, he will speak. He will declare to you
things that are coming.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He will glorify me, for he will take
from what is mine, and will declare it to you.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> All things whatever the Father has are
mine; therefore I said that he takes of mine, and will declare it to
you.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> A little while, and you will not see
me. Again a little while, and you will see me."

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Some of his disciples therefore said to
one another, "What is this that he says to us, 'A little while, and you
won't see me, and again a little while, and you will see me;' and,
'Because I go to the Father?'"

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> They said therefore, "What is this that
he says, 'A little while?' We don't know what he is saying."

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Therefore Jesus perceived that they
wanted to ask him, and he said to them, "Do you inquire among yourselves
concerning this, that I said, 'A little while, and you won't see me, and
again a little while, and you will see me?'

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Most certainly I tell you, that you
will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful,
but your sorrow will be turned into joy.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> A woman, when she gives birth, has
sorrow, because her time has come. But when she has delivered the child,
she doesn't remember the anguish any more, for the joy that a human
being is born into the world.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Therefore you now have sorrow, but I
will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and no one will take
your joy away from you.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> "In that day you will ask me no
questions. Most certainly I tell you, whatever you may ask of the Father
in my name, he will give it to you.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Until now, you have asked nothing in my
name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be made full.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> I have spoken these things to you in
figures of speech. But the time is coming when I will no more speak to
you in figures of speech, but will tell you plainly about the Father.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> In that day you will ask in my name;
and I don't say to you, that I will pray to the Father for you,

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> for the Father himself loves you,
because you have loved me, and have believed that I came forth from God.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> I came out from the Father, and have
come into the world. Again, I leave the world, and go to the Father."

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> His disciples said to him, "Behold, now
you speak plainly, and speak no figures of speech.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> Now we know that you know all things,
and don't need for anyone to question you. By this we believe that you
came forth from God."

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> Jesus answered them, "Do you now
believe?

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> Behold, the time is coming, yes, and
has now come, that you will be scattered, everyone to his own place, and
you will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with
me.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> I have told you these things, that in
me you may have peace. In the world you have oppression; but cheer up! I
have overcome the world."

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Jesus said these things, and lifting up
his eyes to heaven, he said, "Father, the time has come. Glorify your
Son, that your Son may also glorify you;

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> even as you gave him authority over all
flesh, he will give eternal life to all whom you have given him.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> This is eternal life, that they should
know you, the only true God, and him whom you sent, Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> I glorified you on the earth. I have
accomplished the work which you have given me to do.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Now, Father, glorify me with your own
self with the glory which I had with you before the world existed.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> I revealed your name to the people whom
you have given me out of the world. They were yours, and you have given
them to me. They have kept your word.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Now they have known that all things
whatever you have given me are from you,

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> for the words which you have given me I
have given to them, and they received them, and knew for sure that I
came forth from you, and they have believed that you sent me.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> I pray for them. I don't pray for the
world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> All things that are mine are yours, and
yours are mine, and I am glorified in them.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> I am no more in the world, but these
are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them through
your name which you have given me, that they may be one, even as we are.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> While I was with them in the world, I
kept them in your name. Those whom you have given me I have kept. None
of them is lost, except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might
be fulfilled.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But now I come to you, and I say these
things in the world, that they may have my joy made full in themselves.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> I have given them your word. The world
hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the
world.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> I pray not that you would take them
from the world, but that you would keep them from the evil one.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> They are not of the world even as I am
not of the world.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Sanctify them in your truth. Your word
is truth.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> As you sent me into the world, even so
I have sent them into the world.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> For their sakes I sanctify myself, that
they themselves also may be sanctified in truth.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> Not for these only do I pray, but for
those also who believe in me through their word,

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> that they may all be one; even as you,
Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be one in us; that
the world may believe that you sent me.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> The glory which you have given me, I
have given to them; that they may be one, even as we are one;

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> I in them, and you in me, that they may
be perfected into one; that the world may know that you sent me, and
loved them, even as you loved me.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Father, I desire that they also whom
you have given me be with me where I am, that they may see my glory,
which you have given me, for you loved me before the foundation of the
world.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Righteous Father, the world hasn't
known you, but I knew you; and these knew that you sent me.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> I made known to them your name, and
will make it known; that the love with which you loved me may be in
them, and I in them."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> When Jesus had spoken these words, he
went out with his disciples over the brook Kidron, where there was a
garden, into which he and his disciples entered.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew
the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Judas then, having taken a detachment of
soldiers and officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came
there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Jesus therefore, knowing all the things
that were happening to him, went forth, and said to them, "Who are you
looking for?"

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> They answered him, "Jesus of Nazareth."
Jesus said to them, "I am he." Judas also, who betrayed him, was
standing with them.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> When therefore he said to them, "I am
he," they went backward, and fell to the ground.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Again therefore he asked them, "Who are
you looking for?" They said, "Jesus of Nazareth."

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Jesus answered, "I told you that I am he.
If therefore you seek me, let these go their way,"

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> that the word might be fulfilled which he
spoke, "Of those whom you have given me, I have lost none."

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Simon Peter therefore, having a sword,
drew it, and struck the high priest's servant, and cut off his right
ear. The servant's name was Malchus.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Jesus therefore said to Peter, "Put the
sword into its sheath. The cup which the Father has given me, shall I
not surely drink it?"

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> So the detachment, the commanding
officer, and the officers of the Jews, seized Jesus and bound him,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> and led him to Annas first, for he was
father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Now it was Caiaphas who advised the
Jews that it was expedient that one man should perish for the people.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Simon Peter followed Jesus, as did
another disciple. Now that disciple was known to the high priest, and
entered in with Jesus into the court of the high priest;

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> but Peter was standing at the door
outside. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went
out and spoke to her who kept the door, and brought in Peter.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Then the maid who kept the door said to
Peter, "Are you also one of this man's disciples?" He said, "I am not."

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Now the servants and the officers were
standing there, having made a fire of coals, for it was cold. They were
warming themselves. Peter was with them, standing and warming himself.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> The high priest therefore asked Jesus
about his disciples, and about his teaching.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Jesus answered him, "I spoke openly to
the world. I always taught in synagogues, and in the temple, where the
Jews always meet. I said nothing in secret.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Why do you ask me? Ask those who have
heard me what I said to them. Behold, these know the things which I
said."

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> When he had said this, one of the
officers standing by slapped Jesus with his hand, saying, "Do you answer
the high priest like that?"

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Jesus answered him, "If I have spoken
evil, testify of the evil; but if well, why do you beat me?"

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas, the
high priest.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Now Simon Peter was standing and
warming himself. They said therefore to him, "You aren't also one of his
disciples, are you?" He denied it, and said, "I am not."

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> One of the servants of the high priest,
being a relative of him whose ear Peter had cut off, said, "Didn't I see
you in the garden with him?"

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Peter therefore denied it again, and
immediately the rooster crowed.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas
into the Praetorium. It was early, and they themselves didn't enter into
the Praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the
Passover.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Pilate therefore went out to them, and
said, "What accusation do you bring against this man?"

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> They answered him, "If this man weren't
an evildoer, we wouldn't have delivered him up to you."

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Pilate therefore said to them, "Take
him yourselves, and judge him according to your law." Therefore the Jews
said to him, "It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death,"

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> that the word of Jesus might be
fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying by what kind of death he should
die.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Pilate therefore entered again into the
Praetorium, called Jesus, and said to him, "Are you the King of the
Jews?"

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> Jesus answered him, "Do you say this by
yourself, or did others tell you about me?"

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> Pilate answered, "I'm not a Jew, am I?
Your own nation and the chief priests delivered you to me. What have you
done?"

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> Jesus answered, "My Kingdom is not of
this world. If my Kingdom were of this world, then my servants would
fight, that I wouldn't be delivered to the Jews. But now my Kingdom is
not from here."

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Pilate therefore said to him, "Are you
a king then?" Jesus answered, "You say that I am a king. For this reason
I have been born, and for this reason I have come into the world, that I
should testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my
voice."

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Pilate said to him, "What is truth?"
When he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and said to them,
"I find no basis for a charge against him.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> But you have a custom, that I should
release someone to you at the Passover. Therefore do you want me to
release to you the King of the Jews?"

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> Then they all shouted again, saying,
"Not this man, but Barabbas!" Now Barabbas was a robber.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> So Pilate then took Jesus, and flogged
him.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> The soldiers twisted thorns into a crown,
and put it on his head, and dressed him in a purple garment.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> They kept saying, "Hail, King of the
Jews!" and they kept slapping him.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Then Pilate went out again, and said to
them, "Behold, I bring him out to you, that you may know that I find no
basis for a charge against him."

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Jesus therefore came out, wearing the
crown of thorns and the purple garment. Pilate said to them, "Behold,
the man!"

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> When therefore the chief priests and the
officers saw him, they shouted, saying, "Crucify! Crucify!" Pilate said
to them, "Take him yourselves, and crucify him, for I find no basis for
a charge against him."

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The Jews answered him, "We have a law,
and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God."

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> When therefore Pilate heard this saying,
he was more afraid.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> He entered into the Praetorium again, and
said to Jesus, "Where are you from?" But Jesus gave him no answer.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Pilate therefore said to him, "Aren't
you speaking to me? Don't you know that I have power to release you, and
have power to crucify you?"

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Jesus answered, "You would have no
power at all against me, unless it were given to you from above.
Therefore he who delivered me to you has greater sin."

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> At this, Pilate was seeking to release
him, but the Jews cried out, saying, "If you release this man, you
aren't Caesar's friend! Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against
Caesar!"

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> When Pilate therefore heard these
words, he brought Jesus out, and sat down on the judgment seat at a
place called "The Pavement," but in Hebrew, "Gabbatha."

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> Now it was the Preparation Day of the
Passover, at about the sixth hour. He said to the Jews, "Behold, your
King!"

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> They cried out, "Away with him! Away
with him! Crucify him!" Pilate said to them, "Shall I crucify your
King?" The chief priests answered, "We have no king but Caesar!"

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> So then he delivered him to them to be
crucified. So they took Jesus and led him away.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He went out, bearing his cross, to the
place called "The Place of a Skull," which is called in Hebrew,
"Golgotha,"

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> where they crucified him, and with him
two others, on either side one, and Jesus in the middle.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Pilate wrote a title also, and put it
on the cross. There was written, "JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE
JEWS."

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Therefore many of the Jews read this
title, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it
was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> The chief priests of the Jews therefore
said to Pilate, "Don't write, 'The King of the Jews,' but, 'he said, I
am King of the Jews.'"

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Pilate answered, "What I have written,
I have written."

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Then the soldiers, when they had
crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier
a part; and also the coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from the
top throughout.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> Then they said to one another, "Let's
not tear it, but cast lots for it to decide whose it will be," that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, "They parted my garments among
them. For my cloak they cast lots." Therefore the soldiers did these
things.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> But there were standing by the cross of
Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and
Mary Magdalene.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Therefore when Jesus saw his mother,
and the disciple whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother,
"Woman, behold your son!"

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then he said to the disciple, "Behold,
your mother!" From that hour, the disciple took her to his own home.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> After this, Jesus, seeing that all
things were now finished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said,
"I am thirsty."

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Now a vessel full of vinegar was set
there; so they put a sponge full of the vinegar on hyssop, and held it
at his mouth.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> When Jesus therefore had received the
vinegar, he said, "It is finished." He bowed his head, and gave up his
spirit.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> Therefore the Jews, because it was the
Preparation Day, so that the bodies wouldn't remain on the cross on the
Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a special one), asked of Pilate that their
legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Therefore the soldiers came, and broke
the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him;

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> but when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was already dead, they didn't break his legs.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> However one of the soldiers pierced his
side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> He who has seen has testified, and his
testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, that you may
believe.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> For these things happened, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, "A bone of him will not be broken."

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> Again another Scripture says, "They
will look on him whom they pierced."

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> After these things, Joseph of
Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the
Jews, asked of Pilate that he might take away Jesus' body. Pilate gave
him permission. He came therefore and took away his body.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> Nicodemus, who at first came to Jesus
by night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a
hundred Roman pounds.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> So they took Jesus' body, and bound it
in linen cloths with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> Now in the place where he was crucified
there was a garden. In the garden was a new tomb in which no man had
ever yet been laid.

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> Then because of the Jews' Preparation
Day (for the tomb was near at hand) they laid Jesus there.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Now on the first day of the week, Mary
Magdalene went early, while it was still dark, to the tomb, and saw the
stone taken away from the tomb.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Therefore she ran and came to Simon
Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them,
"They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know where
they have laid him!"

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Therefore Peter and the other disciple
went out, and they went toward the tomb.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> They both ran together. The other
disciple outran Peter, and came to the tomb first.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Stooping and looking in, he saw the linen
cloths lying, yet he didn't enter in.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Then Simon Peter came, following him, and
entered into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying,

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> and the cloth that had been on his head,
not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up in a place by itself.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> So then the other disciple who came first
to the tomb also entered in, and he saw and believed.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> For as yet they didn't know the
Scripture, that he must rise from the dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> So the disciples went away again to
their own homes.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> But Mary was standing outside at the
tomb weeping. So, as she wept, she stooped and looked into the tomb,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> and she saw two angels in white
sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus
had lain.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> They told her, "Woman, why are you
weeping?" She said to them, "Because they have taken away my Lord, and I
don't know where they have laid him."

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> When she had said this, she turned
around and saw Jesus standing, and didn't know that it was Jesus.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Jesus said to her, "Woman, why are you
weeping? Who are you looking for?" She, supposing him to be the
gardener, said to him, "Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where
you have laid him, and I will take him away."

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Jesus said to her, "Mary." She turned
and said to him, "Rabboni!" which is to say, "Teacher!"

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Jesus said to her, "Don't hold me, for
I haven't yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brothers, and tell
them, 'I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your
God.'"

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Mary Magdalene came and told the
disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things
to her.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> When therefore it was evening, on that
day, the first day of the week, and when the doors were locked where the
disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in
the midst, and said to them, "Peace be to you."

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> When he had said this, he showed them
his hands and his side. The disciples therefore were glad when they saw
the Lord.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Jesus therefore said to them again,
"Peace be to you. As the Father has sent me, even so I send you."

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> When he had said this, he breathed on
them, and said to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit!

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Whoever's sins you forgive, they are
forgiven them. Whoever's sins you retain, they have been retained."

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But Thomas, one of the twelve, called
Didymus, wasn't with them when Jesus came.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> The other disciples therefore said to
him, "We have seen the Lord!" But he said to them, "Unless I see in his
hands the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not
believe."

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> After eight days again his disciples
were inside, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, the doors being
locked, and stood in the midst, and said, "Peace be to you."

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Then he said to Thomas, "Reach here
your finger, and see my hands. Reach here your hand, and put it into my
side. Don't be unbelieving, but believing."

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Thomas answered him, "My Lord and my
God!"

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> Jesus said to him, "Because you have
seen me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen, and
have believed."

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Therefore Jesus did many other signs in
the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book;

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> but these are written, that you may
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you
may have life in his name.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> After these things, Jesus revealed
himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. He revealed
himself this way.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus,
Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of
his disciples were together.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Simon Peter said to them, "I'm going
fishing." They told him, "We are also coming with you." They immediately
went out, and entered into the boat. That night, they caught nothing.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> But when day had already come, Jesus
stood on the beach, yet the disciples didn't know that it was Jesus.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Jesus therefore said to them, "Children,
have you anything to eat?" They answered him, "No."

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> He said to them, "Cast the net on the
right side of the boat, and you will find some." They cast it therefore,
and now they weren't able to draw it in for the multitude of fish.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved
said to Peter, "It's the Lord!" So when Simon Peter heard that it was
the Lord, he wrapped his coat around him (for he was naked), and threw
himself into the sea.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> But the other disciples came in the
little boat (for they were not far from the land, but about two hundred
cubits away), dragging the net full of fish.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> So when they got out on the land, they
saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Jesus said to them, "Bring some of the
fish which you have just caught."

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Simon Peter went up, and drew the net
to land, full of great fish, one hundred fifty-three; and even though
there were so many, the net wasn't torn.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Jesus said to them, "Come and eat
breakfast." None of the disciples dared inquire of him, "Who are you?"
knowing that it was the Lord.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Jesus came and took the bread,
gave it to them, and the fish likewise.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> This is now the third time that Jesus
was revealed to his disciples, after he had risen from the dead.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> So when they had eaten their breakfast,
Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me more
than these?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection
for you." He said to him, "Feed my lambs."

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> He said to him again a second time,
"Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me?" He said to him, "Yes, Lord; you
know that I have affection for you." He said to him, "Tend my sheep."

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He said to him the third time, "Simon,
son of Jonah, do you have affection for me?" Peter was grieved because
he asked him the third time, "Do you have affection for me?" He said to
him, "Lord, you know everything. You know that I have affection for
you." Jesus said to him, "Feed my sheep.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Most certainly I tell you, when you
were young, you dressed yourself, and walked where you wanted to. But
when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will
dress you, and carry you where you don't want to go."

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Now he said this, signifying by what
kind of death he would glorify God. When he had said this, he said to
him, "Follow me."

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Then Peter, turning around, saw a
disciple following. This was the disciple whom Jesus sincerely loved,
the one who had also leaned on Jesus' breast at the supper and asked,
"Lord, who is going to betray You?"

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Peter seeing him, said to Jesus, "Lord,
what about this man?"

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Jesus said to him, "If I desire that he
stay until I come, what is that to you? You follow me."

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> This saying therefore went out among
the brothers, that this disciple wouldn't die. Yet Jesus didn't say to
him that he wouldn't die, but, "If I desire that he stay until I come,
what is that to you?"

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> This is the disciple who testifies
about these things, and wrote these things. We know that his witness is
true.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> There are also many other things which
Jesus did, which if they would all be written, I suppose that even the
world itself wouldn't have room for the books that would be written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts](act)
