[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sa2)  [Next](kg2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 1 Kings

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now king David was old and stricken in
years; and they covered him with clothes, but he couldn't keep warm.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Therefore his servants said to him, "Let
there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand
before the king, and cherish him; and let her lie in your bosom, that my
lord the king may keep warm."

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> So they sought for a beautiful young lady
throughout all the borders of Israel, and found Abishag the Shunammite,
and brought her to the king.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> The young lady was very beautiful; and she
cherished the king, and ministered to him; but the king didn't know her
intimately.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted
himself, saying, "I will be king." Then he prepared him chariots and
horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> His father had not displeased him at any
time in saying, "Why have you done so?" and he was also a very handsome
man; and he was born after Absalom.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> He conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah,
and with Abiathar the priest: and they following Adonijah helped him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son
of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty
men who belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Adonijah killed sheep and cattle and
fatlings by the stone of Zoheleth, which is beside En Rogel; and he
called all his brothers, the king's sons, and all the men of Judah, the
king's servants:

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> but Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and
the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he didn't call.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then Nathan spoke to Bathsheba the mother
of Solomon, saying, "Haven't you heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith
reigns, and David our lord doesn't know it?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Now therefore come, please let me give
you counsel, that you may save your own life, and the life of your son
Solomon.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Go in to king David, and tell him,
'Didn't you, my lord, king, swear to your handmaid, saying, Assuredly
Solomon your son shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne?
Why then does Adonijah reign?'

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Behold, while you yet talk there with the
king, I also will come in after you, and confirm your words."

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Bathsheba went in to the king into the
room. The king was very old; and Abishag the Shunammite was ministering
to the king.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance to the
king. The king said, "What would you like?"

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> She said to him, "My lord, you swore by
Yahweh your God to your handmaid, 'Assuredly Solomon your son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne.'

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now, behold, Adonijah reigns; and you, my
lord the king, don't know it.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> He has slain cattle and fatlings and
sheep in abundance, and has called all the sons of the king, and
Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the army; but he hasn't
called Solomon your servant.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> You, my lord the king, the eyes of all
Israel are on you, that you should tell them who shall sit on the throne
of my lord the king after him.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Otherwise it will happen, when my lord
the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall
be counted offenders."

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Behold, while she yet talked with the
king, Nathan the prophet came in.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> They told the king, saying, "Behold,
Nathan the prophet!" When he had come in before the king, he bowed
himself before the king with his face to the ground.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Nathan said, "My lord, king, have you
said, 'Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne?'

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> For he is gone down this day, and has
slain cattle and fatlings and sheep in abundance, and has called all the
king's sons, and the captains of the army, and Abiathar the priest.
Behold, they are eating and drinking before him, and say, 'Long live
king Adonijah!'

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> But he hasn't called me, even me your
servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and your
servant Solomon.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Is this thing done by my lord the king,
and you haven't shown to your servants who should sit on the throne of
my lord the king after him?"

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then king David answered, "Call to me
Bathsheba." She came into the king's presence, and stood before the
king.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> The king swore, and said, "As Yahweh
lives, who has redeemed my soul out of all adversity,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> most certainly as I swore to you by
Yahweh, the God of Israel, saying, 'Assuredly Solomon your son shall
reign after me, and he shall sit on my throne in my place;' most
certainly so will I do this day."

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the
earth, and did obeisance to the king, and said, "Let my lord king David
live forever!"

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> King David said, "Call to me Zadok the
priest, Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada." They came
before the king.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> The king said to them, "Take with you the
servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride on my own mule,
and bring him down to Gihon.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> Let Zadok the priest and Nathan the
prophet anoint him there king over Israel. Blow the trumpet, and say,
'Long live king Solomon!'

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> Then you shall come up after him, and he
shall come and sit on my throne; for he shall be king in my place. I
have appointed him to be prince over Israel and over Judah."

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the
king, and said, "Amen. May Yahweh, the God of my lord the king, say so.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> As Yahweh has been with my lord the king,
even so may he be with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the
throne of my lord king David."

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the
Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride on king David's mule,
and brought him to Gihon.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out
of the Tent, and anointed Solomon. They blew the trumpet; and all the
people said, "Long live king Solomon!"

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> All the people came up after him, and the
people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth
shook with the sound of them.

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Adonijah and all the guests who were with
him heard it as they had made an end of eating. When Joab heard the
sound of the trumpet, he said, "Why is this noise of the city being in
an uproar?"

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> While he yet spoke, behold, Jonathan the
son of Abiathar the priest came: and Adonijah said, "Come in; for you
are a worthy man, and bring good news."

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> Jonathan answered Adonijah, "Most
certainly our lord king David has made Solomon king.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> The king has sent with him Zadok the
priest, Nathan the prophet, Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the
Cherethites and the Pelethites; and they have caused him to ride on the
king's mule.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet
have anointed him king in Gihon. They have come up from there rejoicing,
so that the city rang again. This is the noise that you have heard.

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> Also, Solomon sits on the throne of the
kingdom.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> Moreover the king's servants came to
bless our lord king David, saying, 'May your God make the name of
Solomon better than your name, and make his throne greater than your
throne;' and the king bowed himself on the bed.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> Also thus said the king, 'Blessed be
Yahweh, the God of Israel, who has given one to sit on my throne this
day, my eyes even seeing it.'"

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> All the guests of Adonijah were afraid,
and rose up, and each man went his way.

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> Adonijah feared because of Solomon; and
he arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> It was told Solomon, saying, "Behold,
Adonijah fears king Solomon; for, behold, he has laid hold on the horns
of the altar, saying, 'Let king Solomon swear to me first that he will
not kill his servant with the sword.'"

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> Solomon said, "If he shows himself a
worthy man, not a hair of him shall fall to the earth; but if wickedness
be found in him, he shall die."

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> So king Solomon sent, and they brought
him down from the altar. He came and did obeisance to king Solomon; and
Solomon said to him, "Go to your house."

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now the days of David drew near that he
should die; and he commanded Solomon his son, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> "I am going the way of all the earth. You
be strong therefore, and show yourself a man;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and keep the instruction of Yahweh your
God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, his commandments, his
ordinances, and his testimonies, according to that which is written in
the law of Moses, that you may prosper in all that you do, and wherever
you turn yourself.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> That Yahweh may establish his word which he
spoke concerning me, saying, 'If your children take heed to their way,
to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul,
there shall not fail you,' he said, 'a man on the throne of Israel.'

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> "Moreover you know also what Joab the son
of Zeruiah did to me, even what he did to the two captains of the armies
of Israel, to Abner the son of Ner, and to Amasa the son of Jether, whom
he killed, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war
on his sash that was about his waist, and in his shoes that were on his
feet.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Do therefore according to your wisdom, and
don't let his gray head go down to Sheol in peace.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> But show kindness to the sons of Barzillai
the Gileadite, and let them be of those who eat at your table; for so
they came to me when I fled from Absalom your brother.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> "Behold, there is with you Shimei the son
of Gera, the Benjamite, of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse
in the day when I went to Mahanaim; but he came down to meet me at the
Jordan, and I swore to him by Yahweh, saying, 'I will not put you to
death with the sword.'

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Now therefore don't hold him guiltless, for
you are a wise man; and you will know what you ought to do to him, and
you shall bring his gray head down to Sheol with blood."

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> David slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the city of David.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The days that David reigned over Israel
were forty years; seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty-three
years reigned he in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Solomon sat on the throne of David his
father; and his kingdom was firmly established.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to
Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. She said, "Do you come peaceably?" He
said, "Peaceably.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> He said moreover, I have something to
tell you." She said, "Say on."

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> He said, "You know that the kingdom was
mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign.
However the kingdom is turned around, and has become my brother's; for
it was his from Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now I ask one petition of you. Don't deny
me." She said to him, "Say on."

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> He said, "Please speak to Solomon the
king (for he will not tell you 'no'), that he give me Abishag the
Shunammite as wife."

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Bathsheba said, "Alright. I will speak
for you to the king."

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Bathsheba therefore went to king Solomon,
to speak to him for Adonijah. The king rose up to meet her, and bowed
himself to her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a throne to be
set for the king's mother; and she sat on his right hand.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then she said, "I ask one small petition
of you; don't deny me." The king said to her, "Ask on, my mother; for I
will not deny you."

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> She said, "Let Abishag the Shunammite be
given to Adonijah your brother as wife."

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> King Solomon answered his mother, "Why do
you ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? Ask for him the kingdom
also; for he is my elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the
priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah."

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Then king Solomon swore by Yahweh,
saying, "God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah has not spoken this
word against his own life.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Now therefore as Yahweh lives, who has
established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who has
made me a house, as he promised, surely Adonijah shall be put to death
this day."

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> King Solomon sent by Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada; and he fell on him, so that he died.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> To Abiathar the priest the king said, "Go
to Anathoth, to your own fields; for you are worthy of death. But I will
not at this time put you to death, because you bore the ark of the Lord
Yahweh before David my father, and because you were afflicted in all in
which my father was afflicted."

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being
priest to Yahweh, that he might fulfill the word of Yahweh, which he
spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> The news came to Joab; for Joab had
turned after Adonijah, though he didn't turn after Absalom. Joab fled to
the Tent of Yahweh, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> It was told king Solomon, "Joab has fled
to the Tent of Yahweh, and behold, he is by the altar." Then Solomon
sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, "Go, fall on him."

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Benaiah came to the Tent of Yahweh, and
said to him, "Thus says the king, 'Come forth!'" He said, "No; but I
will die here." Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, "Thus said
Joab, and thus he answered me."

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> The king said to him, "Do as he has said,
and fall on him, and bury him; that you may take away the blood, which
Joab shed without cause, from me and from my father's house.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> Yahweh will return his blood on his own
head, because he fell on two men more righteous and better than he, and
killed them with the sword, and my father David didn't know it: Abner
the son of Ner, captain of the army of Israel, and Amasa the son of
Jether, captain of the army of Judah.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> So shall their blood return on the head
of Joab, and on the head of his seed forever. But to David, and to his
seed, and to his house, and to his throne, there shall be peace forever
from Yahweh."

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Then Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up,
and fell on him, and killed him; and he was buried in his own house in
the wilderness.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> The king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada
in his place over the army; and Zadok the priest did the king put in the
place of Abiathar.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> The king sent and called for Shimei, and
said to him, "Build yourself a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and
don't go out from there anywhere.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> For on the day you go out, and pass over
the brook Kidron, know for certain that you shall surely die: your blood
shall be on your own head."

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> Shimei said to the king, "The saying is
good. As my lord the king has said, so will your servant do." Shimei
lived in Jerusalem many days.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> It happened at the end of three years,
that two of the servants of Shimei ran away to Achish, son of Maacah,
king of Gath. They told Shimei, saying, "Behold, your servants are in
Gath."

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> Shimei arose, and saddled his donkey, and
went to Gath to Achish, to seek his servants; and Shimei went, and
brought his servants from Gath.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> It was told Solomon that Shimei had gone
from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come again.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> The king sent and called for Shimei, and
said to him, "Didn't I adjure you by Yahweh, and warn you, saying, 'Know
for certain, that on the day you go out, and walk abroad any where, you
shall surely die?' You said to me, 'The saying that I have heard is
good.'

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> Why then have you not kept the oath of
Yahweh, and the commandment that I have instructed you with?"

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> The king said moreover to Shimei, "You
know all the wickedness which your heart is privy to, that you did to
David my father. Therefore Yahweh shall return your wickedness on your
own head.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> But king Solomon shall be blessed, and
the throne of David shall be established before Yahweh forever."

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> So the king commanded Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada; and he went out, and fell on him, so that he died. The kingdom
was established in the hand of Solomon.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of
David, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house
of Yahweh, and the wall of Jerusalem all around.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Only the people sacrificed in the high
places, because there was no house built for the name of Yahweh until
those days.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Solomon loved Yahweh, walking in the
statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in
the high places.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> The king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there;
for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did
Solomon offer on that altar.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> In Gibeon Yahweh appeared to Solomon in a
dream by night; and God said, "Ask what I shall give you."

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Solomon said, "You have shown to your
servant David my father great loving kindness, according as he walked
before you in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart
with you. You have kept for him this great loving kindness, that you
have given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Now, Yahweh my God, you have made your
servant king instead of David my father. I am but a little child. I
don't know how to go out or come in.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Your servant is in the midst of your people
which you have chosen, a great people, that can't be numbered nor
counted for multitude.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Give your servant therefore an
understanding heart to judge your people, that I may discern between
good and evil; for who is able to judge this your great people?"

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon
had asked this thing.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> God said to him, "Because you have asked
this thing, and have not asked for yourself long life, neither have
asked riches for yourself, nor have asked the life of your enemies, but
have asked for yourself understanding to discern justice;

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> behold, I have done according to your
word. Behold, I have given you a wise and an understanding heart; so
that there has been none like you before you, neither after you shall
any arise like you.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> I have also given you that which you have
not asked, both riches and honor, so that there shall not be any among
the kings like you, all your days.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> If you will walk in my ways, to keep my
statutes and my commandments, as your father David walked, then I will
lengthen your days."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Solomon awoke; and behold, it was a
dream. Then he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the
covenant of Yahweh, and offered up burnt offerings, offered peace
offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then two women who were prostitutes came
to the king, and stood before him.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The one woman said, "Oh, my lord, I and
this woman dwell in one house. I delivered a child with her in the
house.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> It happened the third day after I
delivered, that this woman delivered also. We were together. There was
no stranger with us in the house, just us two in the house.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> This woman's child died in the night,
because she lay on it.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> She arose at midnight, and took my son
from beside me, while your handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and
laid her dead child in my bosom.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> When I rose in the morning to nurse my
child, behold, it was dead; but when I had looked at it in the morning,
behold, it was not my son, whom I bore."

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> The other woman said, "No; but the living
is my son, and the dead is your son." This said, "No; but the dead is
your son, and the living is my son." Thus they spoke before the king.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then the king said, "The one says, 'This
is my son who lives, and your son is the dead;' and the other says, 'No;
but your son is the dead one, and my son is the living one.'"

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> The king said, "Get me a sword." They
brought a sword before the king.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> The king said, "Divide the living child
in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other."

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Then the woman whose the living child was
spoke to the king, for her heart yearned over her son, and she said,
"Oh, my lord, give her the living child, and in no way kill it!" But the
other said, "It shall be neither mine nor yours. Divide it."

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Then the king answered, "Give her the
living child, and in no way kill it. She is its mother."

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> All Israel heard of the judgment which
the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that the
wisdom of God was in him, to do justice.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> King Solomon was king over all Israel.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> These were the princes whom he had: Azariah
the son of Zadok, the priest;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha,
scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder;

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over
the army; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> and Azariah the son of Nathan was over the
officers; and Zabud the son of Nathan was chief minister, \[and\] the
king's friend;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and Ahishar was over the household; and
Adoniram the son of Abda was over the men subject to forced labor.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Solomon had twelve officers over all
Israel, who provided food for the king and his household: each man had
to make provision for a month in the year.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> These are their names: Ben Hur, in the hill
country of Ephraim;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Ben Deker, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and
Beth Shemesh, and Elon Beth Hanan;

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Ben Hesed, in Arubboth (to him
\[pertained\] Socoh, and all the land of Hepher);

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Ben Abinadab, in all the height of Dor
(he had Taphath the daughter of Solomon as wife);

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Baana the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and
Megiddo, and all Beth Shean which is beside Zarethan, beneath Jezreel,
from Beth Shean to Abel Meholah, as far as beyond Jokmeam;

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Ben Geber, in Ramoth Gilead (to him
\[pertained\] the towns of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in
Gilead; \[even\] to him \[pertained\] the region of Argob, which is in
Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and bronze bars);

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Ahinadab the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim;

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Ahimaaz, in Naphtali (he also took
Basemath the daughter of Solomon as wife);

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Baana the son of Hushai, in Asher and
Bealoth;

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in
Issachar;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Shimei the son of Ela, in Benjamin;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Geber the son of Uri, in the land of
Gilead, the country of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of
Bashan; and \[he was\] the only officer who was in the land.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Judah and Israel were many as the sand
which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from
the River to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt:
they brought tribute, and served Solomon all the days of his life.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Solomon's provision for one day was
thirty measures of fine flour, and sixty measures of meal,

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> ten head of fat cattle, and twenty head
of cattle out of the pastures, and one hundred sheep, besides harts, and
gazelles, and roebucks, and fattened fowl.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For he had dominion over all \[the
region\] on this side the River, from Tiphsah even to Gaza, over all the
kings on this side the River: and he had peace on all sides around him.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Judah and Israel lived safely, every man
under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all
the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Solomon had forty thousand stalls of
horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Those officers provided food for king
Solomon, and for all who came to king Solomon's table, every man in his
month; they let nothing be lacking.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> Barley also and straw for the horses and
swift steeds brought they to the place where \[the officers\] were,
every man according to his duty.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding
exceeding much, and very great understanding, even as the sand that is
on the seashore.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of
all the children of the east, and all the wisdom of Egypt.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan
the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and
his fame was in all the nations all around.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> He spoke three thousand proverbs; and his
songs were one thousand five.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> He spoke of trees, from the cedar that is
in Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall; he spoke
also of animals, and of birds, and of creeping things, and of fish.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> There came of all peoples to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, who had heard of his
wisdom.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to
Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the place
of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> "You know how that David my father could
not build a house for the name of Yahweh his God for the wars which were
about him on every side, until Yahweh put them under the soles of his
feet.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But now Yahweh my God has given me rest on
every side. There is neither adversary, nor evil occurrence.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Behold, I purpose to build a house for the
name of Yahweh my God, as Yahweh spoke to David my father, saying, 'Your
son, whom I will set on your throne in your place, he shall build the
house for my name.'

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Now therefore command that they cut me
cedar trees out of Lebanon. My servants shall be with your servants; and
I will give you wages for your servants according to all that you shall
say. For you know that there is not among us any who knows how to cut
timber like the Sidonians."

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> It happened, when Hiram heard the words of
Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, "Blessed is Yahweh this
day, who has given to David a wise son over this great people."

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, "I have
heard the message which you have sent to me. I will do all your desire
concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> My servants shall bring them down from
Lebanon to the sea. I will make them into rafts to go by sea to the
place that you shall appoint me, and will cause them to be broken up
there, and you shall receive them. You shall accomplish my desire, in
giving food for my household."

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So Hiram gave Solomon timber of cedar and
timber of fir according to all his desire.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand
measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of pure
oil. Solomon gave this to Hiram year by year.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Yahweh gave Solomon wisdom, as he
promised him; and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon; and they
two made a treaty together.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> King Solomon raised a levy out of all
Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> He sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a
month by courses; a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home;
and Adoniram was over the men subject to forced labor.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Solomon had seventy thousand who bore
burdens, and eighty thousand who were stone cutters in the mountains;

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> besides Solomon's chief officers who were
over the work, three thousand and three hundred, who bore rule over the
people who labored in the work.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> The king commanded, and they cut out
great stones, costly stones, to lay the foundation of the house with
worked stone.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders
and the Gebalites did fashion them, and prepared the timber and the
stones to build the house.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> It happened in the four hundred and
eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of
Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month
Ziv, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of
Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The house which king Solomon built for
Yahweh, its length was sixty cubits, and its breadth twenty \[cubits\],
and its height thirty cubits.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> The porch before the temple of the house,
twenty cubits was its length, according to the breadth of the house;
\[and\] ten cubits was its breadth before the house.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For the house he made windows of fixed
lattice work.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Against the wall of the house he built
stories all around, against the walls of the house all around, both of
the temple and of the oracle; and he made side rooms all around.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> The nethermost story was five cubits broad,
and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits
broad; for on the outside he made offsets \[in the wall\] of the house
all around, that \[the beams\] should not have hold in the walls of the
house.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> The house, when it was in building, was
built of stone prepared at the quarry; and there was neither hammer nor
axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was in building.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> The door for the middle side rooms was in
the right side of the house: and they went up by winding stairs into the
middle \[story\], and out of the middle into the third.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> So he built the house, and finished it; and
he covered the house with beams and planks of cedar.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> He built the stories against all the
house, each five cubits high: and they rested on the house with timber
of cedar.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> The word of Yahweh came to Solomon,
saying,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> "Concerning this house which you are
building, if you will walk in my statutes, and execute my ordinances,
and keep all my commandments to walk in them; then will I establish my
word with you, which I spoke to David your father.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I will dwell among the children of
Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel."

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> So Solomon built the house, and finished
it.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> He built the walls of the house within
with boards of cedar: from the floor of the house to the walls of the
ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood; and he covered the
floor of the house with boards of fir.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> He built twenty cubits on the hinder part
of the house with boards of cedar from the floor to the walls \[of the
ceiling\]: he built \[them\] for it within, for an oracle, even for the
most holy place.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> The house, that is, the temple before
\[the oracle\], was forty cubits \[long\].

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> There was cedar on the house within,
carved with buds and open flowers: all was cedar; there was no stone
seen.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> He prepared an oracle in the midst of the
house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Within the oracle was \[a space of\]
twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits
in its height; and he overlaid it with pure gold: and he covered the
altar with cedar.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> So Solomon overlaid the house within with
pure gold: and he drew chains of gold across before the oracle; and he
overlaid it with gold.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> The whole house he overlaid with gold,
until all the house was finished: also the whole altar that belonged to
the oracle he overlaid with gold.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> In the oracle he made two cherubim of
olive wood, each ten cubits high.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Five cubits was the one wing of the
cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub: from the uttermost
part of the one wing to the uttermost part of the other were ten cubits.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> The other cherub was ten cubits: both the
cherubim were of one measure and one form.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> The height of the one cherub was ten
cubits, and so was it of the other cherub.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> He set the cherubim within the inner
house; and the wings of the cherubim were stretched forth, so that the
wing of the one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub
touched the other wall; and their wings touched one another in the midst
of the house.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> He overlaid the cherubim with gold.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> He carved all the walls of the house
around with carved figures of cherubim and palm trees and open flowers,
inside and outside.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> The floor of the house he overlaid with
gold, inside and outside.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> For the entrance of the oracle he made
doors of olive wood: the lintel \[and\] door posts were a fifth part
\[of the wall\].

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> So \[he made\] two doors of olive wood;
and he carved on them carvings of cherubim and palm trees and open
flowers, and overlaid them with gold; and he spread the gold on the
cherubim, and on the palm trees.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> So also made he for the entrance of the
temple door posts of olive wood, out of a fourth part \[of the wall\];

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> and two doors of fir wood: the two leaves
of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were
folding.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> He carved \[thereon\] cherubim and palm
trees and open flowers; and he overlaid them with gold fitted on the
engraved work.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> He built the inner court with three
courses of cut stone, and a course of cedar beams.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> In the fourth year was the foundation of
the house of Yahweh laid, in the month Ziv.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> In the eleventh year, in the month Bul,
which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout all its
parts, and according to all its fashion. So was he seven years in
building it.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Solomon was building his own house thirteen
years, and he finished all his house.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For he built the house of the forest of
Lebanon; its length was one hundred cubits, and its breadth fifty
cubits, and its height thirty cubits, on four rows of cedar pillars,
with cedar beams on the pillars.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> It was covered with cedar above over the
forty-five beams, that were on the pillars; fifteen in a row.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> There were beams in three rows, and window
was over against window in three ranks.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> All the doors and posts were made square
with beams: and window was over against window in three ranks.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> He made the porch of pillars; its length
was fifty cubits, and its breadth thirty cubits; and a porch before
them; and pillars and a threshold before them.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> He made the porch of the throne where he
was to judge, even the porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar
from floor to floor.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> His house where he was to dwell, the other
court within the porch, was of the like work. He made also a house for
Pharaoh's daughter (whom Solomon had taken as wife), like this porch.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> All these were of costly stones, even of
cut stone, according to measure, sawed with saws, inside and outside,
even from the foundation to the coping, and so on the outside to the
great court.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> The foundation was of costly stones, even
great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Above were costly stones, even cut stone,
according to measure, and cedar wood.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The great court around had three courses
of cut stone, and a course of cedar beams; like as the inner court of
the house of Yahweh, and the porch of the house.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> King Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out
of Tyre.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> He was the son of a widow of the tribe of
Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in brass; and he
was filled with wisdom and understanding and skill, to work all works in
brass. He came to king Solomon, and performed all his work.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For he fashioned the two pillars of
brass, eighteen cubits high apiece: and a line of twelve cubits
encircled either of them about.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> He made two capitals of molten brass, to
set on the tops of the pillars: the height of the one capital was five
cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> There were nets of checker work, and
wreaths of chain work, for the capitals which were on the top of the
pillars; seven for the one capital, and seven for the other capital.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> So he made the pillars; and there were
two rows around on the one network, to cover the capitals that were on
the top of the pillars: and so did he for the other capital.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The capitals that were on the top of the
pillars in the porch were of lily work, four cubits.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> There were capitals above also on the two
pillars, close by the belly which was beside the network: and the
pomegranates were two hundred, in rows around on the other capital.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> He set up the pillars at the porch of the
temple: and he set up the right pillar, and called its name Jachin; and
he set up the left pillar, and called its name Boaz.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> On the top of the pillars was lily work:
so was the work of the pillars finished.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> He made the molten sea of ten cubits from
brim to brim, round in compass, and its height was five cubits; and a
line of thirty cubits encircled it.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Under its brim around there were buds
which encircled it, for ten cubits, encircling the sea: the buds were in
two rows, cast when it was cast.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> It stood on twelve oxen, three looking
toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking
toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set
on them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> It was a handbreadth thick: and its brim
was worked like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily: it held
two thousand baths.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> He made the ten bases of brass; four
cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits its breadth, and
three cubits its height.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> The work of the bases was like this: they
had panels; and there were panels between the ledges;

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> and on the panels that were between the
ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubim; and on the ledges there was a
pedestal above; and beneath the lions and oxen were wreaths of hanging
work.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> Every base had four bronze wheels, and
axles of brass; and the four feet of it had supports: beneath the basin
were the supports molten, with wreaths at the side of each.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> The mouth of it within the capital and
above was a cubit: and its mouth was round after the work of a pedestal,
a cubit and a half; and also on its mouth were engravings, and their
panels were foursquare, not round.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The four wheels were underneath the
panels; and the axles of the wheels were in the base: and the height of
a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> The work of the wheels was like the work
of a chariot wheel: their axles, and their rims, and their spokes, and
their naves, were all molten.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> There were four supports at the four
corners of each base: its supports were of the base itself.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> In the top of the base was there a round
compass half a cubit high; and on the top of the base its stays and its
panels were of the same.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> On the plates of its stays, and on its
panels, he engraved cherubim, lions, and palm trees, according to the
space of each, with wreaths all around.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> In this way, he made the ten bases: all
of them had one casting, one measure, and one form.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> He made ten basins of brass: one basin
contained forty baths; and every basin was four cubits; and on every one
of the ten bases one basin.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> He set the bases, five on the right side
of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and he set the sea
on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> Hiram made the basins, and the shovels,
and the basins. So Hiram made an end of doing all the work that he
worked for king Solomon in the house of Yahweh:

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> the two pillars, and the two bowls of the
capitals that were on the top of the pillars; and the two networks to
cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars;

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> and the four hundred pomegranates for the
two networks; two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the
two bowls of the capitals that were on the pillars;

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> and the ten bases, and the ten basins on
the bases;

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> and the one sea, and the twelve oxen
under the sea;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> and the pots, and the shovels, and the
basins: even all these vessels, which Hiram made for king Solomon, in
the house of Yahweh, were of burnished brass.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> In the plain of the Jordan did the king
cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> Solomon left all the vessels
\[unweighed\], because they were exceeding many: the weight of the brass
could not be found out.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> Solomon made all the vessels that were in
the house of Yahweh: the golden altar, and the table whereupon the show
bread was, of gold;

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> and the lampstands, five on the right
side, and five on the left, before the oracle, of pure gold; and the
flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold;

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> and the cups, and the snuffers, and the
basins, and the spoons, and the fire pans, of pure gold; and the hinges,
both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the
doors of the house, \[to wit\], of the temple, of gold.

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> Thus all the work that king Solomon
worked in the house of Yahweh was finished. Solomon brought in the
things which David his father had dedicated, \[even\] the silver, and
the gold, and the vessels, and put them in the treasuries of the house
of Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Then Solomon assembled the elders of
Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers'
\[houses\] of the children of Israel, to king Solomon in Jerusalem, to
bring up the ark of the covenant of Yahweh out of the city of David,
which is Zion.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> All the men of Israel assembled themselves
to king Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh
month.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> All the elders of Israel came, and the
priests took up the ark.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They brought up the ark of Yahweh, and the
Tent of Meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tent; even
these did the priests and the Levites bring up.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> King Solomon and all the congregation of
Israel, who were assembled to him, were with him before the ark,
sacrificing sheep and cattle, that could not be counted nor numbered for
multitude.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> The priests brought in the ark of the
covenant of Yahweh to its place, into the oracle of the house, to the
most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For the cherubim spread forth their wings
over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its
poles above.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> The poles were so long that the ends of the
poles were seen from the holy place before the oracle; but they were not
seen outside: and there they are to this day.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> There was nothing in the ark except the two
tables of stone which Moses put there at Horeb, when Yahweh made a
covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> It came to pass, when the priests were
come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of Yahweh,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> so that the priests could not stand to
minister by reason of the cloud; for the glory of Yahweh filled the
house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Then Solomon said, "Yahweh has said that
he would dwell in the thick darkness.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> I have surely built you a house of
habitation, a place for you to dwell in forever."

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> The king turned his face about, and
blessed all the assembly of Israel: and all the assembly of Israel
stood.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He said, "Blessed is Yahweh, the God of
Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David your father, and has with his
hand fulfilled it, saying,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> 'Since the day that I brought forth my
people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of
Israel to build a house, that my name might be there; but I chose David
to be over my people Israel.'

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> "Now it was in the heart of David my
father to build a house for the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> But Yahweh said to David my father,
'Whereas it was in your heart to build a house for my name, you did well
that it was in your heart.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Nevertheless, you shall not build the
house; but your son who shall come forth out of your body, he shall
build the house for my name.'

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Yahweh has established his word that he
spoke; for I have risen up in the place of David my father, and I sit on
the throne of Israel, as Yahweh promised, and have built the house for
the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> There I have set a place for the ark, in
which is the covenant of Yahweh, which he made with our fathers, when he
brought them out of the land of Egypt."

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Solomon stood before the altar of Yahweh
in the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his
hands toward heaven;

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> and he said, "Yahweh, the God of Israel,
there is no God like you, in heaven above, or on earth beneath; who keep
covenant and loving kindness with your servants, who walk before you
with all their heart;

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> who have kept with your servant David my
father that which you promised him. Yes, you spoke with your mouth, and
have fulfilled it with your hand, as it is this day.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Now therefore, may Yahweh, the God of
Israel, keep with your servant David my father that which you have
promised him, saying, 'There shall not fail you a man in my sight to sit
on the throne of Israel, if only your children take heed to their way,
to walk before me as you have walked before me.'

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> "Now therefore, God of Israel, please let
your word be verified, which you spoke to your servant David my father.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But will God in very deed dwell on the
earth? Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens can't contain you; how
much less this house that I have built!

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> Yet have respect for the prayer of your
servant, and for his supplication, Yahweh my God, to listen to the cry
and to the prayer which your servant prays before you this day;

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> that your eyes may be open toward this
house night and day, even toward the place of which you have said, 'My
name shall be there;' to listen to the prayer which your servant shall
pray toward this place.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Listen to the supplication of your
servant, and of your people Israel, when they shall pray toward this
place. Yes, hear in heaven, your dwelling place; and when you hear,
forgive.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> "If a man sins against his neighbor, and
an oath is laid on him to cause him to swear, and he comes and swear
before your altar in this house;

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> then hear in heaven, and do, and judge
your servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way on his own head,
and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> "When your people Israel are struck down
before the enemy, because they have sinned against you; if they turn
again to you, and confess your name, and pray and make supplication to
you in this house:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> then hear in heaven, and forgive the sin
of your people Israel, and bring them again to the land which you gave
to their fathers.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> "When the sky is shut up, and there is no
rain, because they have sinned against you; if they pray toward this
place, and confess your name, and turn from their sin, when you afflict
them:

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> then hear in heaven, and forgive the sin
of your servants, and of your people Israel, when you teach them the
good way in which they should walk; and send rain on your land, which
you have given to your people for an inheritance.

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> "If there is famine in the land, if there
is pestilence, if there is blight, mildew, locust or caterpillar; if
their enemy besieges them in the land of their cities; whatever plague,
whatever sickness there is;

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> whatever prayer and supplication is made
by any man, or by all your people Israel, who shall each know the plague
of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house:

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> then hear in heaven, your dwelling place,
and forgive, and do, and render to every man according to all his ways,
whose heart you know; (for you, even you only, know the hearts of all
the children of men;)

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> that they may fear you all the days that
they live in the land which you gave to our fathers.

<span id="an_8:41">8:41</span> "Moreover concerning the foreigner, who
is not of your people Israel, when he shall come out of a far country
for your name's sake

<span id="an_8:42">8:42</span> (for they shall hear of your great name,
and of your mighty hand, and of your outstretched arm); when he shall
come and pray toward this house;

<span id="an_8:43">8:43</span> hear in heaven, your dwelling place, and
do according to all that the foreigner calls to you for; that all the
peoples of the earth may know your name, to fear you, as do your people
Israel, and that they may know that this house which I have built is
called by your name.

<span id="an_8:44">8:44</span> "If your people go out to battle against
their enemy, by whatever way you shall send them, and they pray to
Yahweh toward the city which you have chosen, and toward the house which
I have built for your name;

<span id="an_8:45">8:45</span> then hear in heaven their prayer and
their supplication, and maintain their cause.

<span id="an_8:46">8:46</span> If they sin against you (for there is no
man who doesn't sin), and you are angry with them, and deliver them to
the enemy, so that they carry them away captive to the land of the
enemy, far off or near;

<span id="an_8:47">8:47</span> yet if they shall repent in the land
where they are carried captive, and turn again, and make supplication to
you in the land of those who carried them captive, saying, 'We have
sinned, and have done perversely; we have dealt wickedly;'

<span id="an_8:48">8:48</span> if they return to you with all their
heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies, who carried
them captive, and pray to you toward their land, which you gave to their
fathers, the city which you have chosen, and the house which I have
built for your name:

<span id="an_8:49">8:49</span> then hear their prayer and their
supplication in heaven, your dwelling place, and maintain their cause;

<span id="an_8:50">8:50</span> and forgive your people who have sinned
against you, and all their transgressions in which they have
transgressed against you; and give them compassion before those who
carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them

<span id="an_8:51">8:51</span> (for they are your people, and your
inheritance, which you brought forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the
furnace of iron);

<span id="an_8:52">8:52</span> that your eyes may be open to the
supplication of your servant, and to the supplication of your people
Israel, to listen to them whenever they cry to you.

<span id="an_8:53">8:53</span> For you separated them from among all the
peoples of the earth, to be your inheritance, as you spoke by Moses your
servant, when you brought our fathers out of Egypt, Lord Yahweh."

<span id="an_8:54">8:54</span> It was so, that when Solomon had made an
end of praying all this prayer and supplication to Yahweh, he arose from
before the altar of Yahweh, from kneeling on his knees with his hands
spread forth toward heaven.

<span id="an_8:55">8:55</span> He stood, and blessed all the assembly of
Israel with a loud voice, saying,

<span id="an_8:56">8:56</span> "Blessed be Yahweh, who has given rest to
his people Israel, according to all that he promised. There has not
failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by Moses his
servant.

<span id="an_8:57">8:57</span> May Yahweh our God be with us, as he was
with our fathers. Let him not leave us, nor forsake us;

<span id="an_8:58">8:58</span> that he may incline our hearts to him, to
walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his statutes,
and his ordinances, which he commanded our fathers.

<span id="an_8:59">8:59</span> Let these my words, with which I have
made supplication before Yahweh, be near to Yahweh our God day and
night, that he may maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of
his people Israel, as every day shall require;

<span id="an_8:60">8:60</span> that all the peoples of the earth may
know that Yahweh, he is God. There is none else.

<span id="an_8:61">8:61</span> "Let your heart therefore be perfect with
Yahweh our God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments,
as at this day."

<span id="an_8:62">8:62</span> The king, and all Israel with him,
offered sacrifice before Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:63">8:63</span> Solomon offered for the sacrifice of
peace offerings, which he offered to Yahweh, two and twenty thousand
head of cattle, and one hundred twenty thousand sheep. So the king and
all the children of Israel dedicated the house of Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:64">8:64</span> The same day did the king make the middle
of the court holy that was before the house of Yahweh; for there he
offered the burnt offering, and the meal offering, and the fat of the
peace offerings, because the bronze altar that was before Yahweh was too
little to receive the burnt offering, and the meal offering, and the fat
of the peace offerings.

<span id="an_8:65">8:65</span> So Solomon held the feast at that time,
and all Israel with him, a great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath
to the brook of Egypt, before Yahweh our God, seven days and seven days,
even fourteen days.

<span id="an_8:66">8:66</span> On the eighth day he sent the people
away; and they blessed the king, and went to their tents joyful and glad
of heart for all the goodness that Yahweh had shown to David his
servant, and to Israel his people.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> It happened, when Solomon had finished the
building of the house of Yahweh, and the king's house, and all Solomon's
desire which he was pleased to do,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> that Yahweh appeared to Solomon the second
time, as he had appeared to him at Gibeon.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Yahweh said to him, "I have heard your
prayer and your supplication, that you have made before me. I have made
this house holy, which you have built, to put my name there forever; and
my eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> As for you, if you will walk before me, as
David your father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to
do according to all that I have commanded you, and will keep my statutes
and my ordinances;

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> then I will establish the throne of your
kingdom over Israel forever, according as I promised to David your
father, saying, 'There shall not fail you a man on the throne of
Israel.'

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But if you turn away from following me, you
or your children, and not keep my commandments and my statutes which I
have set before you, but shall go and serve other gods, and worship
them;

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> then will I cut off Israel out of the land
which I have given them; and this house, which I have made holy for my
name, will I cast out of my sight; and Israel shall be a proverb and a
byword among all peoples.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Though this house is so high, yet shall
everyone who passes by it be astonished, and shall hiss; and they shall
say, 'Why has Yahweh done thus to this land, and to this house?'

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> and they shall answer, 'Because they
forsook Yahweh their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the
land of Egypt, and laid hold of other gods, and worshiped them, and
served them. Therefore Yahweh has brought all this evil on them.'"

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> It happened at the end of twenty years,
in which Solomon had built the two houses, the house of Yahweh and the
king's house

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> (now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished
Solomon with cedar trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all
his desire), that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land
of Galilee.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Hiram came out from Tyre to see the
cities which Solomon had given him; and they didn't please him.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> He said, "What cities are these which you
have given me, my brother?" He called them the land of Cabul to this
day.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Hiram sent to the king one hundred twenty
talents of gold.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> This is the reason of the levy which king
Solomon raised, to build the house of Yahweh, and his own house, and
Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and
taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canaanites who lived
in the city, and given it for a portion to his daughter, Solomon's wife.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Solomon built Gezer, and Beth Horon the
lower,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> and Baalath, and Tamar in the wilderness,
in the land,

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> and all the storage cities that Solomon
had, and the cities for his chariots, and the cities for his horsemen,
and that which Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem,
and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> As for all the people who were left of
the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the
Jebusites, who were not of the children of Israel;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> their children who were left after them
in the land, whom the children of Israel were not able utterly to
destroy, of them did Solomon raise a levy of bondservants to this day.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But of the children of Israel did Solomon
make no bondservants; but they were the men of war, and his servants,
and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his
horsemen.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> These were the chief officers who were
over Solomon's work, five hundred fifty, who bore rule over the people
who labored in the work.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the
city of David to her house which \[Solomon\] had built for her: then did
he build Millo.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Three times a year did Solomon offer
burnt offerings and peace offerings on the altar which he built to
Yahweh, burning incense therewith, \[on the altar\] that was before
Yahweh. So he finished the house.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> King Solomon made a navy of ships in
Ezion Geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the
land of Edom.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Hiram sent in the navy his servants,
sailors who had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> They came to Ophir, and fetched from
there gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king
Solomon.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame
of Solomon concerning the name of Yahweh, she came to prove him with
hard questions.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> She came to Jerusalem with a very great
train, with camels that bore spices, and very much gold, and precious
stones; and when she was come to Solomon, she talked with him of all
that was in her heart.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Solomon told her all her questions: there
was not anything hidden from the king which he didn't tell her.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> When the queen of Sheba had seen all the
wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> and the food of his table, and the
sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their
clothing, and his cup bearers, and his ascent by which he went up to the
house of Yahweh; there was no more spirit in her.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> She said to the king, "It was a true
report that I heard in my own land of your acts, and of your wisdom.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> However I didn't believe the words, until
I came, and my eyes had seen it. Behold, the half was not told me! Your
wisdom and prosperity exceed the fame which I heard.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Happy are your men, happy are these your
servants, who stand continually before you, who hear your wisdom.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Blessed is Yahweh your God, who delighted
in you, to set you on the throne of Israel. Because Yahweh loved Israel
forever, therefore made he you king, to do justice and righteousness."

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> She gave the king one hundred twenty
talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and precious stones.
There came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of
Sheba gave to king Solomon.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The navy also of Hiram, that brought
gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees and
precious stones.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The king made of the almug trees
pillars for the house of Yahweh, and for the king's house, harps also
and stringed instruments for the singers: there came no such almug
trees, nor were seen, to this day.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba
all her desire, whatever she asked, besides that which Solomon gave her
of his royal bounty. So she turned, and went to her own land, she and
her servants.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Now the weight of gold that came to
Solomon in one year was six hundred sixty-six talents of gold,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> besides \[that which\] the traders
\[brought\], and the traffic of the merchants, and of all the kings of
the mixed people, and of the governors of the country.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> King Solomon made two hundred bucklers
of beaten gold; six hundred \[shekels\] of gold went to one buckler.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> \[he made\] three hundred shields of
beaten gold; three minas of gold went to one shield: and the king put
them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Moreover the king made a great throne
of ivory, and overlaid it with the finest gold.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> There were six steps to the throne, and
the top of the throne was round behind; and there were stays on either
side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the stays.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Twelve lions stood there on the one
side and on the other on the six steps: there was nothing like it made
in any kingdom.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> All king Solomon's drinking vessels
were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon
were of pure gold: none were of silver; it was nothing accounted of in
the days of Solomon.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For the king had at sea a navy of
Tarshish with the navy of Hiram: once every three years came the navy of
Tarshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> So king Solomon exceeded all the kings
of the earth in riches and in wisdom.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> All the earth sought the presence of
Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> They brought every man his tribute,
vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and clothing, and armor, and
spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Solomon gathered together chariots and
horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve
thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the
king at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The king made silver to be in Jerusalem
as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycamore trees that are in
the lowland, for abundance.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The horses which Solomon had were
brought out of Egypt; and the king's merchants received them in droves,
each drove at a price.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> A chariot came up and went out of Egypt
for six hundred \[shekels\] of silver, and a horse for one hundred
fifty; and so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of
Syria, did they bring them out by their means.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now king Solomon loved many foreign
women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites,
Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians, and Hittites;

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> of the nations concerning which Yahweh
said to the children of Israel, "You shall not go among them, neither
shall they come among you; for surely they will turn away your heart
after their gods." Solomon joined to these in love.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> He had seven hundred wives, princesses,
and three hundred concubines; and his wives turned away his heart.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For it happened, when Solomon was old,
that his wives turned away his heart after other gods; and his heart was
not perfect with Yahweh his God, as was the heart of David his father.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the
goddess of the Sidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the
Ammonites.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Solomon did that which was evil in the
sight of Yahweh, and didn't go fully after Yahweh, as did David his
father.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then did Solomon build a high place for
Chemosh the abomination of Moab, on the mountain that is before
Jerusalem, and for Molech the abomination of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> So did he for all his foreign wives, who
burnt incense and sacrificed to their gods.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Yahweh was angry with Solomon, because
his heart was turned away from Yahweh, the God of Israel, who had
appeared to him twice,

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> and had commanded him concerning this
thing, that he should not go after other gods: but he didn't keep that
which Yahweh commanded.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Therefore Yahweh said to Solomon,
"Because this is done by you, and you have not kept my covenant and my
statutes, which I have commanded you, I will surely tear the kingdom
from you, and will give it to your servant.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Notwithstanding I will not do it in
your days, for David your father's sake; but I will tear it out of the
hand of your son.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> However I will not tear away all the
kingdom; but I will give one tribe to your son, for David my servant's
sake, and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen."

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Yahweh raised up an adversary to
Solomon, Hadad the Edomite: he was of the king's seed in Edom.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For it happened, when David was in
Edom, and Joab the captain of the army was gone up to bury the slain,
and had struck every male in Edom

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> (for Joab and all Israel remained there
six months, until he had cut off every male in Edom);

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> that Hadad fled, he and certain
Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt, Hadad
being yet a little child.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> They arose out of Midian, and came to
Paran; and they took men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt,
to Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house, and appointed him food,
and gave him land.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Hadad found great favor in the sight of
Pharaoh, so that he gave him as wife the sister of his own wife, the
sister of Tahpenes the queen.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> The sister of Tahpenes bore him
Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house; and Genubath
was in Pharaoh's house among the sons of Pharaoh.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> When Hadad heard in Egypt that David
slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the army was dead,
Hadad said to Pharaoh, "Let me depart, that I may go to my own country."

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Then Pharaoh said to him, "But what
have you lacked with me, that behold, you seek to go to your own
country?" He answered, "Nothing, however only let me depart."

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> God raised up \[another\] adversary to
him, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his lord Hadadezer king
of Zobah.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> He gathered men to him, and became
captain over a troop, when David killed them \[of Zobah\]: and they went
to Damascus, and lived therein, and reigned in Damascus.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> He was an adversary to Israel all the
days of Solomon, besides the mischief that Hadad \[did\]: and he
abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an
Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of Solomon, whose mother's name was
Zeruah, a widow, he also lifted up his hand against the king.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> This was the reason why he lifted up
his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breach
of the city of David his father.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> The man Jeroboam was a mighty man of
valor; and Solomon saw the young man that he was industrious, and he put
him in charge of all the labor of the house of Joseph.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> It happened at that time, when Jeroboam
went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him
in the way; now \[Ahijah\] had clad himself with a new garment; and they
two were alone in the field.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Ahijah laid hold of the new garment
that was on him, and tore it in twelve pieces.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> He said to Jeroboam, "Take ten pieces;
for thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel, 'Behold, I will tear the
kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to you

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> (but he shall have one tribe, for my
servant David's sake and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have
chosen out of all the tribes of Israel);

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> because that they have forsaken me, and
have worshiped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god
of Moab, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon. They have not
walked in my ways, to do that which is right in my eyes, and \[to keep\]
my statutes and my ordinances, as David his father did.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> "'However I will not take the whole
kingdom out of his hand; but I will make him prince all the days of his
life, for David my servant's sake whom I chose, who kept my commandments
and my statutes;

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> but I will take the kingdom out of his
son's hand, and will give it to you, even ten tribes.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> To his son will I give one tribe, that
David my servant may have a lamp always before me in Jerusalem, the city
which I have chosen me to put my name there.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> I will take you, and you shall reign
according to all that your soul desires, and shall be king over Israel.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> It shall be, if you will listen to all
that I command you, and will walk in my ways, and do that which is right
in my eyes, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant
did; that I will be with you, and will build you a sure house, as I
built for David, and will give Israel to you.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> I will for this afflict the seed of
David, but not forever.'"

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> Solomon sought therefore to kill
Jeroboam; but Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, to Shishak king of
Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon.

<span id="an_11:41">11:41</span> Now the rest of the acts of Solomon,
and all that he did, and his wisdom, aren't they written in the book of
the acts of Solomon?

<span id="an_11:42">11:42</span> The time that Solomon reigned in
Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.

<span id="an_11:43">11:43</span> Solomon slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in
his place.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel
were come to Shechem to make him king.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> It happened, when Jeroboam the son of
Nebat heard of it (for he was yet in Egypt, where he had fled from the
presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam lived in Egypt,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> and they sent and called him), that
Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel came, and spoke to Rehoboam,
saying,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> "Your father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make you the grievous service of your father, and his heavy
yoke which he put on us, lighter, and we will serve you."

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> He said to them, "Depart for three days,
then come back to me." The people departed.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> King Rehoboam took counsel with the old
men, who had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying,
"What counsel do you give me to return answer to this people?"

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> They spoke to him, saying, "If you will
be a servant to this people this day, and will serve them, and answer
them, and speak good words to them, then they will be your servants
forever."

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> But he forsook the counsel of the old men
which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men who had
grown up with him, who stood before him.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> He said to them, "What counsel do you
give, that we may return answer to this people, who have spoken to me,
saying, 'Make the yoke that your father did put on us lighter?'"

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The young men who had grown up with him
spoke to him, saying, "Thus you shall tell this people who spoke to you,
saying, 'Your father made our yoke heavy, but make it lighter to us;'
you shall say to them, 'My little finger is thicker than my father's
waist.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Now whereas my father burdened you with
a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father chastised you with
whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.'"

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> So Jeroboam and all the people came to
Rehoboam the third day, as the king asked, saying, "Come to me again the
third day."

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The king answered the people roughly,
and forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him,

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> and spoke to them according to the
counsel of the young men, saying, "My father made your yoke heavy, but I
will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you with scorpions."

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> So the king didn't listen to the
people; for it was a thing brought about of Yahweh, that he might
establish his word, which Yahweh spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite to
Jeroboam the son of Nebat.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> When all Israel saw that the king
didn't listen to them, the people answered the king, saying, "What
portion have we in David? Neither do we have an inheritance in the son
of Jesse. To your tents, Israel! Now see to your own house, David." So
Israel departed to their tents.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But as for the children of Israel who
lived in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was
over the men subject to forced labor; and all Israel stoned him to death
with stones. King Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to
flee to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> So Israel rebelled against the house of
David to this day.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> It happened, when all Israel heard that
Jeroboam was returned, that they sent and called him to the
congregation, and made him king over all Israel: there was none who
followed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> When Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he
assembled all the house of Judah, and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred
and eighty thousand chosen men, who were warriors, to fight against the
house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of
Solomon.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But the word of God came to Shemaiah
the man of God, saying,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> "Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon,
king of Judah, and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the
rest of the people, saying,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> 'Thus says Yahweh, "You shall not go
up, nor fight against your brothers, the children of Israel. Everyone
return to his house; for this thing is of me."'" So they listened to the
word of Yahweh, and returned and went their way, according to the word
of Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the hill
country of Ephraim, and lived in it; and he went out from there, and
built Penuel.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Jeroboam said in his heart, "Now the
kingdom will return to the house of David.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> If this people goes up to offer
sacrifices in the house of Yahweh at Jerusalem, then the heart of this
people will turn again to their lord, even to Rehoboam king of Judah;
and they will kill me, and return to Rehoboam king of Judah."

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Whereupon the king took counsel, and
made two calves of gold; and he said to them, "It is too much for you to
go up to Jerusalem. Look and see your gods, Israel, which brought you up
out of the land of Egypt!"

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> He set the one in Bethel, and the other
put he in Dan.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> This thing became a sin; for the people
went \[to worship\] before the one, even to Dan.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> He made houses of high places, and made
priests from among all the people, who were not of the sons of Levi.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth
month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast that is in
Judah, and he went up to the altar; so did he in Bethel, sacrificing to
the calves that he had made: and he placed in Bethel the priests of the
high places that he had made.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> He went up to the altar which he had
made in Bethel on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, even in the
month which he had devised of his own heart: and he ordained a feast for
the children of Israel, and went up to the altar, to burn incense.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Behold, there came a man of God out of
Judah by the word of Yahweh to Beth El: and Jeroboam was standing by the
altar to burn incense.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> He cried against the altar by the word of
Yahweh, and said, "Altar, altar, thus says Yahweh: 'Behold, a son shall
be born to the house of David, Josiah by name. On you he shall sacrifice
the priests of the high places who burn incense on you, and they will
burn men's bones on you.'"

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He gave a sign the same day, saying,
"This is the sign which Yahweh has spoken: Behold, the altar will be
split apart, and the ashes that are on it will be poured out."

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> It happened, when the king heard the
saying of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in Bethel,
that Jeroboam put out his hand from the altar, saying, "Seize him!" His
hand, which he put out against him, dried up, so that he could not draw
it back again to himself.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> The altar also was split apart, and the
ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of
God had given by the word of Yahweh.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> The king answered the man of God, "Now
entreat the favor of Yahweh your God, and pray for me, that my hand may
be restored me again." The man of God entreated Yahweh, and the king's
hand was restored him again, and became as it was before.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> The king said to the man of God, "Come
home with me, and refresh yourself, and I will give you a reward."

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> The man of God said to the king, "Even if
you gave me half of your house, I would not go in with you, neither
would I eat bread nor drink water in this place;

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> for so was it commanded me by the word of
Yahweh, saying, 'You shall eat no bread, nor drink water, neither return
by the way that you came.'"

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> So he went another way, and didn't
return by the way that he came to Bethel.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Now there lived an old prophet in
Bethel; and one of his sons came and told him all the works that the man
of God had done that day in Bethel. They also told their father the
words which he had spoken to the king.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Their father said to them, "Which way
did he go?" Now his sons had seen which way the man of God went, who
came from Judah.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> He said to his sons, "Saddle the donkey
for me." So they saddled the donkey for him; and he rode on it.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> He went after the man of God, and found
him sitting under an oak. He said to him, "Are you the man of God who
came from Judah?" He said, "I am."

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then he said to him, "Come home with
me, and eat bread."

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> He said, "I may not return with you,
nor go in with you; neither will I eat bread nor drink water with you in
this place.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For it was said to me by the word of
Yahweh, 'You shall eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to
go by the way that you came.'"

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> He said to him, "I also am a prophet as
you are; and an angel spoke to me by the word of Yahweh, saying, 'Bring
him back with you into your house, that he may eat bread and drink
water.'" He lied to him.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> So he went back with him, and ate bread
in his house, and drank water.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> It happened, as they sat at the table,
that the word of Yahweh came to the prophet who brought him back;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> and he cried to the man of God who came
from Judah, saying, "Thus says Yahweh, 'Because you have been
disobedient to the mouth of Yahweh, and have not kept the commandment
which Yahweh your God commanded you,

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> but came back, and have eaten bread and
drunk water in the place of which he said to you, "Eat no bread, and
drink no water;" your body shall not come to the tomb of your fathers.'"

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> It happened, after he had eaten bread,
and after he had drunk, that he saddled the donkey for the prophet whom
he had brought back.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> When he had gone, a lion met him by the
way, and killed him. His body was cast in the way, and the donkey stood
by it. The lion also stood by the body.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Behold, men passed by, and saw the body
cast in the way, and the lion standing by the body; and they came and
told it in the city where the old prophet lived.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> When the prophet who brought him back
from the way heard of it, he said, "It is the man of God who was
disobedient to the mouth of Yahweh. Therefore Yahweh has delivered him
to the lion, which has mauled him and slain him, according to the word
of Yahweh, which he spoke to him."

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> He spoke to his sons, saying, "Saddle
the donkey for me." They saddled it.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> He went and found his body cast in the
way, and the donkey and the lion standing by the body. The lion had not
eaten the body, nor mauled the donkey.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> The prophet took up the body of the man
of God, and laid it on the donkey, and brought it back. He came to the
city of the old prophet to mourn, and to bury him.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> He laid his body in his own grave; and
they mourned over him, saying, "Alas, my brother!"

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> It happened, after he had buried him,
that he spoke to his sons, saying, "When I am dead, then bury me in the
tomb in which the man of God is buried. Lay my bones beside his bones.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> For the saying which he cried by the
word of Yahweh against the altar in Bethel, and against all the houses
of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, will surely
happen."

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> After this thing Jeroboam didn't return
from his evil way, but again made priests of the high places from among
all the people. Whoever wanted to, he consecrated him, that there might
be priests of the high places.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> This thing became sin to the house of
Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the surface of
the earth.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam
fell sick.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Jeroboam said to his wife, "Please get up
and disguise yourself, that you won't be recognized as the wife of
Jeroboam. Go to Shiloh. Behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, who spoke
concerning me that I should be king over this people.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Take with you ten loaves, and cakes, and
a jar of honey, and go to him. He will tell you what will become of the
child."

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and
went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not
see; for his eyes were set by reason of his age.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Yahweh said to Ahijah, "Behold, the wife
of Jeroboam comes to inquire of you concerning her son; for he is sick.
Thus and thus you shall tell her; for it will be, when she comes in,
that she will pretend to be another woman."

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> It was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of
her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, "Come in, you wife
of Jeroboam! Why do you pretend to be another? For I am sent to you with
heavy news.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go, tell Jeroboam, 'Thus says Yahweh, the
God of Israel: "Because I exalted you from among the people, and made
you prince over my people Israel,

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> and tore the kingdom away from the house
of David, and gave it you; and yet you have not been as my servant
David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart,
to do that only which was right in my eyes,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> but have done evil above all who were
before you, and have gone and made you other gods, and molten images, to
provoke me to anger, and have cast me behind your back:

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> therefore, behold, I will bring evil on
the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam everyone who
urinates on a wall, he who is shut up and he who is left at large in
Israel, and will utterly sweep away the house of Jeroboam, as a man
sweeps away dung, until it is all gone.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> He who dies of Jeroboam in the city
shall the dogs eat; and he who dies in the field shall the birds of the
sky eat: for Yahweh has spoken it."'

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Arise therefore, and go to your house.
When your feet enter into the city, the child shall die.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> All Israel shall mourn for him, and
bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in
him there is found some good thing toward Yahweh, the God of Israel, in
the house of Jeroboam.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Moreover Yahweh will raise him up a
king over Israel, who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam. This is day!
What? Even now.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> For Yahweh will strike Israel, as a
reed is shaken in the water; and he will root up Israel out of this good
land which he gave to their fathers, and will scatter them beyond the
River, because they have made their Asherim, provoking Yahweh to anger.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> He will give Israel up because of the
sins of Jeroboam, which he has sinned, and with which he has made Israel
to sin."

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Jeroboam's wife arose, and departed,
and came to Tirzah. As she came to the threshold of the house, the child
died.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> All Israel buried him, and mourned for
him, according to the word of Yahweh, which he spoke by his servant
Ahijah the prophet.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how
he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Israel.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> The days which Jeroboam reigned were
two and twenty years: and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son
reigned in his place.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in
Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Yahweh had chosen
out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there: and his mother's
name was Naamah the Ammonitess.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Judah did that which was evil in the
sight of Yahweh, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which
they committed, above all that their fathers had done.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> For they also built them high places,
and pillars, and Asherim, on every high hill, and under every green
tree;

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> and there were also sodomites in the
land: they did according to all the abominations of the nations which
Yahweh drove out before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> It happened in the fifth year of king
Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem;

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> and he took away the treasures of the
house of Yahweh, and the treasures of the king's house; he even took
away all: and he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had
made.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> King Rehoboam made in their place
shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the
guard, who kept the door of the king's house.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> It was so, that as often as the king
went into the house of Yahweh, the guard bore them, and brought them
back into the guard room.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam,
and all that he did, aren't they written in the book of the chronicles
of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> There was war between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam continually.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the city of David: and his mother's name
was Naamah the Ammonitess. Abijam his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now in the eighteenth year of king
Jeroboam the son of Nebat began Abijam to reign over Judah.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Three years reigned he in Jerusalem: and
his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> He walked in all the sins of his father,
which he had done before him; and his heart was not perfect with Yahweh
his God, as the heart of David his father.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Nevertheless for David's sake did Yahweh
his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and
to establish Jerusalem;

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> because David did that which was right in
the eyes of Yahweh, and didn't turn aside from anything that he
commanded him all the days of his life, except only in the matter of
Uriah the Hittite.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Now there was war between Rehoboam and
Jeroboam all the days of his life.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The rest of the acts of Abijam, and all
that he did, aren't they written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Judah? There was war between Abijam and Jeroboam.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Abijam slept with his fathers; and they
buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> In the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of
Israel began Asa to reign over Judah.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Forty-one years reigned he in
Jerusalem: and his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Asa did that which was right in the
eyes of Yahweh, as did David his father.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> He put away the sodomites out of the
land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Also Maacah his mother he removed from
being queen, because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah;
and Asa cut down her image, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> But the high places were not taken
away: nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect with Yahweh all his
days.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> He brought into the house of Yahweh the
things that his father had dedicated, and the things that himself had
dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> There was war between Asa and Baasha
king of Israel all their days.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Baasha king of Israel went up against
Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not allow anyone to go out or come
in to Asa king of Judah.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Then Asa took all the silver and the
gold that were left in the treasures of the house of Yahweh, and the
treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his
servants; and king Asa sent them to Ben Hadad, the son of Tabrimmon, the
son of Hezion, king of Syria, who lived at Damascus, saying,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> "There is a treaty between me and you,
between my father and your father. Behold, I have sent to you a present
of silver and gold. Go, break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel,
that he may depart from me."

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Ben Hadad listened to king Asa, and
sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel, and struck
Ijon, and Dan, and Abel Beth Maacah, and all Chinneroth, with all the
land of Naphtali.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> It happened, when Baasha heard of it,
that he left off building Ramah, and lived in Tirzah.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then king Asa made a proclamation to
all Judah; none was exempted: and they carried away the stones of Ramah,
and its timber, with which Baasha had built; and king Asa built
therewith Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Now the rest of all the acts of Asa,
and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built,
aren't they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
But in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Asa slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; and Jehoshaphat
his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to
reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah; and he
reigned over Israel two years.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> He did that which was evil in the sight
of Yahweh, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin with
which he made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house
of Issachar, conspired against him; and Baasha struck him at Gibbethon,
which belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and all Israel were laying
siege to Gibbethon.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Even in the third year of Asa king of
Judah did Baasha kill him, and reigned in his place.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> It happened that, as soon as he was
king, he struck all the house of Jeroboam: he didn't leave to Jeroboam
any who breathed, until he had destroyed him; according to the saying of
Yahweh, which he spoke by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite;

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> for the sins of Jeroboam which he
sinned, and with which he made Israel to sin, because of his provocation
with which he provoked Yahweh, the God of Israel, to anger.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and
all that he did, aren't they written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> There was war between Asa and Baasha
king of Israel all their days.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> In the third year of Asa king of Judah
began Baasha the son of Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, \[and
reigned\] twenty-four years.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> He did that which was evil in the sight
of Yahweh, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin with which
he made Israel to sin.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The word of Yahweh came to Jehu the son
of Hanani against Baasha, saying,

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> "Because I exalted you out of the dust,
and made you prince over my people Israel, and you have walked in the
way of Jeroboam, and have made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to
anger with their sins;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> behold, I will utterly sweep away Baasha
and his house; and I will make your house like the house of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> The dogs will eat Baasha's descendants
who die in the city; and he who dies of his in the field the birds of
the sky will eat."

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and
what he did, and his might, aren't they written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Baasha slept with his fathers, and was
buried in Tirzah; and Elah his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Moreover by the prophet Jehu the son of
Hanani came the word of Yahweh against Baasha, and against his house,
both because of all the evil that he did in the sight of Yahweh, to
provoke him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house
of Jeroboam, and because he struck him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of
Judah began Elah the son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, \[and
reigned\] two years.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> His servant Zimri, captain of half his
chariots, conspired against him. Now he was in Tirzah, drinking himself
drunk in the house of Arza, who was over the household in Tirzah:

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and Zimri went in and struck him, and
killed him, in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned
in his place.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> It happened, when he began to reign, as
soon as he sat on his throne, that he struck all the house of Baasha: he
didn't leave him a single one who urinates on a wall, neither of his
relatives, nor of his friends.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Thus Zimri destroyed all the house of
Baasha, according to the word of Yahweh, which he spoke against Baasha
by Jehu the prophet,

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> for all the sins of Baasha, and the
sins of Elah his son, which they sinned, and with which they made Israel
to sin, to provoke Yahweh, the God of Israel, to anger with their
vanities.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and
all that he did, aren't they written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king
of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were
encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> The people who were encamped heard say,
Zimri has conspired, and has also struck the king: therefore all Israel
made Omri, the captain of the army, king over Israel that day in the
camp.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all
Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> It happened, when Zimri saw that the
city was taken, that he went into the castle of the king's house, and
burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died,

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> for his sins which he sinned in doing
that which was evil in the sight of Yahweh, in walking in the way of
Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and
his treason that he did, aren't they written in the book of the
chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Then were the people of Israel divided
into two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to
make him king; and half followed Omri.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> But the people who followed Omri
prevailed against the people who followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so
Tibni died, and Omri reigned.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> In the thirty-first year of Asa king of
Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, \[and reigned\] twelve years: six
years reigned he in Tirzah.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> He bought the hill Samaria of Shemer
for two talents of silver; and he built on the hill, and called the name
of the city which he built, after the name of Shemer, the owner of the
hill, Samaria.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Omri did that which was evil in the
sight of Yahweh, and dealt wickedly above all who were before him.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> For he walked in all the way of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sins with which he made Israel to
sin, to provoke Yahweh, the God of Israel, to anger with their vanities.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Now the rest of the acts of Omri which
he did, and his might that he showed, aren't they written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> So Omri slept with his fathers, and was
buried in Samaria; and Ahab his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> In the thirty-eighth year of Asa king
of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the
son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty-two years.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> Ahab the son of Omri did that which was
evil in the sight of Yahweh above all that were before him.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> It happened, as if it had been a light
thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he
took as wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Sidonians, and
went and served Baal, and worshiped him.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> He reared up an altar for Baal in the
house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> Ahab made the Asherah; and Ahab did yet
more to provoke Yahweh, the God of Israel, to anger than all the kings
of Israel who were before him.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> In his days did Hiel the Bethelite
build Jericho: he laid its foundation with the loss of Abiram his
firstborn, and set up its gates with the loss of his youngest son Segub,
according to the word of Yahweh, which he spoke by Joshua the son of
Nun.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the
foreigners of Gilead, said to Ahab, "As Yahweh, the God of Israel,
lives, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years,
but according to my word."

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> The word of Yahweh came to him, saying,

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> "Go away from here, turn eastward, and
hide yourself by the brook Cherith, that is before the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> It shall be, that you shall drink of the
brook. I have commanded the ravens to feed you there."

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> So he went and did according to the word
of Yahweh; for he went and lived by the brook Cherith, that is before
the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> The ravens brought him bread and flesh in
the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the
brook.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> It happened after a while, that the brook
dried up, because there was no rain in the land.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The word of Yahweh came to him, saying,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> "Arise, go to Zarephath, which belongs to
Sidon, and stay there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to sustain
you."

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So he arose and went to Zarephath; and
when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there
gathering sticks: and he called to her, and said, "Please get me a
little water in a vessel, that I may drink."

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> As she was going to get it, he called
to her, and said, "Please bring me a morsel of bread in your hand."

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> She said, "As Yahweh your God lives, I
don't have a cake, but a handful of meal in the jar, and a little oil in
the jar. Behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and bake it
for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die."

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Elijah said to her, "Don't be afraid.
Go and do as you have said; but make me of it a little cake first, and
bring it out to me, and afterward make some for you and for your son.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> For thus says Yahweh, the God of
Israel, 'The jar of meal shall not empty, neither shall the jar of oil
fail, until the day that Yahweh sends rain on the earth.'"

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> She went and did according to the
saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, ate \[many\] days.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> The jar of meal didn't empty, neither
did the jar of oil fail, according to the word of Yahweh, which he spoke
by Elijah.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> It happened after these things, that
the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his
sickness was so severe, that there was no breath left in him.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> She said to Elijah, "What have I to do
with you, you man of God? You have come to me to bring my sin to memory,
and to kill my son!"

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> He said to her, "Give me your son." He
took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the room where he
stayed, and laid him on his own bed.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> He cried to Yahweh, and said, "Yahweh
my God, have you also brought evil on the widow with whom I stay, by
killing her son?"

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> He stretched himself on the child three
times, and cried to Yahweh, and said, "Yahweh my God, please let this
child's soul come into him again."

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Yahweh listened to the voice of Elijah;
and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> Elijah took the child, and brought him
down out of the room into the house, and delivered him to his mother;
and Elijah said, "Behold, your son lives."

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> The woman said to Elijah, "Now I know
that you are a man of God, and that the word of Yahweh in your mouth is
truth."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> It happened after many days, that the
word of Yahweh came to Elijah, in the third year, saying, "Go, show
yourself to Ahab; and I will send rain on the earth."

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Elijah went to show himself to Ahab. The
famine was severe in Samaria.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Ahab called Obadiah, who was over the
household. (Now Obadiah feared Yahweh greatly:

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> for it was so, when Jezebel cut off the
prophets of Yahweh, that Obadiah took one hundred prophets, and hid them
by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.)

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Ahab said to Obadiah, "Go through the
land, to all the springs of water, and to all the brooks. Perhaps we may
find grass and save the horses and mules alive, that we not lose all the
animals."

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> So they divided the land between them to
pass throughout it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went
another way by himself.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> As Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah
met him: and he recognized him, and fell on his face, and said, "Is it
you, my lord Elijah?"

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> He answered him, "It is I. Go, tell your
lord, 'Behold, Elijah is here!'"

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> He said, "Wherein have I sinned, that you
would deliver your servant into the hand of Ahab, to kill me?

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> As Yahweh your God lives, there is no
nation or kingdom, where my lord has not sent to seek you. When they
said, 'He is not here,' he took an oath of the kingdom and nation, that
they didn't find you.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now you say, 'Go, tell your lord,
"Behold, Elijah is here."'

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> It will happen, as soon as I am gone
from you, that the Spirit of Yahweh will carry you I don't know where;
and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he can't find you, he will kill
me. But I, your servant, have feared Yahweh from my youth.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Wasn't it told my lord what I did when
Jezebel killed the prophets of Yahweh, how I hid one hundred men of
Yahweh's prophets with fifty to a cave, and fed them with bread and
water?

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Now you say, 'Go, tell your lord,
"Behold, Elijah is here;"' and he will kill me."

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Elijah said, "As Yahweh of Armies
lives, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself to him today."

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told
him; and Ahab went to meet Elijah.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> It happened, when Ahab saw Elijah, that
Ahab said to him, "Is that you, you troubler of Israel?"

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> He answered, "I have not troubled
Israel; but you, and your father's house, in that you have forsaken the
commandments of Yahweh, and you have followed the Baals.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Now therefore send, and gather to me
all Israel to Mount Carmel, and four hundred fifty of the prophets of
Baal, and four hundred of the prophets of the Asherah, who eat at
Jezebel's table."

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> So Ahab sent to all the children of
Israel, and gathered the prophets together to Mount Carmel.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Elijah came near to all the people, and
said, "How long will you waver between the two sides? If Yahweh is God,
follow him; but if Baal, then follow him." The people answered him not a
word.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Then Elijah said to the people, "I,
even I only, am left a prophet of Yahweh; but Baal's prophets are four
hundred fifty men.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Let them therefore give us two bulls;
and let them choose one bull for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and
lay it on the wood, and put no fire under; and I will dress the other
bull, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under it.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> You call on the name of your god, and I
will call on the name of Yahweh. The God who answers by fire, let him be
God." All the people answered, "It is well said."

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Elijah said to the prophets of Baal,
"Choose one bull for yourselves, and dress it first; for you are many;
and call on the name of your god, but put no fire under it."

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> They took the bull which was given
them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning
even until noon, saying, Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any
who answered. They leaped about the altar which was made.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> It happened at noon, that Elijah mocked
them, and said, "Cry aloud; for he is a god. Either he is musing, or he
has gone aside, or he is on a journey, or perhaps he sleeps and must be
awakened."

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> They cried aloud, and cut themselves in
their way with knives and lances, until the blood gushed out on them.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> It was so, when midday was past, that
they prophesied until the time of the offering of the offering; but
there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any who regarded.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Elijah said to all the people, "Come
near to me;" and all the people came near to him. He repaired the altar
of Yahweh that was thrown down.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Elijah took twelve stones, according to
the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, to whom the word of
Yahweh came, saying, "Israel shall be your name."

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> With the stones he built an altar in
the name of Yahweh. He made a trench around the altar, large enough to
contain two measures of seed.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> He put the wood in order, and cut the
bull in pieces, and laid it on the wood. He said, "Fill four jars with
water, and pour it on the burnt offering, and on the wood."

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> He said, "Do it a second time;" and
they did it the second time. He said, "Do it a third time;" and they did
it the third time.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> The water ran around the altar; and he
also filled the trench with water.

<span id="an_18:36">18:36</span> It happened at the time of the offering
of the offering, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, "Yahweh,
the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day
that you are God in Israel, and that I am your servant, and that I have
done all these things at your word.

<span id="an_18:37">18:37</span> Hear me, Yahweh, hear me, that this
people may know that you, Yahweh, are God, and that you have turned
their heart back again."

<span id="an_18:38">18:38</span> Then the fire of Yahweh fell, and
consumed the burnt offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust,
and licked up the water that was in the trench.

<span id="an_18:39">18:39</span> When all the people saw it, they fell
on their faces. They said, "Yahweh, he is God! Yahweh, he is God!"

<span id="an_18:40">18:40</span> Elijah said to them, "Seize the
prophets of Baal! Don't let one of them escape!" They seized them.
Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and killed them there.

<span id="an_18:41">18:41</span> Elijah said to Ahab, "Get up, eat and
drink; for there is the sound of abundance of rain."

<span id="an_18:42">18:42</span> So Ahab went up to eat and to drink.
Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he bowed himself down on the
earth, and put his face between his knees.

<span id="an_18:43">18:43</span> He said to his servant, "Go up now,
look toward the sea." He went up, and looked, and said, "There is
nothing." He said, "Go again" seven times.

<span id="an_18:44">18:44</span> It happened at the seventh time, that
he said, "Behold, a small cloud, like a man's hand, is rising out of the
sea." He said, "Go up, tell Ahab, 'Get ready and go down, so that the
rain doesn't stop you.'"

<span id="an_18:45">18:45</span> It happened in a little while, that the
sky grew black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. Ahab
rode, and went to Jezreel.

<span id="an_18:46">18:46</span> The hand of Yahweh was on Elijah; and
he tucked his cloak into his belt and ran before Ahab to the entrance of
Jezreel.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had
done, and how he had killed all the prophets with the sword.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Then Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah,
saying, "So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I don't make your
life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time!"

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> When he saw that, he arose, and went for
his life, and came to Beersheba, which belongs to Judah, and left his
servant there.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> But he himself went a day's journey into
the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree: and he
requested for himself that he might die, and said, "It is enough. Now, O
Yahweh, take away my life; for I am not better than my fathers."

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> He lay down and slept under a juniper
tree; and behold, an angel touched him, and said to him, "Arise and
eat!"

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> He looked, and behold, there was at his
head a cake baked on the coals, and a jar of water. He ate and drank,
and laid down again.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The angel of Yahweh came again the second
time, and touched him, and said, "Arise and eat, because the journey is
too great for you."

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He arose, and ate and drank, and went in
the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the Mount
of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> He came there to a cave, and lodged
there; and behold, the word of Yahweh came to him, and he said to him,
"What are you doing here, Elijah?"

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> He said, "I have been very jealous for
Yahweh, the God of Armies; for the children of Israel have forsaken your
covenant, thrown down your altars, and slain your prophets with the
sword. I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away."

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> He said, "Go out, and stand on the
mountain before Yahweh." Behold, Yahweh passed by, and a great and
strong wind tore the mountains, and broke in pieces the rocks before
Yahweh; but Yahweh was not in the wind. After the wind an earthquake;
but Yahweh was not in the earthquake.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> After the earthquake a fire passed; but
Yahweh was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> It was so, when Elijah heard it, that
he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the
entrance of the cave. Behold, a voice came to him, and said, "What are
you doing here, Elijah?"

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> He said, "I have been very jealous for
Yahweh, the God of Armies; for the children of Israel have forsaken your
covenant, thrown down your altars, and slain your prophets with the
sword. I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away."

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Yahweh said to him, "Go, return on your
way to the wilderness of Damascus. When you arrive, you shall anoint
Hazael to be king over Syria.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> You shall anoint Jehu the son of Nimshi
to be king over Israel; and you shall anoint Elisha the son of Shaphat
of Abel Meholah to be prophet in your place.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> It shall happen, that he who escapes
from the sword of Hazael, Jehu will kill; and he who escapes from the
sword of Jehu, Elisha will kill.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Yet will I leave seven thousand in
Israel, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth
which has not kissed him."

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> So he departed there, and found Elisha
the son of Shaphat, who was plowing, with twelve yoke \[of oxen\] before
him, and he with the twelfth: and Elijah passed over to him, and cast
his mantle on him.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> He left the oxen, and ran after Elijah,
and said, "Let me please kiss my father and my mother, and then I will
follow you." He said to him, "Go back again; for what have I done to
you?"

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> He returned from following him, and
took the yoke of oxen, and killed them, and boiled their flesh with the
instruments of the oxen, and gave to the people, and they ate. Then he
arose, and went after Elijah, and served him.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Ben Hadad the king of Syria gathered all
his army together; and there were thirty-two kings with him, and horses
and chariots: and he went up and besieged Samaria, and fought against
it.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> He sent messengers to Ahab king of
Israel, into the city, and said to him, "Thus says Ben Hadad,

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> 'Your silver and your gold is mine. Your
wives also and your children, even the best, are mine.'"

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> The king of Israel answered, "It is
according to your saying, my lord, O king. I am yours, and all that I
have."

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> The messengers came again, and said, "Ben
Hadad says, 'I sent indeed to you, saying, "You shall deliver me your
silver, and your gold, and your wives, and your children;

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> but I will send my servants to you
tomorrow about this time, and they shall search your house, and the
houses of your servants; and it shall be, that whatever is pleasant in
your eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and take it away."'"

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Then the king of Israel called all the
elders of the land, and said, "Please notice how this man seeks
mischief; for he sent to me for my wives, and for my children, and for
my silver, and for my gold; and I didn't deny him."

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> All the elders and all the people said to
him, "Don't listen, neither consent."

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Therefore he said to the messengers of
Ben Hadad, "Tell my lord the king, 'All that you sent for to your
servant at the first I will do; but this thing I cannot do.'" The
messengers departed, and brought him back the message.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Ben Hadad sent to him, and said, "The
gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice
for handfuls for all the people who follow me."

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> The king of Israel answered, "Tell him,
'Don't let him who puts on his armor brag like he who takes it off.'"

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> It happened, when Ben Hadad heard this
message, as he was drinking, he and the kings, in the pavilions, that he
said to his servants, "Prepare to attack!" They prepared to attack the
city.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Behold, a prophet came near to Ahab
king of Israel, and said, "Thus says Yahweh, 'Have you seen all this
great multitude? Behold, I will deliver it into your hand this day; and
you shall know that I am Yahweh.'"

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Ahab said, "By whom?" He said, "Thus
says Yahweh, 'By the young men of the princes of the provinces.'" Then
he said, "Who shall begin the battle?" He answered, "You."

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Then he mustered the young men of the
princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty-two.
After them, he mustered all the people, even all the children of Israel,
being seven thousand.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> They went out at noon. But Ben Hadad
was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the
thirty-two kings who helped him.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> The young men of the princes of the
provinces went out first; and Ben Hadad sent out, and they told him,
saying, "Men are coming out from Samaria."

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> He said, "If they have come out for
peace, take them alive; or if they have come out for war, take them
alive."

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> So these went out of the city, the
young men of the princes of the provinces, and the army which followed
them.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> They each killed his man. The Syrians
fled, and Israel pursued them. Ben Hadad the king of Syria escaped on a
horse with horsemen.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> The king of Israel went out, and struck
the horses and chariots, and killed the Syrians with a great slaughter.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> The prophet came near to the king of
Israel, and said to him, "Go, strengthen yourself, and mark, and see
what you do; for at the return of the year the king of Syria will come
up against you."

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> The servants of the king of Syria said
to him, "Their god is a god of the hills; therefore they were stronger
than we. But let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall
be stronger than they.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> Do this thing: take the kings away,
every man out of his place, and put captains in their place.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> Muster an army, like the army that you
have lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot. We will fight
against them in the plain, and surely we will be stronger than them." He
listened to their voice, and did so.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> It happened at the return of the year,
that Ben Hadad mustered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight
against Israel.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The children of Israel were mustered,
and were provisioned, and went against them. The children of Israel
encamped before them like two little flocks of young goats; but the
Syrians filled the country.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> A man of God came near and spoke to the
king of Israel, and said, "Thus says Yahweh, 'Because the Syrians have
said, "Yahweh is a god of the hills, but he is not a god of the
valleys;" therefore I will deliver all this great multitude into your
hand, and you shall know that I am Yahweh.'"

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> They encamped one over against the
other seven days. So it was, that in the seventh day the battle was
joined; and the children of Israel killed one hundred thousand footmen
of the Syrians in one day.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> But the rest fled to Aphek, into the
city; and the wall fell on twenty-seven thousand men who were left. Ben
Hadad fled, and came into the city, into an inner room.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> His servants said to him, "See now, we
have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings.
Please let us put sackcloth on our bodies, and ropes on our heads, and
go out to the king of Israel. Maybe he will save your life."

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> So they put sackcloth on their bodies
and ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said,
"Your servant Ben Hadad says, 'Please let me live.'" He said, "Is he
still alive? He is my brother."

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> Now the men observed diligently, and
hurried to take this phrase; and they said, "Your brother Ben Hadad."
Then he said, "Go, bring him." Then Ben Hadad came out to him; and he
caused him to come up into the chariot.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> Ben Hadad said to him, "The cities
which my father took from your father I will restore. You shall make
streets for yourself in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria." "I,"
said Ahab, "will let you go with this covenant." So he made a covenant
with him, and let him go.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> A certain man of the sons of the
prophets said to his fellow by the word of Yahweh, "Please strike me!"
The man refused to strike him.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> Then he said to him, "Because you have
not obeyed the voice of Yahweh, behold, as soon as you are departed from
me, a lion shall kill you." As soon as he was departed from him, a lion
found him, and killed him.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> Then he found another man, and said,
"Please strike me." The man struck him, smiting and wounding him.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> So the prophet departed, and waited for
the king by the way, and disguised himself with his headband over his
eyes.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> As the king passed by, he cried to the
king; and he said, "Your servant went out into the midst of the battle;
and behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man to me, and said,
'Guard this man! If by any means he be missing, then your life shall be
for his life, or else you shall pay a talent of silver.'

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> As your servant was busy here and
there, he was gone." The king of Israel said to him, "So your judgment
shall be; yourself have decided it."

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> He hurried, and took the headband away
from his eyes; and the king of Israel recognized that he was of the
prophets.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> He said to him, "Thus says Yahweh,
'Because you have let go out of your hand the man whom I had devoted to
destruction, therefore your life shall go for his life, and your people
for his people.'"

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> The king of Israel went to his house
sullen and angry, and came to Samaria.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> It happened after these things, that
Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the
palace of Ahab king of Samaria.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Ahab spoke to Naboth, saying, "Give me
your vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is
near to my house; and I will give you for it a better vineyard than it.
Or, if it seems good to you, I will give you its worth in money."

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Naboth said to Ahab, "May Yahweh forbid
me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers to you!"

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Ahab came into his house sullen and angry
because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him; for
he had said, "I will not give you the inheritance of my fathers." He
laid himself down on his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no
bread.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> But Jezebel his wife came to him, and
said to him, "Why is your spirit so sad, that you eat no bread?"

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> He said to her, "Because I spoke to
Naboth the Jezreelite, and said to him, 'Give me your vineyard for
money; or else, if it pleases you, I will give you another vineyard for
it.' He answered, 'I will not give you my vineyard.'"

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Jezebel his wife said to him, "Do you now
govern the kingdom of Israel? Arise, and eat bread, and let your heart
be merry. I will give you the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite."

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and
sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters to the elders and to the
nobles who were in his city, who lived with Naboth.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> She wrote in the letters, saying,
"Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Set two men, base fellows, before him,
and let them testify against him, saying, 'You cursed God and the king!'
Then carry him out, and stone him to death."

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The men of his city, even the elders
and the nobles who lived in his city, did as Jezebel had sent to them,
according as it was written in the letters which she had sent to them.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth
on high among the people.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> The two men, the base fellows, came in
and sat before him. The base fellows testified against him, even against
Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, "Naboth cursed God and
the king!" Then they carried him out of the city, and stoned him to
death with stones.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Then they sent to Jezebel, saying,
"Naboth has been stoned, and is dead."

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> It happened, when Jezebel heard that
Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, "Arise, take
possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to
give you for money; for Naboth is not alive, but dead."

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> It happened, when Ahab heard that
Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth
the Jezreelite, to take possession of it.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> The word of Yahweh came to Elijah the
Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> "Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of
Israel, who dwells in Samaria. Behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth,
where he has gone down to take possession of it.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> You shall speak to him, saying, 'Thus
says Yahweh, "Have you killed and also taken possession?"' You shall
speak to him, saying, 'Thus says Yahweh, "In the place where dogs licked
the blood of Naboth, dogs will lick your blood, even yours."'"

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> Ahab said to Elijah, "Have you found
me, my enemy?" He answered, "I have found you, because you have sold
yourself to do that which is evil in the sight of Yahweh.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Behold, I will bring evil on you, and
will utterly sweep you away and will cut off from Ahab everyone who
urinates against a wall, and him who is shut up and him who is left at
large in Israel.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> I will make your house like the house
of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of
Ahijah for the provocation with which you have provoked me to anger, and
have made Israel to sin."

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Yahweh also spoke of Jezebel, saying,
"The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the rampart of Jezreel.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> The dogs will eat he who dies of Ahab
in the city; and the birds of the sky will eat he who dies in the
field."

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But there was none like Ahab, who sold
himself to do that which was evil in the sight of Yahweh, whom Jezebel
his wife stirred up.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> He did very abominably in following
idols, according to all that the Amorites did, whom Yahweh cast out
before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> It happened, when Ahab heard those
words, that he tore his clothes, and put sackcloth on his flesh, and
fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> The word of Yahweh came to Elijah the
Tishbite, saying,

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> "See how Ahab humbles himself before
me? Because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in
his days; but in his son's days will I bring the evil on his house."

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> They continued three years without war
between Syria and Israel.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> It happened in the third year, that
Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> The king of Israel said to his servants,
"You know that Ramoth Gilead is ours, and we are still, and don't take
it out of the hand of the king of Syria?"

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> He said to Jehoshaphat, "Will you go with
me to battle to Ramoth Gilead?" Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel,
"I am as you are, my people as your people, my horses as your horses."

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel,
"Please inquire first for the word of Yahweh."

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Then the king of Israel gathered the
prophets together, about four hundred men, and said to them, "Shall I go
against Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?" They said, "Go up;
for the Lord will deliver it into the hand of the king."

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But Jehoshaphat said, "Isn't there here a
prophet of Yahweh, that we may inquire of him?"

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat,
"There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Yahweh, Micaiah the son
of Imlah; but I hate him; for he does not prophesy good concerning me,
but evil." Jehoshaphat said, "Don't let the king say so."

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then the king of Israel called an
officer, and said, "Quickly get Micaiah the son of Imlah."

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, arrayed in their
robes, in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all
the prophets were prophesying before them.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made him
horns of iron, and said, "Thus says Yahweh, 'With these you shall push
the Syrians, until they are consumed.'"

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> All the prophets prophesied so, saying,
"Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper; for Yahweh will deliver it into
the hand of the king."

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The messenger who went to call Micaiah
spoke to him, saying, "See now, the prophets declare good to the king
with one mouth. Please let your word be like the word of one of them,
and speak good."

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Micaiah said, "As Yahweh lives, what
Yahweh says to me, that I will speak."

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> When he had come to the king, the king
said to him, "Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall
we forbear?" He answered him, "Go up and prosper; and Yahweh will
deliver it into the hand of the king."

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> The king said to him, "How many times
do I have to adjure you that you speak to me nothing but the truth in
the name of Yahweh?"

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> He said, "I saw all Israel scattered on
the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. Yahweh said, 'These have
no master. Let them each return to his house in peace.'"

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat,
"Didn't I tell you that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but
evil?"

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Micaiah said, "Therefore hear the word
of Yahweh. I saw Yahweh sitting on his throne, and all the army of
heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Yahweh said, 'Who shall entice Ahab,
that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead?' One said one thing; and
another said another.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> A spirit came out and stood before
Yahweh, and said, 'I will entice him.'

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Yahweh said to him, 'How?' He said, 'I
will go out and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his
prophets.' He said, 'You will entice him, and will also prevail. Go out
and do so.'

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Now therefore, behold, Yahweh has put a
lying spirit in the mouth of all these your prophets; and Yahweh has
spoken evil concerning you."

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came
near, and struck Micaiah on the cheek, and said, "Which way did the
Spirit of Yahweh go from me to speak to you?"

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Micaiah said, "Behold, you will see on
that day, when you go into an inner room to hide yourself."

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> The king of Israel said, "Take Micaiah,
and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the
king's son.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Say, 'Thus says the king, "Put this
fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with
water of affliction, until I come in peace."'"

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Micaiah said, "If you return at all in
peace, Yahweh has not spoken by me." He said, "Listen, all you people!"

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat
the king of Judah went up to Ramoth Gilead.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat,
"I will disguise myself, and go into the battle; but you put on your
robes." The king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Now the king of Syria had commanded the
thirty-two captains of his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small
nor great, except only with the king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> It happened, when the captains of the
chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, "Surely that is the king of
Israel!" and they turned aside to fight against him. Jehoshaphat cried
out.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> It happened, when the captains of the
chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back
from pursuing him.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> A certain man drew his bow at random,
and struck the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. Therefore
he said to the driver of his chariot, "Turn your hand, and carry me out
of the battle; for I am severely wounded."

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> The battle increased that day. The king
was propped up in his chariot facing the Syrians, and died at evening.
The blood ran out of the wound into the bottom of the chariot.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> A cry went throughout the army about
the going down of the sun, saying, "Every man to his city, and every man
to his country!"

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> So the king died, and was brought to
Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> They washed the chariot by the pool of
Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blood where the prostitutes washed
themselves; according to the word of Yahweh which he spoke.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and
all that he did, and the ivory house which he built, and all the cities
that he built, aren't they written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel?

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> So Ahab slept with his fathers; and
Ahaziah his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to
reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old
when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem.
His mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> He walked in all the way of Asa his
father; He didn't turn aside from it, doing that which was right in the
eyes of Yahweh: however the high places were not taken away; the people
still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of
Israel.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> Now the rest of the acts of
Jehoshaphat, and his might that he showed, and how he warred, aren't
they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> The remnant of the sodomites, that
remained in the days of his father Asa, he put away out of the land.

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> There was no king in Edom: a deputy was
king.

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to
go to Ophir for gold: but they didn't go; for the ships were broken at
Ezion Geber.

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> Then Ahaziah the son of Ahab said to
Jehoshaphat, "Let my servants go with your servants in the ships." But
Jehoshaphat would not.

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and
was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father; Jehoram his
son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign
over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of
Judah, and he reigned two years over Israel.

<span id="an_22:52">22:52</span> He did that which was evil in the sight
of Yahweh, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his
mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, in which he made
Israel to sin.

<span id="an_22:53">22:53</span> He served Baal, and worshiped him, and
provoked to anger Yahweh, the God of Israel, according to all that his
father had done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings](kg2)
