[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jer)  [Next](eze.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Lamentations

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> How the city sits solitary, that was full
of people! She has become as a widow, who was great among the nations!
She who was a princess among the provinces is become tributary!

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> She weeps bitterly in the night, and her
tears are on her cheeks; among all her lovers she has none to comfort
her: All her friends have dealt treacherously with her; they are become
her enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Judah is gone into captivity because of
affliction, and because of great servitude; she dwells among the
nations, she finds no rest: all her persecutors overtook her within the
straits.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> The ways of Zion do mourn, because none
come to the solemn assembly; all her gates are desolate, her priests do
sigh: her virgins are afflicted, and she herself is in bitterness.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Her adversaries are become the head, her
enemies prosper; for Yahweh has afflicted her for the multitude of her
transgressions: her young children are gone into captivity before the
adversary.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From the daughter of Zion all her majesty
is departed: her princes are become like harts that find no pasture,
they are gone without strength before the pursuer.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Jerusalem remembers in the days of her
affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that were from
the days of old: when her people fell into the hand of the adversary,
and none did help her, The adversaries saw her, they did mock at her
desolations.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Jerusalem has grievously sinned; therefore
she is become as an unclean thing; all who honored her despise her,
because they have seen her nakedness: yes, she sighs, and turns
backward.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Her filthiness was in her skirts; she
didn't remember her latter end; therefore is she come down wonderfully;
she has no comforter: see, Yahweh, my affliction; for the enemy has
magnified himself.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> The adversary has spread out his hand on
all her pleasant things: for she has seen that the nations are entered
into her sanctuary, concerning whom you commanded that they should not
enter into your assembly.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> All her people sigh, they seek bread;
they have given their pleasant things for food to refresh the soul:
look, Yahweh, and see; for I am become abject.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Is it nothing to you, all you who pass
by? Look, and see if there be any sorrow like my sorrow, which is
brought on me, With which Yahweh has afflicted \[me\] in the day of his
fierce anger.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> From on high has he sent fire into my
bones, and it prevails against them; He has spread a net for my feet, he
has turned me back: He has made me desolate and faint all the day.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The yoke of my transgressions is bound by
his hand; They are knit together, they are come up on my neck; he has
made my strength to fail: The Lord has delivered me into their hands,
against whom I am not able to stand.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> The Lord has set at nothing all my mighty
men in the midst of me; He has called a solemn assembly against me to
crush my young men: The Lord has trodden as in a winepress the virgin
daughter of Judah.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For these things I weep; my eye, my eye
runs down with water; Because the comforter who should refresh my soul
is far from me: My children are desolate, because the enemy has
prevailed.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Zion spreads forth her hands; there is
none to comfort her; Yahweh has commanded concerning Jacob, that those
who are around him should be his adversaries: Jerusalem is among them as
an unclean thing.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Yahweh is righteous; for I have rebelled
against his commandment: Please hear all you peoples, and see my sorrow:
My virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> I called for my lovers, \[but\] they
deceived me: My priests and my elders gave up the spirit in the city,
While they sought them food to refresh their souls.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> See, Yahweh; for I am in distress; my
heart is troubled; My heart is turned within me; for I have grievously
rebelled: Abroad the sword bereaves, at home there is as death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> They have heard that I sigh; there is
none to comfort me; All my enemies have heard of my trouble; they are
glad that you have done it: You will bring the day that you have
proclaimed, and they shall be like me.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Let all their wickedness come before you;
Do to them, as you have done to me for all my transgressions: For my
sighs are many, and my heart is faint.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> How has the Lord covered the daughter of
Zion with a cloud in his anger! He has cast down from heaven to the
earth the beauty of Israel, And hasn't remembered his footstool in the
day of his anger.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The Lord has swallowed up all the
habitations of Jacob, and has not pitied: He has thrown down in his
wrath the strongholds of the daughter of Judah; He has brought them down
to the ground; he has profaned the kingdom and its princes.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> He has cut off in fierce anger all the horn
of Israel; He has drawn back his right hand from before the enemy: He
has burned up Jacob like a flaming fire, which devours all around.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He has bent his bow like an enemy, he has
stood with his right hand as an adversary, Has killed all that were
pleasant to the eye: In the tent of the daughter of Zion he has poured
out his wrath like fire.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> The Lord is become as an enemy, he has
swallowed up Israel; He has swallowed up all her palaces, he has
destroyed his strongholds; He has multiplied in the daughter of Judah
mourning and lamentation.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> He has violently taken away his tabernacle,
as if it were of a garden; he has destroyed his place of assembly:
Yahweh has caused solemn assembly and Sabbath to be forgotten in Zion,
Has despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The Lord has cast off his altar, he has
abhorred his sanctuary; He has given up into the hand of the enemy the
walls of her palaces: They have made a noise in the house of Yahweh, as
in the day of a solemn assembly.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Yahweh has purposed to destroy the wall of
the daughter of Zion; He has stretched out the line, he has not
withdrawn his hand from destroying; He has made the rampart and wall to
lament; they languish together.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Her gates are sunk into the ground; he has
destroyed and broken her bars: Her king and her princes are among the
nations where the law is not; Yes, her prophets find no vision from
Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> The elders of the daughter of Zion sit on
the ground, they keep silence; They have cast up dust on their heads;
they have clothed themselves with sackcloth: The virgins of Jerusalem
hang down their heads to the ground.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> My eyes do fail with tears, my heart is
troubled; My liver is poured on the earth, because of the destruction of
the daughter of my people, Because the young children and the infants
swoon in the streets of the city.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> They tell their mothers, Where is grain
and wine? When they swoon as the wounded in the streets of the city,
When their soul is poured out into their mothers' bosom.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> What shall I testify to you? what shall I
liken to you, daughter of Jerusalem? What shall I compare to you, that I
may comfort you, virgin daughter of Zion? For your breach is great like
the sea: who can heal you?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Your prophets have seen for you false and
foolish visions; They have not uncovered your iniquity, to bring back
your captivity, but have seen for you false oracles and causes of
banishment.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> All that pass by clap their hands at you.
They hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, \[saying\],
Is this the city that men called The perfection of beauty, The joy of
the whole earth?

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> All your enemies have opened their mouth
wide against you; They hiss and gnash the teeth; they say, We have
swallowed her up; Certainly this is the day that we looked for; we have
found, we have seen it.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Yahweh has done that which he purposed;
he has fulfilled his word that he commanded in the days of old; He has
thrown down, and has not pitied: He has caused the enemy to rejoice over
you; he has exalted the horn of your adversaries.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Their heart cried to the Lord: wall of
the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night;
Give yourself no respite; don't let the apple of your eye cease.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Arise, cry out in the night, at the
beginning of the watches; Pour out your heart like water before the face
of the Lord: Lift up your hands toward him for the life of your young
children, that faint for hunger at the head of every street.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Look, Yahweh, and see to whom you have
done thus! Shall the women eat their fruit, the children that are
dandled in the hands? Shall the priest and the prophet be killed in the
sanctuary of the Lord?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> The youth and the old man lie on the
ground in the streets; My virgins and my young men are fallen by the
sword: You have killed them in the day of your anger; you have
slaughtered, \[and\] not pitied.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> You have called, as in the day of a
solemn assembly, my terrors on every side; There was none that escaped
or remained in the day of Yahweh's anger: Those that I have dandled and
brought up has my enemy consumed.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> I am the man that has seen affliction by
the rod of his wrath.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> He has led me and caused me to walk in
darkness, and not in light.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Surely against me he turns his hand again
and again all the day.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> My flesh and my skin has he made old; he
has broken my bones.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He has built against me, and surrounded me
with gall and travail.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He has made me to dwell in dark places, as
those that have been long dead.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> He has walled me about, that I can't go
forth; he has made my chain heavy.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Yes, when I cry, and call for help, he
shuts out my prayer.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> He has walled up my ways with cut stone; he
has made my paths crooked.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> He is to me as a bear lying in wait, as a
lion in secret places.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> He has turned aside my ways, and pulled
me in pieces; he has made me desolate.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark
for the arrow.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> He has caused the shafts of his quiver to
enter into my kidneys.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I am become a derision to all my people,
and their song all the day.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> He has filled me with bitterness, he has
sated me with wormwood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> He has also broken my teeth with gravel
stones; he has covered me with ashes.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> You have removed my soul far off from
peace; I forgot prosperity.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I said, My strength is perished, and my
expectation from Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Remember my affliction and my misery, the
wormwood and the gall.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> My soul still remembers them, and is
bowed down within me.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> This I recall to my mind; therefore have
I hope.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> \[It is of\] Yahweh's loving kindnesses
that we are not consumed, because his compassion doesn't fail.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> They are new every morning; great is your
faithfulness.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Yahweh is my portion, says my soul;
therefore will I hope in him.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Yahweh is good to those who wait for him,
to the soul that seeks him.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> It is good that a man should hope and
quietly wait for the salvation of Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> It is good for a man that he bear the
yoke in his youth.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Let him sit alone and keep silence,
because he has laid it on him.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Let him put his mouth in the dust, if so
be there may be hope.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Let him give his cheek to him who strikes
him; let him be filled full with reproach.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> For the Lord will not cast off forever.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For though he cause grief, yet he will
have compassion according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> For he does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of men.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> To crush under foot all the prisoners of
the earth,

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> To turn aside the right of a man before
the face of the Most High,

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord
doesn't approve.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> Who is he who says, and it comes to pass,
when the Lord doesn't command it?

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> Doesn't evil and good come out of the
mouth of the Most High?

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> Why does a living man complain, a man for
the punishment of his sins?

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> Let us lift up our heart with our hands
to God in the heavens.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> We have transgressed and have rebelled;
you have not pardoned.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> You have covered with anger and pursued
us; you have killed, you have not pitied.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> You have covered yourself with a cloud,
so that no prayer can pass through.

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> You have made us an off-scouring and
refuse in the midst of the peoples.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> All our enemies have opened their mouth
wide against us.

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> Fear and the pit are come on us,
devastation and destruction.

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> My eye runs down with streams of water,
for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> My eye pours down, and doesn't cease,
without any intermission,

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> Until Yahweh look down, and see from
heaven.

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> My eye affects my soul, because of all
the daughters of my city.

<span id="an_3:52">3:52</span> They have chased me relentlessly like a
bird, those who are my enemies without cause.

<span id="an_3:53">3:53</span> They have cut off my life in the dungeon,
and have cast a stone on me.

<span id="an_3:54">3:54</span> Waters flowed over my head; I said, I am
cut off.

<span id="an_3:55">3:55</span> I called on your name, Yahweh, out of the
lowest dungeon.

<span id="an_3:56">3:56</span> You heard my voice; don't hide your ear
at my breathing, at my cry.

<span id="an_3:57">3:57</span> You drew near in the day that I called on
you; you said, Don't be afraid.

<span id="an_3:58">3:58</span> Lord, you have pleaded the causes of my
soul; you have redeemed my life.

<span id="an_3:59">3:59</span> Yahweh, you have seen my wrong. Judge my
cause.

<span id="an_3:60">3:60</span> You have seen all their vengeance and all
their devices against me.

<span id="an_3:61">3:61</span> You have heard their reproach, Yahweh,
and all their devices against me,

<span id="an_3:62">3:62</span> The lips of those that rose up against
me, and their device against me all the day.

<span id="an_3:63">3:63</span> You see their sitting down, and their
rising up; I am their song.

<span id="an_3:64">3:64</span> You will render to them a recompense,
Yahweh, according to the work of their hands.

<span id="an_3:65">3:65</span> You will give them hardness of heart,
your curse to them.

<span id="an_3:66">3:66</span> You will pursue them in anger, and
destroy them from under the heavens of Yahweh.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> How is the gold become dim! \[how\] is the
most pure gold changed! The stones of the sanctuary are poured out at
the head of every street.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The precious sons of Zion, comparable to
fine gold, How are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the
hands of the potter!

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Even the jackals draw out the breast, they
nurse their young ones: The daughter of my people has become cruel, like
the ostriches in the wilderness.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> The tongue of the nursing child clings to
the roof of his mouth for thirst: The young children ask bread, and no
man breaks it to them.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Those who did feed delicately are desolate
in the streets: Those who were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For the iniquity of the daughter of my
people is greater than the sin of Sodom, That was overthrown as in a
moment, and no hands were laid on her.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Her nobles were purer than snow, they were
whiter than milk; They were more ruddy in body than rubies, their
polishing was as of sapphire.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Their appearance is blacker than a coal;
they are not known in the streets: Their skin clings to their bones; it
is withered, it is become like a stick.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Those who are killed with the sword are
better than those who are killed with hunger; For these pine away,
stricken through, for want of the fruits of the field.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The hands of the pitiful women have
boiled their own children; They were their food in the destruction of
the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Yahweh has accomplished his wrath, he has
poured out his fierce anger; He has kindled a fire in Zion, which has
devoured its foundations.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> The kings of the earth didn't believe,
neither all the inhabitants of the world, That the adversary and the
enemy would enter into the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> \[It is\] because of the sins of her
prophets, \[and\] the iniquities of her priests, That have shed the
blood of the just in the midst of her.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> They wander as blind men in the streets,
they are polluted with blood, So that men can't touch their garments.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Depart! they cried to them, Unclean!
depart, depart, don't touch! When they fled away and wandered, men said
among the nations, They shall no more live \[here\].

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The anger of Yahweh has scattered them;
he will no more regard them: They didn't respect the persons of the
priests, they didn't favor the elders.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Our eyes do yet fail \[in looking\] for
our vain help: In our watching we have watched for a nation that could
not save.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> They hunt our steps, so that we can't go
in our streets: Our end is near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is
come.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles
of the sky: They chased us on the mountains, they laid wait for us in
the wilderness.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> The breath of our nostrils, the anointed
of Yahweh, was taken in their pits; Of whom we said, Under his shadow we
shall live among the nations.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Rejoice and be glad, daughter of Edom,
that dwell in the land of Uz: The cup shall pass through to you also;
you shall be drunken, and shall make yourself naked.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The punishment of your iniquity is
accomplished, daughter of Zion; he will no more carry you away into
captivity: He will visit your iniquity, daughter of Edom; he will
uncover your sins.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Remember, Yahweh, what has come on us:
Look, and see our reproach.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Our inheritance is turned to strangers, Our
houses to aliens.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> We are orphans and fatherless; Our mothers
are as widows.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> We have drunken our water for money; Our
wood is sold to us.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Our pursuers are on our necks: We are
weary, and have no rest.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> We have given the hand to the Egyptians, To
the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Our fathers sinned, and are no more; We
have borne their iniquities.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Servants rule over us: There is none to
deliver us out of their hand.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> We get our bread at the peril of our lives,
Because of the sword of the wilderness.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Our skin is black like an oven, Because
of the burning heat of famine.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> They ravished the women in Zion, The
virgins in the cities of Judah.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Princes were hanged up by their hand: The
faces of elders were not honored.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> The young men bare the mill; The children
stumbled under the wood.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> The elders have ceased from the gate, The
young men from their music.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The joy of our heart is ceased; Our dance
is turned into mourning.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> The crown is fallen from our head: Woe to
us! for we have sinned.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For this our heart is faint; For these
things our eyes are dim;

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For the mountain of Zion, which is
desolate: The foxes walk on it.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> You, Yahweh, remain forever; Your throne
is from generation to generation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Why do you forget us forever, \[And\]
forsake us so long time?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Turn us to yourself, Yahweh, and we shall
be turned. Renew our days as of old.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But you have utterly rejected us; You are
very angry against us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel](eze.md)
