[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zac)  [Next](mat.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Malachi

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> An oracle: the word of Yahweh to Israel by
Malachi.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> "I have loved you," says Yahweh. Yet you
say, "How have you loved us?" "Wasn't Esau Jacob's brother?" says
Yahweh, "Yet I loved Jacob;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> but Esau I hated, and made his mountains a
desolation, and gave his heritage to the jackals of the wilderness."

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Whereas Edom says, "We are beaten down, but
we will return and build the waste places;" thus says Yahweh of Armies,
"They shall build, but I will throw down; and men will call them 'The
Wicked Land,' even the people against whom Yahweh shows wrath forever."

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Your eyes will see, and you will say,
"Yahweh is great--even beyond the border of Israel!"

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> "A son honors his father, and a servant his
master. If I am a father, then where is my honor? And if I am a master,
where is the respect due me? Says Yahweh of Armies to you, priests, who
despise my name. You say, 'How have we despised your name?'

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> You offer polluted bread on my altar. You
say, 'How have we polluted you?' In that you say, 'Yahweh's table
contemptible.'

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> When you offer the blind for sacrifice,
isn't that evil? And when you offer the lame and sick, isn't that evil?
Present it now to your governor! Will he be pleased with you? Or will he
accept your person?" says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> "Now, please entreat the favor of God, that
he may be gracious to us. With this, will he accept any of you?" says
Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> "Oh that there were one among you who
would shut the doors, that you might not kindle fire on my altar in
vain! I have no pleasure in you," says Yahweh of Armies, "neither will I
accept an offering at your hand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For from the rising of the sun even to
the going down of the same, my name is great among the nations, and in
every place incense will be offered to my name, and a pure offering: for
my name is great among the nations," says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> "But you profane it, in that you say,
'Yahweh's table is polluted, and its fruit, even its food, is
contemptible.'

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> You say also, 'Behold, what a weariness
it is!' and you have sniffed at it," says Yahweh of Armies; "and you
have brought that which was taken by violence, the lame, and the sick;
thus you bring the offering. Should I accept this at your hand?" says
Yahweh.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> "But the deceiver is cursed, who has in
his flock a male, and vows, and sacrifices to the Lord a blemished
thing; for I am a great King," says Yahweh of Armies, "and my name is
awesome among the nations."

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> "Now, you priests, this commandment is for
you.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> If you will not listen, and if you will not
lay it to heart, to give glory to my name," says Yahweh of Armies, "then
will I send the curse on you, and I will curse your blessings. Indeed, I
have cursed them already, because you do not lay it to heart.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Behold, I will rebuke your seed, and will
spread dung on your faces, even the dung of your feasts; and you will be
taken away with it.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> You will know that I have sent this
commandment to you, that my covenant may be with Levi," says Yahweh of
Armies.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> "My covenant was with him of life and
peace; and I gave them to him that he might be reverent toward me; and
he was reverent toward me, and stood in awe of my name.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The law of truth was in his mouth, and
unrighteousness was not found in his lips. He walked with me in peace
and uprightness, and turned many away from iniquity.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the priest's lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for he is the
messenger of Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But you have turned aside out of the way.
You have caused many to stumble in the law. You have corrupted the
covenant of Levi," says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> "Therefore I have also made you
contemptible and base before all the people, according to the way you
have not kept my ways, but have had respect for persons in the law.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Don't we all have one father? Hasn't one
God created us? Why do we deal treacherously every man against his
brother, profaning the covenant of our fathers?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Judah has dealt treacherously, and an
abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah has
profaned the holiness of Yahweh which he loves, and has married the
daughter of a foreign god.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Yahweh will cut off, to the man who does
this, him who wakes and him who answers, out of the tents of Jacob, and
him who offers an offering to Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> This again you do: you cover the altar of
Yahweh with tears, with weeping, and with sighing, because he doesn't
regard the offering any more, neither receives it with good will at your
hand.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Yet you say, 'Why?' Because Yahweh has
been witness between you and the wife of your youth, against whom you
have dealt treacherously, though she is your companion, and the wife of
your covenant.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Did he not make you one, although he had
the residue of the Spirit? Why one? He sought a godly seed. Therefore
take heed to your spirit, and let no one deal treacherously against the
wife of his youth.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For I hate divorce," says Yahweh, the God
of Israel, "and him who covers his garment with violence!" says Yahweh
of Armies. "Therefore take heed to your spirit, that you don't deal
treacherously.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> You have wearied Yahweh with your words.
Yet you say, 'How have we wearied him?' In that you say, 'Everyone who
does evil is good in the sight of Yahweh, and he delights in them;' or
'Where is the God of justice?'

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> "Behold, I send my messenger, and he will
prepare the way before me; and the Lord, whom you seek, will suddenly
come to his temple; and the messenger of the covenant, whom you desire,
behold, he comes!" says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> "But who can endure the day of his coming?
And who will stand when he appears? For he is like a refiner's fire, and
like launderer's soap;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and he will sit as a refiner and purifier
of silver, and he will purify the sons of Levi, and refine them as gold
and silver; and they shall offer to Yahweh offerings in righteousness.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem
will be pleasant to Yahweh, as in the days of old, and as in ancient
years.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> I will come near to you to judgment; and I
will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the
adulterers, and against the perjurers, and against those who oppress the
hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and who deprive
the foreigner of justice, and don't fear me," says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> "For I, Yahweh, don't change; therefore
you, sons of Jacob, are not consumed.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> From the days of your fathers you have
turned aside from my ordinances, and have not kept them. Return to me,
and I will return to you," says Yahweh of Armies. "But you say, 'How
shall we return?'

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Will a man rob God? Yet you rob me! But you
say, 'How have we robbed you?' In tithes and offerings.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> You are cursed with the curse; for you rob
me, even this whole nation.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Bring the whole tithe into the
storehouse, that there may be food in my house, and test me now in
this," says Yahweh of Armies, "if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough
for.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> I will rebuke the devourer for your
sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shall
your vine cast its fruit before its time in the field," says Yahweh of
Armies.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> "All nations shall call you blessed, for
you will be a delightful land," says Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> "Your words have been stout against me,"
says Yahweh. "Yet you say, 'What have we spoken against you?'

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> You have said, 'It is vain to serve God;'
and 'What profit is it that we have followed his instructions, and that
we have walked mournfully before Yahweh of Armies?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Now we call the proud happy; yes, those
who work wickedness are built up; yes, they tempt God, and escape.'

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then those who feared Yahweh spoke one
with another; and Yahweh listened, and heard, and a book of memory was
written before him, for those who feared Yahweh, and who honored his
name.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> They shall be mine," says Yahweh of
Armies, "my own possession in the day that I make, and I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son who serves him.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Then you shall return and discern between
the righteous and the wicked, between him who serves God and him who
doesn't serve him.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> "For, behold, the day comes, it burns as a
furnace; and all the proud, and all who work wickedness, will be
stubble; and the day that comes will burn them up," says Yahweh of
Armies, "that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> But to you who fear my name shall the sun
of righteousness arise with healing in its wings. You will go out, and
leap like calves of the stall.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> You shall tread down the wicked; for they
will be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I make," says
Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> "Remember the law of Moses my servant,
which I commanded to him in Horeb for all Israel, even statutes and
ordinances.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet
before the great and terrible day of Yahweh comes.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> He will turn the hearts of the fathers to
the children, and the hearts of the children to their fathers, lest I
come and strike the earth with a curse."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew](mat.md)
