[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mal)  [Next](mar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Matthew

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ,
the son of David, the son of Abraham.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Abraham became the father of Isaac. Isaac
became the father of Jacob. Jacob became the father of Judah and his
brothers.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah
by Tamar. Perez became the father of Hezron. Hezron became the father of
Ram.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Ram became the father of Amminadab.
Amminadab became the father of Nahshon. Nahshon became the father of
Salmon.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab.
Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth. Obed became the father of Jesse.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Jesse became the father of King David.
David became the father of Solomon by her who had been the wife of
Uriah.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Solomon became the father of Rehoboam.
Rehoboam became the father of Abijah. Abijah became the father of Asa.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat.
Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram. Joram became the father of
Uzziah.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Uzziah became the father of Jotham. Jotham
became the father of Ahaz. Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh.
Manasseh became the father of Amon. Amon became the father of Josiah.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and
his brothers, at the time of the exile to Babylon.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> After the exile to Babylon, Jechoniah
became the father of Shealtiel. Shealtiel became the father of
Zerubbabel.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud.
Abiud became the father of Eliakim. Eliakim became the father of Azor.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Azor became the father of Sadoc. Sadoc
became the father of Achim. Achim became the father of Eliud.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Eliud became the father of Eleazar.
Eleazar became the father of Matthan. Matthan became the father of
Jacob.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Jacob became the father of Joseph, the
husband of Mary, from whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> So all the generations from Abraham to
David are fourteen generations; from David to the exile to Babylon
fourteen generations; and from the carrying away to Babylon to the
Christ, fourteen generations.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now the birth of Jesus Christ was like
this; for after his mother, Mary, was engaged to Joseph, before they
came together, she was found pregnant by the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Joseph, her husband, being a righteous
man, and not willing to make her a public example, intended to put her
away secretly.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But when he thought about these things,
behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying,
"Joseph, son of David, don't be afraid to take to yourself Mary, your
wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> She shall bring forth a son. You shall
call his name Jesus, for it is he who shall save his people from their
sins."

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Now all this has happened, that it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> "Behold, the virgin shall be with child,
and shall bring forth a son. They shall call his name Immanuel;" which
is, being interpreted, "God with us."

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as
the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took his wife to himself;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> and didn't know her sexually until she
had brought forth her firstborn son. He named him Jesus.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of
Judea in the days of King Herod, behold, wise men from the east came to
Jerusalem, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> "Where is he who is born King of the Jews?
For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him."

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> When King Herod heard it, he was troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Gathering together all the chief priests
and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ would be born.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> They said to him, "In Bethlehem of Judea,
for this is written through the prophet,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> 'You Bethlehem, land of Judah, are in no
way least among the princes of Judah: for out of you shall come forth a
governor, who shall shepherd my people, Israel.'"

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then Herod secretly called the wise men,
and learned from them exactly what time the star appeared.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> He sent them to Bethlehem, and said, "Go
and search diligently for the young child. When you have found him,
bring me word, so that I also may come and worship him."

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> They, having heard the king, went their
way; and behold, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them,
until it came and stood over where the young child was.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> When they saw the star, they rejoiced
with exceedingly great joy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> They came into the house and saw the
young child with Mary, his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him.
Opening their treasures, they offered to him gifts: gold, frankincense,
and myrrh.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Being warned in a dream that they
shouldn't return to Herod, they went back to their own country another
way.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Now when they had departed, behold, an
angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, "Arise and take
the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and stay there
until I tell you, for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him."

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> He arose and took the young child and his
mother by night, and departed into Egypt,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> and was there until the death of Herod;
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the
prophet, saying, "Out of Egypt I called my son."

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then Herod, when he saw that he was
mocked by the wise men, was exceedingly angry, and sent out, and killed
all the male children who were in Bethlehem and in all the surrounding
countryside, from two years old and under, according to the exact time
which he had learned from the wise men.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then that which was spoken by Jeremiah
the prophet was fulfilled, saying,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> "A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation,
weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children; she
wouldn't be comforted, because they are no more."

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel
of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> "Arise and take the young child and his
mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who sought the young
child's life are dead."

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> He arose and took the young child and his
mother, and came into the land of Israel.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But when he heard that Archelaus was
reigning over Judea in the place of his father, Herod, he was afraid to
go there. Being warned in a dream, he withdrew into the region of
Galilee,

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> and came and lived in a city called
Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the
prophets: "He will be called a Nazarene."

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> In those days, John the Baptizer came,
preaching in the wilderness of Judea, saying,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> "Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand!"

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah
the prophet, saying, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness, make
ready the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight."

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Now John himself wore clothing made of
camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts
and wild honey.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Then people from Jerusalem, all of Judea,
and all the region around the Jordan went out to him.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> They were baptized by him in the Jordan,
confessing their sins.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But when he saw many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming for his baptism, he said to them, "You offspring of
vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Therefore bring forth fruit worthy of
repentance!

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Don't think to yourselves, 'We have Abraham
for our father,' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to
Abraham from these stones.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> "Even now the axe lies at the root of the
trees. Therefore, every tree that doesn't bring forth good fruit is cut
down, and cast into the fire.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> I indeed baptize you in water for
repentance, but he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I
am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his wheat
into the barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire."

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then Jesus came from Galilee to the
Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But John would have hindered him, saying,
"I need to be baptized by you, and you come to me?"

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But Jesus, answering, said to him, "Allow
it now, for this is the fitting way for us to fulfill all
righteousness." Then he allowed him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Jesus, when he was baptized, went up
directly from the water: and behold, the heavens were opened to him. He
saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming on him.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Behold, a voice out of the heavens said,
"This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased."

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into
the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> When he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, he was hungry afterward.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> The tempter came and said to him, "If you
are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread."

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But he answered, "It is written, 'Man shall
not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God.'"

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then the devil took him into the holy city.
He set him on the pinnacle of the temple,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and said to him, "If you are the Son of
God, throw yourself down, for it is written, 'He will put his angels in
charge of you.' and, 'On their hands they will bear you up, so that you
don't dash your foot against a stone.'"

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Jesus said to him, "Again, it is written,
'You shall not test the Lord, your God.'"

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Again, the devil took him to an exceedingly
high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and their
glory.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> He said to him, "I will give you all of
these things, if you will fall down and worship me."

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then Jesus said to him, "Get behind me,
Satan! For it is written, 'You shall worship the Lord your God, and you
shall serve him only.'"

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Then the devil left him, and behold,
angels came and served him.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now when Jesus heard that John was
delivered up, he withdrew into Galilee.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Leaving Nazareth, he came and lived in
Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> "The land of Zebulun and the land of
Naphtali, toward the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> the people who sat in darkness saw a
great light, to those who sat in the region and shadow of death, to them
light has dawned."

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> From that time, Jesus began to preach,
and to say, "Repent! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two
brothers: Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, casting a
net into the sea; for they were fishermen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> He said to them, "Come after me, and I
will make you fishers for men."

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> They immediately left their nets and
followed him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Going on from there, he saw two other
brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat
with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. He called them.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> They immediately left the boat and their
father, and followed him.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching
in their synagogues, preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing
every disease and every sickness among the people.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> The report about him went out into all
Syria. They brought to him all who were sick, afflicted with various
diseases and torments, possessed with demons, epileptics, and
paralytics; and he healed them.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Great multitudes from Galilee, Decapolis,
Jerusalem, Judea and from beyond the Jordan followed him.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Seeing the multitudes, he went up onto the
mountain. When he had sat down, his disciples came to him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> He opened his mouth and taught them,
saying,

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs
is the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall
be comforted.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Blessed are the gentle, for they shall
inherit the earth.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Blessed are those who hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be filled.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall
be called children of God.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Blessed are those who have been
persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> "Blessed are you when people reproach
you, persecute you, and say all kinds of evil against you falsely, for
my sake.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for
great is your reward in heaven. For that is how they persecuted the
prophets who were before you.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> "You are the salt of the earth, but if
the salt has lost its flavor, with what will it be salted? It is then
good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> You are the light of the world. A city
located on a hill can't be hidden.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Neither do you light a lamp, and put it
under a measuring basket, but on a stand; and it shines to all who are
in the house.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Even so, let your light shine before men;
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in
heaven.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> "Don't think that I came to destroy the
law or the prophets. I didn't come to destroy, but to fulfill.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For most certainly, I tell you, until
heaven and earth pass away, not even one smallest letter or one tiny pen
stroke shall in any way pass away from the law, until all things are
accomplished.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Whoever, therefore, shall break one of
these least commandments, and teach others to do so, shall be called
least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them
shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For I tell you that unless your
righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, there is no way
you will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> "You have heard that it was said to the
ancient ones, 'You shall not murder;' and 'Whoever shall murder shall be
in danger of the judgment.'

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But I tell you, that everyone who is
angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the
judgment; and whoever shall say to his brother, 'Raca!' shall be in
danger of the council; and whoever shall say, 'You fool!' shall be in
danger of the fire of Gehenna.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> "If therefore you are offering your gift
at the altar, and there remember that your brother has anything against
you,

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> leave your gift there before the altar,
and go your way. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and
offer your gift.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Agree with your adversary quickly, while
you are with him in the way; lest perhaps the prosecutor deliver you to
the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast
into prison.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Most certainly I tell you, you shall by
no means get out of there, until you have paid the last penny.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> "You have heard that it was said, 'You
shall not commit adultery;'

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> but I tell you that everyone who gazes at
a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his
heart.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> If your right eye causes you to stumble,
pluck it out and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for
you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to
be cast into Gehenna.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> If your right hand causes you to stumble,
cut it off, and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for
you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to
be cast into Gehenna.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> "It was also said, 'Whoever shall put
away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorce,'

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> but I tell you that whoever puts away his
wife, except for the cause of sexual immorality, makes her an
adulteress; and whoever marries her when she is put away commits
adultery.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> "Again you have heard that it was said to
them of old time, 'You shall not make false vows, but shall perform to
the Lord your vows,'

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> but I tell you, don't swear at all:
neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God;

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> nor by the earth, for it is the footstool
of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> Neither shall you swear by your head, for
you can't make one hair white or black.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> But let your 'Yes' be 'Yes' and your 'No'
be 'No.' Whatever is more than these is of the evil one.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> "You have heard that it was said, 'An eye
for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.'

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But I tell you, don't resist him who is
evil; but whoever strikes you on your right cheek, turn to him the other
also.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> If anyone sues you to take away your
coat, let him have your cloak also.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> Whoever compels you to go one mile, go
with him two.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> Give to him who asks you, and don't turn
away him who desires to borrow from you.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> "You have heard that it was said, 'You
shall love your neighbor, and hate your enemy.'

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> But I tell you, love your enemies, bless
those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those
who mistreat you and persecute you,

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> that you may be children of your Father
who is in heaven. For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good,
and sends rain on the just and the unjust.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> For if you love those who love you, what
reward do you have? Don't even the tax collectors do the same?

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> If you only greet your friends, what more
do you do than others? Don't even the tax collectors do the same?

<span id="an_5:48">5:48</span> Therefore you shall be perfect, just as
your Father in heaven is perfect.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> "Be careful that you don't do your
charitable giving before men, to be seen by them, or else you have no
reward from your Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Therefore when you do merciful deeds, don't
sound a trumpet before yourself, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues
and in the streets, that they may get glory from men. Most certainly I
tell you, they have received their reward.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> But when you do merciful deeds, don't let
your left hand know what your right hand does,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> so that your merciful deeds may be in
secret, then your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> "When you pray, you shall not be as the
hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in the
corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Most certainly, I
tell you, they have received their reward.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But you, when you pray, enter into your
inner room, and having shut your door, pray to your Father who is in
secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> In praying, don't use vain repetitions, as
the Gentiles do; for they think that they will be heard for their much
speaking.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Therefore don't be like them, for your
Father knows what things you need, before you ask him.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Pray like this: 'Our Father in heaven, may
your name be kept holy.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Let your Kingdom come. Let your will be
done, as in heaven, so on earth.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Give us today our daily bread.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive
our debtors.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Bring us not into temptation, but deliver
us from the evil one. For yours is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory
forever. Amen.'

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> "For if you forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> But if you don't forgive men their
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> "Moreover when you fast, don't be like
the hypocrites, with sad faces. For they disfigure their faces, that
they may be seen by men to be fasting. Most certainly I tell you, they
have received their reward.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But you, when you fast, anoint your head,
and wash your face;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> so that you are not seen by men to be
fasting, but by your Father who is in secret, and your Father, who sees
in secret, will reward you.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> "Don't lay up treasures for yourselves on
the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through
and steal;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> but lay up for yourselves treasures in
heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves don't
break through and steal;

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> for where your treasure is, there your
heart will be also.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> "The lamp of the body is the eye. If
therefore your eye is sound, your whole body will be full of light.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> But if your eye is evil, your whole body
will be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in you is
darkness, how great is the darkness!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> "No one can serve two masters, for either
he will hate the one and love the other; or else he will be devoted to
one and despise the other. You can't serve both God and Mammon.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Therefore, I tell you, don't be anxious
for your life: what you will eat, or what you will drink; nor yet for
your body, what you will wear. Isn't life more than food, and the body
more than clothing?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> See the birds of the sky, that they don't
sow, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns. Your heavenly Father
feeds them. Aren't you of much more value than they?

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> "Which of you, by being anxious, can add
one moment to his lifespan?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Why are you anxious about clothing?
Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They don't toil,
neither do they spin,

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> yet I tell you that even Solomon in all
his glory was not dressed like one of these.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> But if God so clothes the grass of the
field, which today exists, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, won't
he much more clothe you, you of little faith?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> "Therefore don't be anxious, saying,
'What will we eat?', 'What will we drink?' or, 'With what will we be
clothed?'

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> For the Gentiles seek after all these
things; for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> But seek first God's Kingdom, and his
righteousness; and all these things will be given to you as well.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Therefore don't be anxious for tomorrow,
for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Each day's own evil is
sufficient.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> "Don't judge, so that you won't be judged.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For with whatever judgment you judge, you
will be judged; and with whatever measure you measure, it will be
measured to you.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Why do you see the speck that is in your
brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Or how will you tell your brother, 'Let me
remove the speck from your eye;' and behold, the beam is in your own
eye?

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> You hypocrite! First remove the beam out of
your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck out of
your brother's eye.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> "Don't give that which is holy to the dogs,
neither throw your pearls before the pigs, lest perhaps they trample
them under their feet, and turn and tear you to pieces.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> "Ask, and it will be given you. Seek, and
you will find. Knock, and it will be opened for you.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For everyone who asks receives. He who
seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Or who is there among you, who, if his son
asks him for bread, will give him a stone?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Or if he asks for a fish, who will give
him a serpent?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> If you then, being evil, know how to give
good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in
heaven give good things to those who ask him!

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Therefore whatever you desire for men to
do to you, you shall also do to them; for this is the law and the
prophets.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> "Enter in by the narrow gate; for wide is
the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many are
those who enter in by it.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> How narrow is the gate, and restricted is
the way that leads to life! Few are those who find it.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> "Beware of false prophets, who come to
you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> By their fruits you will know them. Do
you gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Even so, every good tree produces good
fruit; but the corrupt tree produces evil fruit.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> A good tree can't produce evil fruit,
neither can a corrupt tree produce good fruit.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Every tree that doesn't grow good fruit
is cut down, and thrown into the fire.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Therefore, by their fruits you will know
them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Not everyone who says to me, 'Lord,
Lord,' will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he who does the will
of my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Many will tell me in that day, 'Lord,
Lord, didn't we prophesy in your name, in your name cast out demons, and
in your name do many mighty works?'

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Then I will tell them, 'I never knew you.
Depart from me, you who work iniquity.'

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> "Everyone therefore who hears these words
of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man, who built his
house on a rock.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The rain came down, the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it didn't fall, for it was
founded on the rock.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Everyone who hears these words of mine,
and doesn't do them will be like a foolish man, who built his house on
the sand.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The rain came down, the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it fell--and great was its
fall."

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> It happened, when Jesus had finished
saying these things, that the multitudes were astonished at his
teaching,

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> for he taught them with authority, and
not like the scribes.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> When he came down from the mountain, great
multitudes followed him.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Behold, a leper came to him and worshiped
him, saying, "Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean."

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Jesus stretched out his hand, and touched
him, saying, "I want to. Be made clean." Immediately his leprosy was
cleansed.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Jesus said to him, "See that you tell
nobody, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that
Moses commanded, as a testimony to them."

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> When he came into Capernaum, a centurion
came to him, asking him,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and saying, "Lord, my servant lies in the
house paralyzed, grievously tormented."

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Jesus said to him, "I will come and heal
him."

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> The centurion answered, "Lord, I'm not
worthy for you to come under my roof. Just say the word, and my servant
will be healed.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For I am also a man under authority, having
under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go,' and he goes; and tell
another, 'Come,' and he comes; and tell my servant, 'Do this,' and he
does it."

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> When Jesus heard it, he marveled, and
said to those who followed, "Most certainly I tell you, I haven't found
so great a faith, not even in Israel.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> I tell you that many will come from the
east and the west, and will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in
the Kingdom of Heaven,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> but the children of the Kingdom will be
thrown out into the outer darkness. There will be weeping and gnashing
of teeth."

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Jesus said to the centurion, "Go your
way. Let it be done for you as you have believed." His servant was
healed in that hour.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> When Jesus came into Peter's house, he
saw his wife's mother lying sick with a fever.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He touched her hand, and the fever left
her. She got up and served him.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> When evening came, they brought to him
many possessed with demons. He cast out the spirits with a word, and
healed all who were sick;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying: "He took our infirmities, and
bore our diseases."

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Now when Jesus saw great multitudes
around him, he gave the order to depart to the other side.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> A scribe came, and said to him, "Teacher,
I will follow you wherever you go."

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Jesus said to him, "The foxes have holes,
and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to
lay his head."

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Another of his disciples said to him,
"Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father."

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> But Jesus said to him, "Follow me, and
leave the dead to bury their own dead."

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> When he got into a boat, his disciples
followed him.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Behold, a violent storm came up on the
sea, so much that the boat was covered with the waves, but he was
asleep.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They came to him, and woke him up,
saying, "Save us, Lord! We are dying!"

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> He said to them, "Why are you fearful, O
you of little faith?" Then he got up, rebuked the wind and the sea, and
there was a great calm.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> The men marveled, saying, "What kind of
man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?"

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> When he came to the other side, into the
country of the Gergesenes, two people possessed by demons met him there,
coming out of the tombs, exceedingly fierce, so that nobody could pass
that way.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> Behold, they cried out, saying, "What do
we have to do with you, Jesus, Son of God? Have you come here to torment
us before the time?"

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Now there was a herd of many pigs feeding
far away from them.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> The demons begged him, saying, "If you
cast us out, permit us to go away into the herd of pigs."

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He said to them, "Go!" They came out, and
went into the herd of pigs: and behold, the whole herd of pigs rushed
down the cliff into the sea, and died in the water.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Those who fed them fled, and went away
into the city, and told everything, including what happened to those who
were possessed with demons.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Behold, all the city came out to meet
Jesus. When they saw him, they begged that he would depart from their
borders.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> He entered into a boat, and crossed over,
and came into his own city.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Behold, they brought to him a man who was
paralyzed, lying on a bed. Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the
paralytic, "Son, cheer up! Your sins are forgiven you."

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Behold, some of the scribes said to
themselves, "This man blasphemes."

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, "Why
do you think evil in your hearts?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For which is easier, to say, 'Your sins are
forgiven;' or to say, 'Get up, and walk?'

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But that you may know that the Son of Man
has authority on earth to forgive sins..." (then he said to the
paralytic), "Get up, and take up your mat, and go up to your house."

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He arose and departed to his house.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> But when the multitudes saw it, they
marveled and glorified God, who had given such authority to men.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> As Jesus passed by from there, he saw a man
called Matthew sitting at the tax collection office. He said to him,
"Follow me." He got up and followed him.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> It happened as he sat in the house,
behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and sat down with Jesus and
his disciples.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> When the Pharisees saw it, they said to
his disciples, "Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and
sinners?"

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> When Jesus heard it, he said to them,
"Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are
sick do.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But you go and learn what this means: 'I
desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' for I came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance."

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Then John's disciples came to him,
saying, "Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples
don't fast?"

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Jesus said to them, "Can the friends of
the bridegroom mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the
days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and
then they will fast.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on
an old garment; for the patch would tear away from the garment, and a
worse hole is made.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Neither do people put new wine into old
wineskins, or else the skins would burst, and the wine be spilled, and
the skins ruined. No, they put new wine into fresh wineskins, and both
are preserved."

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> While he told these things to them,
behold, a ruler came and worshiped him, saying, "My daughter has just
died, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live."

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Jesus got up and followed him, as did his
disciples.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Behold, a woman who had an issue of blood
for twelve years came behind him, and touched the fringe of his garment;

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> for she said within herself, "If I just
touch his garment, I will be made well."

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Jesus, turning around and seeing her,
said, "Daughter, cheer up! Your faith has made you well." And the woman
was made well from that hour.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> When Jesus came into the ruler's house,
and saw the flute players, and the crowd in noisy disorder,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> he said to them, "Make room, because the
girl isn't dead, but sleeping." They were ridiculing him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> But when the crowd was put out, he
entered in, took her by the hand, and the girl arose.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> The report of this went out into all that
land.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> As Jesus passed by from there, two blind
men followed him, calling out and saying, "Have mercy on us, son of
David!"

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> When he had come into the house, the
blind men came to him. Jesus said to them, "Do you believe that I am
able to do this?" They told him, "Yes, Lord."

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Then he touched their eyes, saying,
"According to your faith be it done to you."

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Their eyes were opened. Jesus strictly
commanded them, saying, "See that no one knows about this."

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But they went out and spread abroad his
fame in all that land.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> As they went out, behold, a mute man who
was demon possessed was brought to him.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> When the demon was cast out, the mute man
spoke. The multitudes marveled, saying, "Nothing like this has ever been
seen in Israel!"

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But the Pharisees said, "By the prince of
the demons, he casts out demons."

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> Jesus went about all the cities and the
villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Good News of
the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the
people.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> But when he saw the multitudes, he was
moved with compassion for them, because they were harassed and
scattered, like sheep without a shepherd.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Then he said to his disciples, "The
harvest indeed is plentiful, but the laborers are few.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> Pray therefore that the Lord of the
harvest will send out laborers into his harvest."

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> He called to himself his twelve
disciples, and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them
out, and to heal every disease and every sickness.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Now the names of the twelve apostles are
these. The first, Simon, who is called Peter; Andrew, his brother; James
the son of Zebedee; John, his brother;

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; Matthew the
tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus; Lebbaeus, whose surname was
Thaddaeus;

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Simon the Canaanite; and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed him.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Jesus sent these twelve out, and
commanded them, saying, "Don't go among the Gentiles, and don't enter
into any city of the Samaritans.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Rather, go to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> As you go, preach, saying, 'The Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand!'

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, and
cast out demons. Freely you received, so freely give.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Don't take any gold, nor silver, nor
brass in your money belts.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Take no bag for your journey, neither
two coats, nor shoes, nor staff: for the laborer is worthy of his food.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Into whatever city or village you
enter, find out who in it is worthy; and stay there until you go on.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> As you enter into the household, greet
it.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> If the household is worthy, let your
peace come on it, but if it isn't worthy, let your peace return to you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Whoever doesn't receive you, nor hear
your words, as you go out of that house or that city, shake off the dust
from your feet.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Most certainly I tell you, it will be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment
than for that city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> "Behold, I send you out as sheep in the
midst of wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But beware of men: for they will
deliver you up to councils, and in their synagogues they will scourge
you.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Yes, and you will be brought before
governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the
nations.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But when they deliver you up, don't be
anxious how or what you will say, for it will be given you in that hour
what you will say.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> For it is not you who speak, but the
Spirit of your Father who speaks in you.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> "Brother will deliver up brother to
death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents,
and cause them to be put to death.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> You will be hated by all men for my
name's sake, but he who endures to the end will be saved.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> But when they persecute you in this
city, flee into the next, for most certainly I tell you, you will not
have gone through the cities of Israel, until the Son of Man has come.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> "A disciple is not above his teacher,
nor a servant above his lord.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is enough for the disciple that he
be like his teacher, and the servant like his lord. If they have called
the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more those of his household!

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Therefore don't be afraid of them, for
there is nothing covered that will not be revealed; and hidden that will
not be known.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> What I tell you in the darkness, speak
in the light; and what you hear whispered in the ear, proclaim on the
housetops.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Don't be afraid of those who kill the
body, but are not able to kill the soul. Rather, fear him who is able to
destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> "Aren't two sparrows sold for an
assarion coin? Not one of them falls on the ground apart from your
Father's will,

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> but the very hairs of your head are all
numbered.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Therefore don't be afraid. You are of
more value than many sparrows.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Everyone therefore who confesses me
before men, him I will also confess before my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> But whoever denies me before men, him I
will also deny before my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> "Don't think that I came to send peace
on the earth. I didn't come to send peace, but a sword.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> For I came to set a man at odds against
his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> A man's foes will be those of his own
household.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> He who loves father or mother more than
me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter more than me
isn't worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> He who doesn't take his cross and
follow after me, isn't worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> He who seeks his life will lose it; and
he who loses his life for my sake will find it.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> He who receives you receives me, and he
who receives me receives him who sent me.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> He who receives a prophet in the name
of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward. He who receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous
man's reward.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> Whoever gives one of these little ones
just a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, most
certainly I tell you he will in no way lose his reward."

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> It happened that when Jesus had finished
directing his twelve disciples, he departed from there to teach and
preach in their cities.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now when John heard in the prison the
works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> and said to him, "Are you he who comes,
or should we look for another?"

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Jesus answered them, "Go and tell John
the things which you hear and see:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> the blind receive their sight, the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up,
and the poor have good news preached to them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Blessed is he who finds no occasion for
stumbling in me."

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> As these went their way, Jesus began to
say to the multitudes concerning John, "What did you go out into the
wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But what did you go out to see? A man in
soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in king's
houses.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But why did you go out? To see a prophet?
Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For this is he, of whom it is written,
'Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way
before you.'

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Most certainly I tell you, among those
who are born of women there has not arisen anyone greater than John the
Baptizer; yet he who is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than
he.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> From the days of John the Baptizer
until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take
it by force.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For all the prophets and the law
prophesied until John.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If you are willing to receive it, this
is Elijah, who is to come.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He who has ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> "But to what shall I compare this
generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces, who call to
their companions

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and say, 'We played the flute for you,
and you didn't dance. We mourned for you, and you didn't lament.'

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> For John came neither eating nor
drinking, and they say, 'He has a demon.'

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> The Son of Man came eating and
drinking, and they say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man and a drunkard, a
friend of tax collectors and sinners!' But wisdom is justified by her
children."

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then he began to denounce the cities in
which most of his mighty works had been done, because they didn't
repent.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> "Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you,
Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which
were done in you, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and
ashes.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> But I tell you, it will be more
tolerable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> You, Capernaum, who are exalted to
heaven, you will go down to Hades. For if the mighty works had been done
in Sodom which were done in you, it would have remained until this day.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> But I tell you that it will be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, on the day of judgment, than for you."

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> At that time, Jesus answered, "I thank
you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you hid these things from
the wise and understanding, and revealed them to infants.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Yes, Father, for so it was
well-pleasing in your sight.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> All things have been delivered to me by
my Father. No one knows the Son, except the Father; neither does anyone
know the Father, except the Son, and he to whom the Son desires to
reveal him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> "Come to me, all you who labor and are
heavily burdened, and I will give you rest.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Take my yoke upon you, and learn from
me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart; and you will find rest for your
souls.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light."

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> At that time, Jesus went on the Sabbath
day through the grain fields. His disciples were hungry and began to
pluck heads of grain and to eat.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said
to him, "Behold, your disciples do what is not lawful to do on the
Sabbath."

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But he said to them, "Haven't you read
what David did, when he was hungry, and those who were with him;

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> how he entered into the house of God, and
ate the show bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for
those who were with him, but only for the priests?

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Or have you not read in the law, that on
the Sabbath day, the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and are
guiltless?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But I tell you that one greater than the
temple is here.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But if you had known what this means, 'I
desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' you would not have condemned the
guiltless.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For the Son of Man is Lord of the
Sabbath."

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> He departed there, and went into their
synagogue.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And behold there was a man with a
withered hand. They asked him, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath
day?" that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He said to them, "What man is there
among you, who has one sheep, and if this one falls into a pit on the
Sabbath day, won't he grab on to it, and lift it out?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Of how much more value then is a man
than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day."

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Then he told the man, "Stretch out your
hand." He stretched it out; and it was restored whole, just like the
other.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> But the Pharisees went out, and
conspired against him, how they might destroy him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Jesus, perceiving that, withdrew from
there. Great multitudes followed him; and he healed them all,

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> and commanded them that they should not
make him known:

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> "Behold, my servant whom I have chosen;
my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit on him.
He will proclaim justice to the nations.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He will not strive, nor shout; neither
will anyone hear his voice in the streets.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> He won't break a bruised reed. He won't
quench a smoking flax, until he leads justice to victory.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> In his name, the nations will hope."

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then one possessed by a demon, blind
and mute, was brought to him and he healed him, so that the blind and
mute man both spoke and saw.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> All the multitudes were amazed, and
said, "Can this be the son of David?"

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But when the Pharisees heard it, they
said, "This man does not cast out demons, except by Beelzebul, the
prince of the demons."

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to
them, "Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation,
and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided
against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> If I by Beelzebul cast out demons, by
whom do your children cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But if I by the Spirit of God cast out
demons, then the Kingdom of God has come upon you.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Or how can one enter into the house of
the strong man, and plunder his goods, unless he first bind the strong
man? Then he will plunder his house.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> "He who is not with me is against me,
and he who doesn't gather with me, scatters.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Therefore I tell you, every sin and
blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Spirit
will not be forgiven men.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Whoever speaks a word against the Son
of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy
Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, neither in this age, nor in that
which is to come.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> "Either make the tree good, and its
fruit good, or make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt; for the
tree is known by its fruit.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> You offspring of vipers, how can you,
being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart,
the mouth speaks.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> The good man out of his good treasure
brings out good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings
out evil things.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> I tell you that every idle word that
men speak, they will give account of it in the day of judgment.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> For by your words you will be
justified, and by your words you will be condemned."

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> Then certain of the scribes and
Pharisees answered, "Teacher, we want to see a sign from you."

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> But he answered them, "An evil and
adulterous generation seeks after a sign, but no sign will be given it
but the sign of Jonah the prophet.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> For as Jonah was three days and three
nights in the belly of the whale, so will the Son of Man be three days
and three nights in the heart of the earth.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> The men of Nineveh will stand up in the
judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for they repented at
the preaching of Jonah; and behold, someone greater than Jonah is here.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> The queen of the south will rise up in
the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for she came
from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold,
someone greater than Solomon is here.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> But the unclean spirit, when he is gone
out of the man, passes through waterless places, seeking rest, and
doesn't find it.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Then he says, 'I will return into my
house from which I came out,' and when he has come back, he finds it
empty, swept, and put in order.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> Then he goes, and takes with himself
seven other spirits more evil than he is, and they enter in and dwell
there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first. Even so
will it be also to this evil generation."

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> While he was yet speaking to the
multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, seeking
to speak to him.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> One said to him, "Behold, your mother
and your brothers stand outside, seeking to speak to you."

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> But he answered him who spoke to him,
"Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?"

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> He stretched out his hand towards his
disciples, and said, "Behold, my mother and my brothers!

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> For whoever does the will of my Father
who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother."

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> On that day Jesus went out of the house,
and sat by the seaside.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Great multitudes gathered to him, so that
he entered into a boat, and sat, and all the multitude stood on the
beach.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He spoke to them many things in parables,
saying, "Behold, a farmer went out to sow.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> As he sowed, some seeds fell by the
roadside, and the birds came and devoured them.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Others fell on rocky ground, where they
didn't have much soil, and immediately they sprang up, because they had
no depth of earth.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> When the sun had risen, they were
scorched. Because they had no root, they withered away.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Others fell among thorns. The thorns grew
up and choked them.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Others fell on good soil, and yielded
fruit: some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> He who has ears to hear, let him hear."

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> The disciples came, and said to him,
"Why do you speak to them in parables?"

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> He answered them, "To you it is given
to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but it is not given to
them.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For whoever has, to him will be given,
and he will have abundance, but whoever doesn't have, from him will be
taken away even that which he has.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore I speak to them in parables,
because seeing they don't see, and hearing, they don't hear, neither do
they understand.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> In them the prophecy of Isaiah is
fulfilled, which says, 'By hearing you will hear, and will in no way
understand; Seeing you will see, and will in no way perceive:

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> for this people's heart has grown
callous, their ears are dull of hearing, they have closed their eyes; or
else perhaps they might perceive with their eyes, hear with their ears,
understand with their heart, and should turn again; and I would heal
them.'

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> "But blessed are your eyes, for they
see; and your ears, for they hear.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For most certainly I tell you that many
prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which you see, and
didn't see them; and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear
them.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> "Hear, then, the parable of the farmer.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> When anyone hears the word of the
Kingdom, and doesn't understand it, the evil one comes, and snatches
away that which has been sown in his heart. This is what was sown by the
roadside.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> What was sown on the rocky places, this
is he who hears the word, and immediately with joy receives it;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> yet he has no root in himself, but
endures for a while. When oppression or persecution arises because of
the word, immediately he stumbles.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> What was sown among the thorns, this is
he who hears the word, but the cares of this age and the deceitfulness
of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> What was sown on the good ground, this
is he who hears the word, and understands it, who most certainly bears
fruit, and brings forth, some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and
some thirty."

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> He set another parable before them,
saying, "The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his
field,

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> but while people slept, his enemy came
and sowed darnel weeds also among the wheat, and went away.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> But when the blade sprang up and
brought forth fruit, then the darnel weeds appeared also.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> The servants of the householder came
and said to him, 'Sir, didn't you sow good seed in your field? Where did
this darnel come from?'

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> "He said to them, 'An enemy has done
this.' "The servants asked him, 'Do you want us to go and gather them
up?'

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> "But he said, 'No, lest perhaps while
you gather up the darnel weeds, you root up the wheat with them.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Let both grow together until the
harvest, and in the harvest time I will tell the reapers, "First, gather
up the darnel weeds, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather
the wheat into my barn."'"

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> He set another parable before them,
saying, "The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a
man took, and sowed in his field;

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> which indeed is smaller than all seeds.
But when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becomes a tree,
so that the birds of the air come and lodge in its branches."

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> He spoke another parable to them. "The
Kingdom of Heaven is like yeast, which a woman took, and hid in three
measures of meal, until it was all leavened."

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> Jesus spoke all these things in
parables to the multitudes; and without a parable, he didn't speak to
them,

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken through the prophet, saying, "I will open my mouth in parables; I
will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world."

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Then Jesus sent the multitudes away,
and went into the house. His disciples came to him, saying, "Explain to
us the parable of the darnel weeds of the field."

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> He answered them, "He who sows the good
seed is the Son of Man,

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> the field is the world; and the good
seed, these are the children of the Kingdom; and the darnel weeds are
the children of the evil one.

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> The enemy who sowed them is the devil.
The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> As therefore the darnel weeds are
gathered up and burned with fire; so will it be at the end of this age.

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> The Son of Man will send out his
angels, and they will gather out of his Kingdom all things that cause
stumbling, and those who do iniquity,

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> and will cast them into the furnace of
fire. There will be weeping and the gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Then the righteous will shine forth
like the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear,
let him hear.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> "Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a
treasure hidden in the field, which a man found, and hid. In his joy, he
goes and sells all that he has, and buys that field.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> "Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a
man who is a merchant seeking fine pearls,

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> who having found one pearl of great
price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> "Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a
dragnet, that was cast into the sea, and gathered some fish of every
kind,

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> which, when it was filled, they drew up
on the beach. They sat down, and gathered the good into containers, but
the bad they threw away.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> So will it be in the end of the world.
The angels will come forth, and separate the wicked from among the
righteous,

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> and will cast them into the furnace of
fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth."

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> Jesus said to them, "Have you
understood all these things?" They answered him, "Yes, Lord."

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> He said to them, "Therefore, every
scribe who has been made a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like a
man who is a householder, who brings out of his treasure new and old
things."

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> It happened that when Jesus had
finished these parables, he departed from there.

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> Coming into his own country, he taught
them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished, and said, "Where
did this man get this wisdom, and these mighty works?

<span id="an_13:55">13:55</span> Isn't this the carpenter's son? Isn't
his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James, Joses, Simon, and
Judas?

<span id="an_13:56">13:56</span> Aren't all of his sisters with us?
Where then did this man get all of these things?"

<span id="an_13:57">13:57</span> They were offended by him. But Jesus
said to them, "A prophet is not without honor, except in his own
country, and in his own house."

<span id="an_13:58">13:58</span> He didn't do many mighty works there
because of their unbelief.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard
the report concerning Jesus,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> and said to his servants, "This is John
the Baptizer. He is risen from the dead. That is why these powers work
in him."

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Herod had laid hold of John, and
bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother
Philip's wife.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> For John said to him, "It is not lawful
for you to have her."

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> When he would have put him to death, he
feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But when Herod's birthday came, the
daughter of Herodias danced among them and pleased Herod.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Whereupon he promised with an oath to
give her whatever she should ask.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> She, being prompted by her mother, said,
"Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptizer."

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The king was grieved, but for the sake of
his oaths, and of those who sat at the table with him, he commanded it
to be given,

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> and he sent and beheaded John in the
prison.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> His head was brought on a platter, and
given to the young lady: and she brought it to her mother.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> His disciples came, and took the body,
and buried it; and they went and told Jesus.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Now when Jesus heard this, he withdrew
from there in a boat, to a deserted place apart. When the multitudes
heard it, they followed him on foot from the cities.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Jesus went out, and he saw a great
multitude. He had compassion on them, and healed their sick.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> When evening had come, his disciples
came to him, saying, "This place is deserted, and the hour is already
late. Send the multitudes away, that they may go into the villages, and
buy themselves food."

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But Jesus said to them, "They don't
need to go away. You give them something to eat."

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> They told him, "We only have here five
loaves and two fish."

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> He said, "Bring them here to me."

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> He commanded the multitudes to sit down
on the grass; and he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking
up to heaven, he blessed, broke and gave the loaves to the disciples,
and the disciples gave to the multitudes.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> They all ate, and were filled. They
took up twelve baskets full of that which remained left over from the
broken pieces.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Those who ate were about five thousand
men, besides women and children.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Immediately Jesus made the disciples
get into the boat, and to go ahead of him to the other side, while he
sent the multitudes away.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> After he had sent the multitudes away,
he went up into the mountain by himself to pray. When evening had come,
he was there alone.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But the boat was now in the middle of
the sea, distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> In the fourth watch of the night, Jesus
came to them, walking on the sea.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> When the disciples saw him walking on
the sea, they were troubled, saying, "It's a ghost!" and they cried out
for fear.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> But immediately Jesus spoke to them,
saying "Cheer up! It is I! Don't be afraid."

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Peter answered him and said, "Lord, if
it is you, command me to come to you on the waters."

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> He said, "Come!" Peter stepped down
from the boat, and walked on the waters to come to Jesus.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> But when he saw that the wind was
strong, he was afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying,
"Lord, save me!"

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Immediately Jesus stretched out his
hand, took hold of him, and said to him, "You of little faith, why did
you doubt?"

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> When they got up into the boat, the
wind ceased.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Those who were in the boat came and
worshiped him, saying, "You are truly the Son of God!"

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> When they had crossed over, they came
to the land of Gennesaret.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> When the people of that place
recognized him, they sent into all that surrounding region, and brought
to him all who were sick,

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> and they begged him that they might
just touch the fringe of his garment. As many as touched it were made
whole.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus
from Jerusalem, saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> "Why do your disciples disobey the
tradition of the elders? For they don't wash their hands when they eat
bread."

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> He answered them, "Why do you also
disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition?

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For God commanded, 'Honor your father and
your mother,' and, 'He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be
put to death.'

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But you say, 'Whoever may tell his father
or his mother, "Whatever help you might otherwise have gotten from me is
a gift devoted to God,"

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> he shall not honor his father or mother.'
You have made the commandment of God void because of your tradition.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> You hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy
of you, saying,

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> 'These people draw near to me with their
mouth, and honor me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And in vain do they worship me, teaching
as doctrine rules made by men.'"

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> He summoned the multitude, and said to
them, "Hear, and understand.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> That which enters into the mouth
doesn't defile the man; but that which proceeds out of the mouth, this
defiles the man."

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then the disciples came, and said to
him, "Do you know that the Pharisees were offended, when they heard this
saying?"

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But he answered, "Every plant which my
heavenly Father didn't plant will be uprooted.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Leave them alone. They are blind guides
of the blind. If the blind guide the blind, both will fall into a pit."

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Peter answered him, "Explain the
parable to us."

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> So Jesus said, "Do you also still not
understand?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Don't you understand that whatever goes
into the mouth passes into the belly, and then out of the body?

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> But the things which proceed out of the
mouth come out of the heart, and they defile the man.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For out of the heart come forth evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual sins, thefts, false testimony, and
blasphemies.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> These are the things which defile the
man; but to eat with unwashed hands doesn't defile the man."

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Jesus went out from there, and withdrew
into the region of Tyre and Sidon.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Behold, a Canaanite woman came out from
those borders, and cried, saying, "Have mercy on me, Lord, you son of
David! My daughter is severely demonized!"

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But he answered her not a word. His
disciples came and begged him, saying, "Send her away; for she cries
after us."

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> But he answered, "I wasn't sent to
anyone but the lost sheep of the house of Israel."

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But she came and worshiped him, saying,
"Lord, help me."

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> But he answered, "It is not appropriate
to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs."

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> But she said, "Yes, Lord, but even the
dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their masters' table."

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Then Jesus answered her, "Woman, great
is your faith! Be it done to you even as you desire." And her daughter
was healed from that hour.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Jesus departed there, and came near to
the sea of Galilee; and he went up into the mountain, and sat there.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Great multitudes came to him, having
with them the lame, blind, mute, maimed, and many others, and they put
them down at his feet. He healed them,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> so that the multitude wondered when
they saw the mute speaking, injured whole, lame walking, and blind
seeing--and they glorified the God of Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Jesus summoned his disciples and said,
"I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now
three days and have nothing to eat. I don't want to send them away
fasting, or they might faint on the way."

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> The disciples said to him, "Where
should we get so many loaves in a deserted place as to satisfy so great
a multitude?"

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> Jesus said to them, "How many loaves do
you have?" They said, "Seven, and a few small fish."

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> He commanded the multitude to sit down
on the ground;

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> and he took the seven loaves and the
fish. He gave thanks and broke them, and gave to the disciples, and the
disciples to the multitudes.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> They all ate, and were filled. They
took up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left over.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> Those who ate were four thousand men,
besides women and children.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> Then he sent away the multitudes, got
into the boat, and came into the borders of Magdala.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The Pharisees and Sadducees came, and
testing him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> But he answered them, "When it is
evening, you say, 'It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.'

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> In the morning, 'It will be foul weather
today, for the sky is red and threatening.' Hypocrites! You know how to
discern the appearance of the sky, but you can't discern the signs of
the times!

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> An evil and adulterous generation seeks
after a sign, and there will be no sign given to it, except the sign of
the prophet Jonah." He left them, and departed.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> The disciples came to the other side and
had forgotten to take bread.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Jesus said to them, "Take heed and beware
of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees."

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> They reasoned among themselves, saying,
"We brought no bread."

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Jesus, perceiving it, said, "Why do you
reason among yourselves, you of little faith, 'because you have brought
no bread?'

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Don't you yet perceive, neither remember
the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took up?

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Nor the seven loaves for the four
thousand, and how many baskets you took up?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> How is it that you don't perceive that
I didn't speak to you concerning bread? But beware of the yeast of the
Pharisees and Sadducees."

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Then they understood that he didn't
tell them to beware of the yeast of bread, but of the teaching of the
Pharisees and Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Now when Jesus came into the parts of
Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, "Who do men say that
I, the Son of Man, am?"

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> They said, "Some say John the Baptizer,
some, Elijah, and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets."

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> He said to them, "But who do you say
that I am?"

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Simon Peter answered, "You are the
Christ, the Son of the living God."

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Jesus answered him, "Blessed are you,
Simon Bar Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but
my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> I also tell you that you are Peter, and
on this rock I will build my assembly, and the gates of Hades will not
prevail against it.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> I will give to you the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and whatever you bind on earth will have been bound
in heaven; and whatever you release on earth will have been released in
heaven."

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then he commanded the disciples that
they should tell no one that he was Jesus the Christ.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> From that time, Jesus began to show his
disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the
elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be
raised up.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Peter took him aside, and began to
rebuke him, saying, "Far be it from you, Lord! This will never be done
to you."

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> But he turned, and said to Peter, "Get
behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, for you are not
setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of men."

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Then Jesus said to his disciples, "If
anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> For whoever desires to save his life
will lose it, and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> For what will it profit a man, if he
gains the whole world, and forfeits his life? Or what will a man give in
exchange for his life?

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> For the Son of Man will come in the
glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to everyone
according to his deeds.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Most certainly I tell you, there are
some standing here who will in no way taste of death, until they see the
Son of Man coming in his Kingdom."

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> After six days, Jesus took with him
Peter, James, and John his brother, and brought them up into a high
mountain by themselves.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> He was transfigured before them. His face
shone like the sun, and his garments became as white as the light.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them
talking with him.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> Peter answered, and said to Jesus, "Lord,
it is good for us to be here. If you want, let's make three tents here:
one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah."

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> While he was still speaking, behold, a
bright cloud overshadowed them. Behold, a voice came out of the cloud,
saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to
him."

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> When the disciples heard it, they fell on
their faces, and were very afraid.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Jesus came and touched them and said,
"Get up, and don't be afraid."

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Lifting up their eyes, they saw no one,
except Jesus alone.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> As they were coming down from the
mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, "Don't tell anyone what you saw,
until the Son of Man has risen from the dead."

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> His disciples asked him, saying, "Then
why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?"

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Jesus answered them, "Elijah indeed
comes first, and will restore all things,

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> but I tell you that Elijah has come
already, and they didn't recognize him, but did to him whatever they
wanted to. Even so the Son of Man will also suffer by them."

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Then the disciples understood that he
spoke to them of John the Baptizer.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> When they came to the multitude, a man
came to him, kneeling down to him, saying,

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> "Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is
epileptic, and suffers grievously; for he often falls into the fire, and
often into the water.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> So I brought him to your disciples, and
they could not cure him."

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Jesus answered, "Faithless and perverse
generation! How long will I be with you? How long will I bear with you?
Bring him here to me."

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Jesus rebuked him, the demon went out
of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Then the disciples came to Jesus
privately, and said, "Why weren't we able to cast it out?"

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> He said to them, "Because of your
unbelief. For most certainly I tell you, if you have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, you will tell this mountain, 'Move from here to there,'
and it will move; and nothing will be impossible for you.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> But this kind doesn't go out except by
prayer and fasting."

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> While they were staying in Galilee,
Jesus said to them, "The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the
hands of men,

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> and they will kill him, and the third
day he will be raised up." They were exceedingly sorry.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> When they had come to Capernaum, those
who collected the didrachma coins came to Peter, and said, "Doesn't your
teacher pay the didrachma?"

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> He said, "Yes." When he came into the
house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, "What do you think, Simon? From
whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tribute? From their
children, or from strangers?"

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Peter said to him, "From strangers."
Jesus said to him, "Therefore the children are exempt.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> But, lest we cause them to stumble, go
to the sea, cast a hook, and take up the first fish that comes up. When
you have opened its mouth, you will find a stater coin. Take that, and
give it to them for me and you."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> In that hour the disciples came to Jesus,
saying, "Who then is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?"

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Jesus called a little child to himself,
and set him in the midst of them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> and said, "Most certainly I tell you,
unless you turn, and become as little children, you will in no way enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Whoever therefore humbles himself as this
little child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Whoever receives one such little child in
my name receives me,

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> but whoever causes one of these little
ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him that a
huge millstone should be hung around his neck, and that he should be
sunk in the depths of the sea.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> "Woe to the world because of occasions of
stumbling! For it must be that the occasions come, but woe to that
person through whom the occasion comes!

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> If your hand or your foot causes you to
stumble, cut it off, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter
into life maimed or crippled, rather than having two hands or two feet
to be cast into the eternal fire.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> If your eye causes you to stumble, pluck
it out, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life
with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of
fire.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> See that you don't despise one of these
little ones, for I tell you that in heaven their angels always see the
face of my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> For the Son of Man came to save that
which was lost.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> "What do you think? If a man has one
hundred sheep, and one of them goes astray, doesn't he leave the
ninety-nine, go to the mountains, and seek that which has gone astray?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> If he finds it, most certainly I tell
you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which have not
gone astray.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Even so it is not the will of your
Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> "If your brother sins against you, go,
show him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you
have gained back your brother.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But if he doesn't listen, take one or
two more with you, that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word may be established.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> If he refuses to listen to them, tell
it to the assembly. If he refuses to hear the assembly also, let him be
to you as a Gentile or a tax collector.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Most certainly I tell you, whatever
things you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever
things you release on earth will have been released in heaven.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Again, assuredly I tell you, that if
two of you will agree on earth concerning anything that they will ask,
it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> For where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there I am in the midst of them."

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then Peter came and said to him, "Lord,
how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Until
seven times?"

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Jesus said to him, "I don't tell you
until seven times, but, until seventy times seven.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is like
a certain king, who wanted to reconcile accounts with his servants.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> When he had begun to reconcile, one was
brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> But because he couldn't pay, his lord
commanded him to be sold, with his wife, his children, and all that he
had, and payment to be made.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> The servant therefore fell down and
kneeled before him, saying, 'Lord, have patience with me, and I will
repay you all!'

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> The lord of that servant, being moved
with compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> "But that servant went out, and found
one of his fellow servants, who owed him one hundred denarii, and he
grabbed him, and took him by the throat, saying, 'Pay me what you owe!'

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> "So his fellow servant fell down at his
feet and begged him, saying, 'Have patience with me, and I will repay
you!'

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> He would not, but went and cast him
into prison, until he should pay back that which was due.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> So when his fellow servants saw what
was done, they were exceedingly sorry, and came and told to their lord
all that was done.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> Then his lord called him in, and said
to him, 'You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt, because you
begged me.

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Shouldn't you also have had mercy on
your fellow servant, even as I had mercy on you?'

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> His lord was angry, and delivered him
to the tormentors, until he should pay all that was due to him.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> So my heavenly Father will also do to
you, if you don't each forgive your brother from your hearts for his
misdeeds."

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> It happened when Jesus had finished these
words, he departed from Galilee, and came into the borders of Judea
beyond the Jordan.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Great multitudes followed him, and he
healed them there.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Pharisees came to him, testing him, and
saying, "Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?"

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> He answered, "Haven't you read that he
who made them from the beginning made them male and female,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> and said, 'For this cause a man shall
leave his father and mother, and shall join to his wife; and the two
shall become one flesh?'

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> So that they are no more two, but one
flesh. What therefore God has joined together, don't let man tear
apart."

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> They asked him, "Why then did Moses
command us to give her a bill of divorce, and divorce her?"

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He said to them, "Moses, because of the
hardness of your hearts, allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the
beginning it has not been so.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> I tell you that whoever divorces his
wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another, commits
adultery; and he who marries her when she is divorced commits adultery."

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> His disciples said to him, "If this is
the case of the man with his wife, it is not expedient to marry."

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> But he said to them, "Not all men can
receive this saying, but those to whom it is given.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> For there are eunuchs who were born
that way from their mother's womb, and there are eunuchs who were made
eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for
the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. He who is able to receive it, let him
receive it."

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Then little children were brought to
him, that he should lay his hands on them and pray; and the disciples
rebuked them.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> But Jesus said, "Allow the little
children, and don't forbid them to come to me; for the Kingdom of Heaven
belongs to ones like these."

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> He laid his hands on them, and departed
from there.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Behold, one came to him and said, "Good
teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?"

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He said to him, "Why do you call me
good? No one is good but one, that is, God. But if you want to enter
into life, keep the commandments."

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> He said to him, "Which ones?" Jesus
said, "'You shall not murder.' 'You shall not commit adultery.' 'You
shall not steal.' 'You shall not offer false testimony.'

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> 'Honor your father and mother.' And,
'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.'"

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> The young man said to him, "All these
things I have observed from my youth. What do I still lack?"

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Jesus said to him, "If you want to be
perfect, go, sell what you have, and give to the poor, and you will have
treasure in heaven; and come, follow me."

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> But when the young man heard the
saying, he went away sad, for he was one who had great possessions.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Jesus said to his disciples, "Most
certainly I say to you, a rich man will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
with difficulty.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> Again I tell you, it is easier for a
camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into
the Kingdom of God."

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> When the disciples heard it, they were
exceedingly astonished, saying, "Who then can be saved?"

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> Looking at them, Jesus said, "With men
this is impossible, but with God all things are possible."

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then Peter answered, "Behold, we have
left everything, and followed you. What then will we have?"

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> Jesus said to them, "Most certainly I
tell you that you who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son
of Man will sit on the throne of his glory, you also will sit on twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Everyone who has left houses, or
brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my name's sake, will receive one hundred times, and will
inherit eternal life.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> But many will be last who are first;
and first who are last.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> "For the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man
who was the master of a household, who went out early in the morning to
hire laborers for his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> When he had agreed with the laborers for
a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> He went out about the third hour, and saw
others standing idle in the marketplace.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> To them he said, 'You also go into the
vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.' So they went their
way.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Again he went out about the sixth and the
ninth hour, and did likewise.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> About the eleventh hour he went out, and
found others standing idle. He said to them, 'Why do you stand here all
day idle?'

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> "They said to him, 'Because no one has
hired us.' "He said to them, 'You also go into the vineyard, and you
will receive whatever is right.'

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> When evening had come, the lord of the
vineyard said to his manager, 'Call the laborers and pay them their
wages, beginning from the last to the first.'

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> "When those who were hired at about the
eleventh hour came, they each received a denarius.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> When the first came, they supposed that
they would receive more; and they likewise each received a denarius.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> When they received it, they murmured
against the master of the household,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> saying, 'These last have spent one
hour, and you have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of
the day and the scorching heat!'

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> "But he answered one of them, 'Friend,
I am doing you no wrong. Didn't you agree with me for a denarius?

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Take that which is yours, and go your
way. It is my desire to give to this last just as much as to you.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Isn't it lawful for me to do what I
want to with what I own? Or is your eye evil, because I am good?'

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> So the last will be first, and the
first last. For many are called, but few are chosen."

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he
took the twelve disciples aside, and on the way he said to them,

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> "Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem,
and the Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and scribes,
and they will condemn him to death,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> and will hand him over to the Gentiles
to mock, to scourge, and to crucify; and the third day he will be raised
up."

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee
came to him with her sons, kneeling and asking a certain thing of him.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> He said to her, "What do you want?" She
said to him, "Command that these, my two sons, may sit, one on your
right hand, and one on your left hand, in your Kingdom."

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> But Jesus answered, "You don't know
what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to
drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?" They
said to him, "We are able."

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> He said to them, "You will indeed drink
my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, but to
sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but it is
for whom it has been prepared by my Father."

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> When the ten heard it, they were
indignant with the two brothers.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> But Jesus summoned them, and said, "You
know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them, and their great
ones exercise authority over them.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> It shall not be so among you, but
whoever desires to become great among you shall be your servant.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Whoever desires to be first among you
shall be your bondservant,

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> even as the Son of Man came not to be
served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> As they went out from Jericho, a great
multitude followed him.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Behold, two blind men sitting by the
road, when they heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, "Lord, have
mercy on us, you son of David!"

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> The multitude rebuked them, telling
them that they should be quiet, but they cried out even more, "Lord,
have mercy on us, you son of David!"

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> Jesus stood still, and called them, and
asked, "What do you want me to do for you?"

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> They told him, "Lord, that our eyes may
be opened."

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> Jesus, being moved with compassion,
touched their eyes; and immediately their eyes received their sight, and
they followed him.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> When they drew near to Jerusalem, and
came to Bethsphage, to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two
disciples,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> saying to them, "Go into the village that
is opposite you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt
with her. Untie them, and bring them to me.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> If anyone says anything to you, you shall
say, 'The Lord needs them,' and immediately he will send them."

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> All this was done, that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> "Tell the daughter of Zion, behold, your
King comes to you, humble, and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal
of a donkey."

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> The disciples went, and did just as Jesus
commanded them,

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> and brought the donkey and the colt, and
laid their clothes on them; and he sat on them.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> A very great multitude spread their
clothes on the road. Others cut branches from the trees, and spread them
on the road.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> The multitudes who went before him, and
who followed kept shouting, "Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed is he
who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!"

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> When he had come into Jerusalem, all
the city was stirred up, saying, "Who is this?"

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The multitudes said, "This is the
prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee."

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Jesus entered into the temple of God,
and drove out all of those who sold and bought in the temple, and
overthrew the money changers' tables and the seats of those who sold the
doves.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> He said to them, "It is written, 'My
house shall be called a house of prayer,' but you have made it a den of
robbers!"

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> The blind and the lame came to him in
the temple, and he healed them.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> But when the chief priests and the
scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children who were
crying in the temple and saying, "Hosanna to the son of David!" they
were indignant,

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> and said to him, "Do you hear what
these are saying?" Jesus said to them, "Yes. Did you never read, 'Out of
the mouth of babes and nursing babies you have perfected praise?'"

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He left them, and went out of the city
to Bethany, and lodged there.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> Now in the morning, as he returned to
the city, he was hungry.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Seeing a fig tree by the road, he came
to it, and found nothing on it but leaves. He said to it, "Let there be
no fruit from you forever!" Immediately the fig tree withered away.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> When the disciples saw it, they
marveled, saying, "How did the fig tree immediately wither away?"

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Jesus answered them, "Most certainly I
tell you, if you have faith, and don't doubt, you will not only do what
was done to the fig tree, but even if you told this mountain, 'Be taken
up and cast into the sea,' it would be done.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> All things, whatever you ask in prayer,
believing, you will receive."

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> When he had come into the temple, the
chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was
teaching, and said, "By what authority do you do these things? Who gave
you this authority?"

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Jesus answered them, "I also will ask
you one question, which if you tell me, I likewise will tell you by what
authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The baptism of John, where was it from?
From heaven or from men?" They reasoned with themselves, saying, "If we
say, 'From heaven,' he will ask us, 'Why then did you not believe him?'

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> But if we say, 'From men,' we fear the
multitude, for all hold John as a prophet."

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> They answered Jesus, and said, "We
don't know." He also said to them, "Neither will I tell you by what
authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> But what do you think? A man had two
sons, and he came to the first, and said, 'Son, go work today in my
vineyard.'

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> He answered, 'I will not,' but
afterward he changed his mind, and went.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> He came to the second, and said the
same thing. He answered, 'I go, sir,' but he didn't go.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Which of the two did the will of his
father?" They said to him, "The first." Jesus said to them, "Most
certainly I tell you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are
entering into the Kingdom of God before you.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> For John came to you in the way of
righteousness, and you didn't believe him, but the tax collectors and
the prostitutes believed him. When you saw it, you didn't even repent
afterward, that you might believe him.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> "Hear another parable. There was a man
who was a master of a household, who planted a vineyard, set a hedge
about it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower, leased it out to
farmers, and went into another country.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> When the season for the fruit drew
near, he sent his servants to the farmers, to receive his fruit.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> The farmers took his servants, beat
one, killed another, and stoned another.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Again, he sent other servants more than
the first: and they treated them the same way.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> But afterward he sent to them his son,
saying, 'They will respect my son.'

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> But the farmers, when they saw the son,
said among themselves, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, and
seize his inheritance.'

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> So they took him, and threw him out of
the vineyard, and killed him.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> When therefore the lord of the vineyard
comes, what will he do to those farmers?"

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> They told him, "He will miserably
destroy those miserable men, and will lease out the vineyard to other
farmers, who will give him the fruit in its season."

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> Jesus said to them, "Did you never read
in the Scriptures, 'The stone which the builders rejected, the same was
made the head of the corner. This was from the Lord. It is marvelous in
our eyes?'

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> "Therefore I tell you, the Kingdom of
God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a nation bringing
forth its fruit.

<span id="an_21:44">21:44</span> He who falls on this stone will be
broken to pieces, but on whoever it will fall, it will scatter him as
dust."

<span id="an_21:45">21:45</span> When the chief priests and the
Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he spoke about them.

<span id="an_21:46">21:46</span> When they sought to seize him, they
feared the multitudes, because they considered him to be a prophet.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Jesus answered and spoke again in
parables to them, saying,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> "The Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain
king, who made a marriage feast for his son,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> and sent out his servants to call those
who were invited to the marriage feast, but they would not come.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Again he sent out other servants, saying,
'Tell those who are invited, "Behold, I have prepared my dinner. My
cattle and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. Come to the
marriage feast!"'

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> But they made light of it, and went their
ways, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise,

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> and the rest grabbed his servants, and
treated them shamefully, and killed them.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> When the king heard that, he was angry,
and sent his armies, destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> "Then he said to his servants, 'The
wedding is ready, but those who were invited weren't worthy.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Go therefore to the intersections of the
highways, and as many as you may find, invite to the marriage feast.'

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Those servants went out into the
highways, and gathered together as many as they found, both bad and
good. The wedding was filled with guests.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> But when the king came in to see the
guests, he saw there a man who didn't have on wedding clothing,

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> and he said to him, 'Friend, how did
you come in here not wearing wedding clothing?' He was speechless.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Then the king said to the servants,
'Bind him hand and foot, take him away, and throw him into the outer
darkness; there is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.'

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> For many are called, but few chosen."

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then the Pharisees went and took
counsel how they might entrap him in his talk.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> They sent their disciples to him, along
with the Herodians, saying, "Teacher, we know that you are honest, and
teach the way of God in truth, no matter who you teach, for you aren't
partial to anyone.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Tell us therefore, what do you think?
Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?"

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> But Jesus perceived their wickedness,
and said, "Why do you test me, you hypocrites?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Show me the tax money." They brought to
him a denarius.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He asked them, "Whose is this image and
inscription?"

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> They said to him, "Caesar's." Then he
said to them, "Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and to God the things that are God's."

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> When they heard it, they marveled, and
left him, and went away.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> On that day Sadducees (those who say
that there is no resurrection) came to him. They asked him,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> saying, "Teacher, Moses said, 'If a man
dies, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up
seed for his brother.'

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Now there were with us seven brothers.
The first married and died, and having no seed left his wife to his
brother.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> In the same way, the second also, and
the third, to the seventh.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> After them all, the woman died.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> In the resurrection therefore, whose
wife will she be of the seven? For they all had her."

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> But Jesus answered them, "You are
mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> For in the resurrection they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like God's angels in heaven.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> But concerning the resurrection of the
dead, haven't you read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> 'I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?' God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living."

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> When the multitudes heard it, they were
astonished at his teaching.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> But the Pharisees, when they heard that
he had silenced the Sadducees, gathered themselves together.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> One of them, a lawyer, asked him a
question, testing him.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> "Teacher, which is the greatest
commandment in the law?"

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> Jesus said to him, "'You shall love the
Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your
mind.'

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> This is the first and great
commandment.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> A second likewise is this, 'You shall
love your neighbor as yourself.'

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> The whole law and the prophets depend
on these two commandments."

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> Now while the Pharisees were gathered
together, Jesus asked them a question,

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> saying, "What do you think of the
Christ? Whose son is he?" They said to him, "Of David."

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> He said to them, "How then does David
in the Spirit call him Lord, saying,

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> 'The Lord said to my Lord, sit on my
right hand, until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet?'

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> "If then David calls him Lord, how is
he his son?"

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> No one was able to answer him a word,
neither did any man dare ask him any more questions from that day forth.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to
his disciples,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> saying, "The scribes and the Pharisees
sat on Moses' seat.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> All things therefore whatever they tell
you to observe, observe and do, but don't do their works; for they say,
and don't do.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> For they bind heavy burdens that are
grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they
themselves will not lift a finger to help them.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> But all their works they do to be seen by
men. They make their phylacteries broad, enlarge the fringes of their
garments,

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> and love the place of honor at feasts,
the best seats in the synagogues,

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> the salutations in the marketplaces, and
to be called 'Rabbi, Rabbi' by men.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But don't you be called 'Rabbi,' for one
is your teacher, the Christ, and all of you are brothers.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Call no man on the earth your father, for
one is your Father, he who is in heaven.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Neither be called masters, for one is
your master, the Christ.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But he who is greatest among you will
be your servant.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Whoever exalts himself will be humbled,
and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you devour widows' houses, and as a pretense you make
long prayers. Therefore you will receive greater condemnation.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> "But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! Because you shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for
you don't enter in yourselves, neither do you allow those who are
entering in to enter.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you travel around by sea and land to make one proselyte;
and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much of a son of Gehenna
as yourselves.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> "Woe to you, you blind guides, who say,
'Whoever swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the
gold of the temple, he is obligated.'

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> You blind fools! For which is greater,
the gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> 'Whoever swears by the altar, it is
nothing; but whoever swears by the gift that is on it, he is obligated?'

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> You blind fools! For which is greater,
the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> He therefore who swears by the altar,
swears by it, and by everything on it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> He who swears by the temple, swears by
it, and by him who was living in it.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> He who swears by heaven, swears by the
throne of God, and by him who sits on it.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you tithe mint, dill, and cumin, and have left undone
the weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faith. But you
ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> You blind guides, who strain out a
gnat, and swallow a camel!

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but
within they are full of extortion and unrighteousness.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> You blind Pharisee, first clean the
inside of the cup and of the platter, that its outside may become clean
also.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you are like whitened tombs, which outwardly appear
beautiful, but inwardly are full of dead men's bones, and of all
uncleanness.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Even so you also outwardly appear
righteous to men, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and decorate the
tombs of the righteous,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> and say, 'If we had lived in the days
of our fathers, we wouldn't have been partakers with them in the blood
of the prophets.'

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Therefore you testify to yourselves
that you are children of those who killed the prophets.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Fill up, then, the measure of your
fathers.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> You serpents, you offspring of vipers,
how will you escape the judgment of Gehenna?

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Therefore, behold, I send to you
prophets, wise men, and scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify;
and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from
city to city;

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> that on you may come all the righteous
blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood
of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom you killed between the sanctuary and
the altar.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Most certainly I tell you, all these
things will come upon this generation.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the
prophets, and stones those who are sent to her! How often I would have
gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chicks under
her wings, and you would not!

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Behold, your house is left to you
desolate.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For I tell you, you will not see me
from now on, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the
Lord!'"

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Jesus went out from the temple, and was
going on his way. His disciples came to him to show him the buildings of
the temple.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> But he answered them, "You see all of
these things, don't you? Most certainly I tell you, there will not be
left here one stone on another, that will not be thrown down."

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> As he sat on the Mount of Olives, the
disciples came to him privately, saying, "Tell us, when will these
things be? What is the sign of your coming, and of the end of the age?"

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Jesus answered them, "Be careful that no
one leads you astray.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For many will come in my name, saying, 'I
am the Christ,' and will lead many astray.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> You will hear of wars and rumors of wars.
See that you aren't troubled, for all this must happen, but the end is
not yet.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For nation will rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; and there will be famines, plagues, and
earthquakes in various places.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> But all these things are the beginning of
birth pains.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then they will deliver you up to
oppression, and will kill you. You will be hated by all of the nations
for my name's sake.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Then many will stumble, and will
deliver up one another, and will hate one another.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Many false prophets will arise, and
will lead many astray.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Because iniquity will be multiplied,
the love of many will grow cold.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> But he who endures to the end, the same
will be saved.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> This Good News of the Kingdom will be
preached in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations, and then
the end will come.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> "When, therefore, you see the
abomination of desolation, which was spoken of through Daniel the
prophet, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> then let those who are in Judea flee to
the mountains.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Let him who is on the housetop not go
down to take out things that are in his house.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Let him who is in the field not return
back to get his clothes.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> But woe to those who are with child and
to nursing mothers in those days!

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Pray that your flight will not be in
the winter, nor on a Sabbath,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> for then there will be great
oppression, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until
now, no, nor ever will be.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Unless those days had been shortened,
no flesh would have been saved. But for the sake of the chosen ones,
those days will be shortened.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> "Then if any man tells you, 'Behold,
here is the Christ,' or, 'There,' don't believe it.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For there will arise false christs, and
false prophets, and they will show great signs and wonders, so as to
lead astray, if possible, even the chosen ones.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> "Behold, I have told you beforehand.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> If therefore they tell you, 'Behold, he
is in the wilderness,' don't go out; 'Behold, he is in the inner rooms,'
don't believe it.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> For as the lightning flashes from the
east, and is seen even to the west, so will be the coming of the Son of
Man.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> For wherever the carcass is, there is
where the vultures gather together.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> But immediately after the oppression of
those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light,
the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be
shaken;

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> and then the sign of the Son of Man
will appear in the sky. Then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and
they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky with power
and great glory.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> He will send out his angels with a
great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather together his chosen ones
from the four winds, from one end of the sky to the other.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> "Now from the fig tree learn this
parable. When its branch has now become tender, and puts forth its
leaves, you know that the summer is near.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> Even so you also, when you see all
these things, know that it is near, even at the doors.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> Most certainly I tell you, this
generation will not pass away, until all these things are accomplished.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> Heaven and earth will pass away, but my
words will not pass away.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> But no one knows of that day and hour,
not even the angels of heaven, but my Father only.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> "As the days of Noah were, so will be
the coming of the Son of Man.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> For as in those days which were before
the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ship,

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> and they didn't know until the flood
came, and took them all away, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> Then two men will be in the field: one
will be taken and one will be left;

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> two women grinding at the mill, one
will be taken and one will be left.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> Watch therefore, for you don't know in
what hour your Lord comes.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> But know this, that if the master of
the house had known in what watch of the night the thief was coming, he
would have watched, and would not have allowed his house to be broken
into.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> Therefore also be ready, for in an hour
that you don't expect, the Son of Man will come.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> "Who then is the faithful and wise
servant, whom his lord has set over his household, to give them their
food in due season?

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> Blessed is that servant whom his lord
finds doing so when he comes.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> Most certainly I tell you that he will
set him over all that he has.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> But if that evil servant should say in
his heart, 'My lord is delaying his coming,'

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> and begins to beat his fellow servants,
and eat and drink with the drunkards,

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> the lord of that servant will come in a
day when he doesn't expect it, and in an hour when he doesn't know it,

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> and will cut him in pieces, and appoint
his portion with the hypocrites. There is where the weeping and grinding
of teeth will be.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> "Then the Kingdom of Heaven will be like
ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went out to meet the bridegroom.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Five of them were foolish, and five were
wise.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Those who were foolish, when they took
their lamps, took no oil with them,

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> but the wise took oil in their vessels
with their lamps.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Now while the bridegroom delayed, they
all slumbered and slept.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> But at midnight there was a cry, 'Behold!
The bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him!'

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed
their lamps.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> The foolish said to the wise, 'Give us
some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.'

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But the wise answered, saying, 'What if
there isn't enough for us and you? You go rather to those who sell, and
buy for yourselves.'

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> While they went away to buy, the
bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the
marriage feast, and the door was shut.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Afterward the other virgins also came,
saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us.'

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> But he answered, 'Most certainly I tell
you, I don't know you.'

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Watch therefore, for you don't know the
day nor the hour in which the Son of Man is coming.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> "For it is like a man, going into
another country, who called his own servants, and entrusted his goods to
them.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> To one he gave five talents, to another
two, to another one; to each according to his own ability. Then he went
on his journey.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Immediately he who received the five
talents went and traded with them, and made another five talents.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> In the same way, he also who got the
two gained another two.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> But he who received the one went away
and dug in the earth, and hid his lord's money.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> "Now after a long time the lord of
those servants came, and reconciled accounts with them.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> He who received the five talents came
and brought another five talents, saying, 'Lord, you delivered to me
five talents. Behold, I have gained another five talents besides them.'

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> "His lord said to him, 'Well done, good
and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will
set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> "He also who got the two talents came
and said, 'Lord, you delivered to me two talents. Behold, I have gained
another two talents besides them.'

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> "His lord said to him, 'Well done, good
and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will
set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> "He also who had received the one
talent came and said, 'Lord, I knew you that you are a hard man, reaping
where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> I was afraid, and went away and hid
your talent in the earth. Behold, you have what is yours.'

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> "But his lord answered him, 'You wicked
and slothful servant. You knew that I reap where I didn't sow, and
gather where I didn't scatter.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> You ought therefore to have deposited
my money with the bankers, and at my coming I should have received back
my own with interest.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Take away therefore the talent from
him, and give it to him who has the ten talents.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For to everyone who has will be given,
and he will have abundance, but from him who doesn't have, even that
which he has will be taken away.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> Throw out the unprofitable servant into
the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> "But when the Son of Man comes in his
glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit on the throne
of his glory.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Before him all the nations will be
gathered, and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd
separates the sheep from the goats.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> He will set the sheep on his right
hand, but the goats on the left.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Then the King will tell those on his
right hand, 'Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world;

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> for I was hungry, and you gave me food
to eat. I was thirsty, and you gave me drink. I was a stranger, and you
took me in.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> I was naked, and you clothed me. I was
sick, and you visited me. I was in prison, and you came to me.'

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> "Then the righteous will answer him,
saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you; or thirsty, and
give you a drink?

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> When did we see you as a stranger, and
take you in; or naked, and clothe you?

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> When did we see you sick, or in prison,
and come to you?'

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> "The King will answer them, 'Most
certainly I tell you, inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of
these my brothers, you did it to me.'

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> Then he will say also to those on the
left hand, 'Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire which is
prepared for the devil and his angels;

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> for I was hungry, and you didn't give
me food to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink;

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> I was a stranger, and you didn't take
me in; naked, and you didn't clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you
didn't visit me.'

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> "Then they will also answer, saying,
'Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked,
or sick, or in prison, and didn't help you?'

<span id="an_25:45">25:45</span> "Then he will answer them, saying,
'Most certainly I tell you, inasmuch as you didn't do it to one of the
least of these, you didn't do it to me.'

<span id="an_25:46">25:46</span> These will go away into eternal
punishment, but the righteous into eternal life."

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> It happened, when Jesus had finished all
these words, that he said to his disciples,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> "You know that after two days the
Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be
crucified."

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Then the chief priests, the scribes, and
the elders of the people were gathered together in the court of the high
priest, who was called Caiaphas.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> They took counsel together that they
might take Jesus by deceit, and kill him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> But they said, "Not during the feast,
lest a riot occur among the people."

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the
house of Simon the leper,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> a woman came to him having an alabaster
jar of very expensive ointment, and she poured it on his head as he sat
at the table.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> But when his disciples saw this, they
were indignant, saying, "Why this waste?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> For this ointment might have been sold
for much, and given to the poor."

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> However, knowing this, Jesus said to
them, "Why do you trouble the woman? Because she has done a good work
for me.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> For you always have the poor with you;
but you don't always have me.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> For in pouring this ointment on my
body, she did it to prepare me for burial.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Most certainly I tell you, wherever
this Good News is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done
will also be spoken of as a memorial of her."

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Then one of the twelve, who was called
Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> and said, "What are you willing to give
me, that I should deliver him to you?" They weighed out for him thirty
pieces of silver.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> From that time he sought opportunity to
betray him.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Now on the first day of unleavened
bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to him, "Where do you want us
to prepare for you to eat the Passover?"

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> He said, "Go into the city to a certain
person, and tell him, 'The Teacher says, "My time is at hand. I will
keep the Passover at your house with my disciples."'"

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> The disciples did as Jesus commanded
them, and they prepared the Passover.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Now when evening had come, he was
reclining at the table with the twelve disciples.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> As they were eating, he said, "Most
certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me."

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> They were exceedingly sorrowful, and
each began to ask him, "It isn't me, is it, Lord?"

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> He answered, "He who dipped his hand
with me in the dish, the same will betray me.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> The Son of Man goes, even as it is
written of him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is
betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born."

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> Judas, who betrayed him, answered, "It
isn't me, is it, Rabbi?" He said to him, "You said it."

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> As they were eating, Jesus took bread,
gave thanks for it, and broke it. He gave to the disciples, and said,
"Take, eat; this is my body."

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> He took the cup, gave thanks, and gave
to them, saying, "All of you drink it,

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> for this is my blood of the new
covenant, which is poured out for many for the remission of sins.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> But I tell you that I will not drink of
this fruit of the vine from now on, until that day when I drink it anew
with you in my Father's Kingdom."

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> When they had sung a hymn, they went
out to the Mount of Olives.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> Then Jesus said to them, "All of you
will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, 'I
will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.'

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> But after I am raised up, I will go
before you into Galilee."

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> But Peter answered him, "Even if all
will be made to stumble because of you, I will never be made to
stumble."

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> Jesus said to him, "Most certainly I
tell you that tonight, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three
times."

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> Peter said to him, "Even if I must die
with you, I will not deny you." All of the disciples also said likewise.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> Then Jesus came with them to a place
called Gethsemane, and said to his disciples, "Sit here, while I go
there and pray."

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> He took with him Peter and the two sons
of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and severely troubled.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> Then he said to them, "My soul is
exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here, and watch with me."

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> He went forward a little, fell on his
face, and prayed, saying, "My Father, if it is possible, let this cup
pass away from me; nevertheless, not what I desire, but what you
desire."

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> He came to the disciples, and found
them sleeping, and said to Peter, "What, couldn't you watch with me for
one hour?

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> Watch and pray, that you don't enter
into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> Again, a second time he went away, and
prayed, saying, "My Father, if this cup can't pass away from me unless I
drink it, your desire be done."

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> He came again and found them sleeping,
for their eyes were heavy.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> He left them again, went away, and
prayed a third time, saying the same words.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Then he came to his disciples, and said
to them, "Sleep on now, and take your rest. Behold, the hour is at hand,
and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> Arise, let's be going. Behold, he who
betrays me is at hand."

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> While he was still speaking, behold,
Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with
swords and clubs, from the chief priest and elders of the people.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> Now he who betrayed him gave them a
sign, saying, "Whoever I kiss, he is the one. Seize him."

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> Immediately he came to Jesus, and said,
"Hail, Rabbi!" and kissed him.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> Jesus said to him, "Friend, why are you
here?" Then they came and laid hands on Jesus, and took him.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> Behold, one of those who were with
Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck the servant
of the high priest, and struck off his ear.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> Then Jesus said to him, "Put your sword
back into its place, for all those who take the sword will die by the
sword.

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> Or do you think that I couldn't ask my
Father, and he would even now send me more than twelve legions of
angels?

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> How then would the Scriptures be
fulfilled that it must be so?"

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> In that hour Jesus said to the
multitudes, "Have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs
to seize me? I sat daily in the temple teaching, and you didn't arrest
me.

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> But all this has happened, that the
Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled." Then all the disciples
left him, and fled.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> Those who had taken Jesus led him away
to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were
gathered together.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> But Peter followed him from a distance,
to the court of the high priest, and entered in and sat with the
officers, to see the end.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> Now the chief priests, the elders, and
the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, that they might
put him to death;

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> and they found none. Even though many
false witnesses came forward, they found none. But at last two false
witnesses came forward,

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> and said, "This man said, 'I am able to
destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.'"

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> The high priest stood up, and said to
him, "Have you no answer? What is this that these testify against you?"

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> But Jesus held his peace. The high
priest answered him, "I adjure you by the living God, that you tell us
whether you are the Christ, the Son of God."

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> Jesus said to him, "You have said it.
Nevertheless, I tell you, after this you will see the Son of Man sitting
at the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of the sky."

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> Then the high priest tore his clothing,
saying, "He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses?
Behold, now you have heard his blasphemy.

<span id="an_26:66">26:66</span> What do you think?" They answered, "He
is worthy of death!"

<span id="an_26:67">26:67</span> Then they spit in his face and beat him
with their fists, and some slapped him,

<span id="an_26:68">26:68</span> saying, "Prophesy to us, you Christ!
Who hit you?"

<span id="an_26:69">26:69</span> Now Peter was sitting outside in the
court, and a maid came to him, saying, "You were also with Jesus, the
Galilean!"

<span id="an_26:70">26:70</span> But he denied it before them all,
saying, "I don't know what you are talking about."

<span id="an_26:71">26:71</span> When he had gone out onto the porch,
someone else saw him, and said to those who were there, "This man also
was with Jesus of Nazareth."

<span id="an_26:72">26:72</span> Again he denied it with an oath, "I
don't know the man."

<span id="an_26:73">26:73</span> After a little while those who stood by
came and said to Peter, "Surely you are also one of them, for your
speech makes you known."

<span id="an_26:74">26:74</span> Then he began to curse and to swear, "I
don't know the man!" Immediately the rooster crowed.

<span id="an_26:75">26:75</span> Peter remembered the word which Jesus
had said to him, "Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three
times." He went out and wept bitterly.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Now when morning had come, all the chief
priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put
him to death:

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> and they bound him, and led him away, and
delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw
that Jesus was condemned, felt remorse, and brought back the thirty
pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> saying, "I have sinned in that I betrayed
innocent blood." But they said, "What is that to us? You see to it."

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> He threw down the pieces of silver in the
sanctuary, and departed. He went away and hanged himself.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> The chief priests took the pieces of
silver, and said, "It's not lawful to put them into the treasury, since
it is the price of blood."

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> They took counsel, and bought the
potter's field with them, to bury strangers in.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Therefore that field was called "The
Field of Blood" to this day.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Then that which was spoken through
Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying, "They took the thirty pieces
of silver, the price of him upon whom a price had been set, whom some of
the children of Israel priced,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> and they gave them for the potter's
field, as the Lord commanded me."

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Now Jesus stood before the governor:
and the governor asked him, saying, "Are you the King of the Jews?"
Jesus said to him, "So you say."

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> When he was accused by the chief
priests and elders, he answered nothing.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Then Pilate said to him, "Don't you
hear how many things they testify against you?"

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He gave him no answer, not even one
word, so that the governor marveled greatly.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Now at the feast the governor was
accustomed to release to the multitude one prisoner, whom they desired.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> They had then a notable prisoner,
called Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> When therefore they were gathered
together, Pilate said to them, "Whom do you want me to release to you?
Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?"

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> For he knew that because of envy they
had delivered him up.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> While he was sitting on the judgment
seat, his wife sent to him, saying, "Have nothing to do with that
righteous man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream
because of him."

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Now the chief priests and the elders
persuaded the multitudes to ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> But the governor answered them, "Which
of the two do you want me to release to you?" They said, "Barabbas!"

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Pilate said to them, "What then shall I
do to Jesus, who is called Christ?" They all said to him, "Let him be
crucified!"

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> But the governor said, "Why? What evil
has he done?" But they cried out exceedingly, saying, "Let him be
crucified!"

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> So when Pilate saw that nothing was
being gained, but rather that a disturbance was starting, he took water,
and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, "I am innocent of the
blood of this righteous person. You see to it."

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> All the people answered, "May his blood
be on us, and on our children!"

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Then he released to them Barabbas, but
Jesus he flogged and delivered to be crucified.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus
into the Praetorium, and gathered the whole garrison together against
him.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> They stripped him, and put a scarlet
robe on him.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> They braided a crown of thorns and put
it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they kneeled down
before him, and mocked him, saying, "Hail, King of the Jews!"

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> They spat on him, and took the reed and
struck him on the head.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> When they had mocked him, they took the
robe off of him, and put his clothes on him, and led him away to crucify
him.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> As they came out, they found a man of
Cyrene, Simon by name, and they compelled him to go with them, that he
might carry his cross.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> They came to a place called "Golgotha,"
that is to say, "The place of a skull."

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> They gave him sour wine to drink mixed
with gall. When he had tasted it, he would not drink.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> When they had crucified him, they
divided his clothing among them, casting lots,

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> and they sat and watched him there.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> They set up over his head the
accusation against him written, "THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS."

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> Then there were two robbers crucified
with him, one on his right hand and one on the left.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> Those who passed by blasphemed him,
wagging their heads,

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> and saying, "You who destroy the
temple, and build it in three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of
God, come down from the cross!"

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> Likewise the chief priests also
mocking, with the scribes, the Pharisees, and the elders, said,

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> "He saved others, but he can't save
himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross
now, and we will believe in him.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> He trusts in God. Let God deliver him
now, if he wants him; for he said, 'I am the Son of God.'"

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> The robbers also who were crucified
with him cast on him the same reproach.

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> Now from the sixth hour there was
darkness over all the land until the ninth hour.

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a
loud voice, saying, "Eli, Eli, lima sabachthani?" That is, "My God, my
God, why have you forsaken me?"

<span id="an_27:47">27:47</span> Some of them who stood there, when they
heard it, said, "This man is calling Elijah."

<span id="an_27:48">27:48</span> Immediately one of them ran, and took a
sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him a
drink.

<span id="an_27:49">27:49</span> The rest said, "Let him be. Let's see
whether Elijah comes to save him."

<span id="an_27:50">27:50</span> Jesus cried again with a loud voice,
and yielded up his spirit.

<span id="an_27:51">27:51</span> Behold, the veil of the temple was torn
in two from the top to the bottom. The earth quaked and the rocks were
split.

<span id="an_27:52">27:52</span> The tombs were opened, and many bodies
of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised;

<span id="an_27:53">27:53</span> and coming out of the tombs after his
resurrection, they entered into the holy city and appeared to many.

<span id="an_27:54">27:54</span> Now the centurion, and those who were
with him watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake, and the things
that were done, feared exceedingly, saying, "Truly this was the Son of
God."

<span id="an_27:55">27:55</span> Many women were there watching from
afar, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him.

<span id="an_27:56">27:56</span> Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary
the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

<span id="an_27:57">27:57</span> When evening had come, a rich man from
Arimathaea, named Joseph, who himself was also Jesus' disciple came.

<span id="an_27:58">27:58</span> This man went to Pilate, and asked for
Jesus' body. Then Pilate commanded the body to be given up.

<span id="an_27:59">27:59</span> Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in
a clean linen cloth,

<span id="an_27:60">27:60</span> and laid it in his own new tomb, which
he had cut out in the rock, and he rolled a great stone to the door of
the tomb, and departed.

<span id="an_27:61">27:61</span> Mary Magdalene was there, and the other
Mary, sitting opposite the tomb.

<span id="an_27:62">27:62</span> Now on the next day, which was the day
after the Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees were
gathered together to Pilate,

<span id="an_27:63">27:63</span> saying, "Sir, we remember what that
deceiver said while he was still alive: 'After three days I will rise
again.'

<span id="an_27:64">27:64</span> Command therefore that the tomb be made
secure until the third day, lest perhaps his disciples come at night and
steal him away, and tell the people, 'He is risen from the dead;' and
the last deception will be worse than the first."

<span id="an_27:65">27:65</span> Pilate said to them, "You have a guard.
Go, make it as secure as you can."

<span id="an_27:66">27:66</span> So they went with the guard and made
the tomb secure, sealing the stone.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Now after the Sabbath, as it began to
dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary
came to see the tomb.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Behold, there was a great earthquake, for
an angel of the Lord descended from the sky, and came and rolled away
the stone from the door, and sat on it.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> His appearance was like lightning, and
his clothing white as snow.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> For fear of him, the guards shook, and
became like dead men.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> The angel answered the women, "Don't be
afraid, for I know that you seek Jesus, who has been crucified.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> He is not here, for he has risen, just
like he said. Come, see the place where the Lord was lying.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Go quickly and tell his disciples, 'He
has risen from the dead, and behold, he goes before you into Galilee;
there you will see him.' Behold, I have told you."

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> They departed quickly from the tomb with
fear and great joy, and ran to bring his disciples word.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> As they went to tell his disciples,
behold, Jesus met them, saying, "Rejoice!" They came and took hold of
his feet, and worshiped him.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then Jesus said to them, "Don't be
afraid. Go tell my brothers that they should go into Galilee, and there
they will see me."

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Now while they were going, behold, some
of the guards came into the city, and told the chief priests all the
things that had happened.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> When they were assembled with the
elders, and had taken counsel, they gave a large amount of silver to the
soldiers,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> saying, "Say that his disciples came by
night, and stole him away while we slept.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> If this comes to the governor's ears,
we will persuade him and make you free of worry."

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> So they took the money and did as they
were told. This saying was spread abroad among the Jews, and continues
until this day.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> But the eleven disciples went into
Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had sent them.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> When they saw him, they bowed down to
him, but some doubted.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Jesus came to them and spoke to them,
saying, "All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Go, and make disciples of all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit,

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> teaching them to observe all things
that I commanded you. Behold, I am with you always, even to the end of
the age." Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark](mar)
