[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ezr)  [Next](est.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Nehemiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah.
Now it happened in the month Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in
Shushan the palace,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> that Hanani, one of my brothers, came, he
and certain men out of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews who
had escaped, who were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> They said to me, "The remnant who are left
of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and
reproach. The wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and its gates are
burned with fire."

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> It happened, when I heard these words, that
I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days; and I fasted and prayed
before the God of heaven,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> and said, "I beg you, Yahweh, the God of
heaven, the great and awesome God, who keeps covenant and loving
kindness with those who love him and keep his commandments:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Let your ear now be attentive, and your
eyes open, that you may listen to the prayer of your servant, which I
pray before you at this time, day and night, for the children of Israel
your servants while I confess the sins of the children of Israel, which
we have sinned against you. Yes, I and my father's house have sinned.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> We have dealt very corruptly against you,
and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the
ordinances, which you commanded your servant Moses.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> "Remember, I beg you, the word that you
commanded your servant Moses, saying, 'If you trespass, I will scatter
you abroad among the peoples;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> but if you return to me, and keep my
commandments and do them, though your outcasts were in the uttermost
part of the heavens, yet will I gather them from there, and will bring
them to the place that I have chosen, to cause my name to dwell there.'

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> "Now these are your servants and your
people, whom you have redeemed by your great power, and by your strong
hand.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Lord, I beg you, let your ear be
attentive now to the prayer of your servant, and to the prayer of your
servants, who delight to fear your name; and please prosper your servant
this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man." Now I was cup
bearer to the king.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> It happened in the month Nisan, in the
twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, when wine was before him, that I
took up the wine, and gave it to the king. Now I had not been \[before\]
sad in his presence.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> The king said to me, "Why is your face sad,
since you are not sick? This is nothing else but sorrow of heart." Then
I was very much afraid.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> I said to the king, "Let the king live
forever! Why shouldn't my face be sad, when the city, the place of my
fathers' tombs, lies waste, and its gates have been consumed with fire?"

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Then the king said to me, "For what do you
make request?" So I prayed to the God of heaven.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> I said to the king, "If it pleases the
king, and if your servant has found favor in your sight, that you would
send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers' tombs, that I may build
it."

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The king said to me (the queen was also
sitting by him), "For how long shall your journey be? And when will you
return?" So it pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Moreover I said to the king, "If it pleases
the king, let letters be given me to the governors beyond the River,
that they may let me pass through until I come to Judah;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and a letter to Asaph the keeper of the
king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of
the citadel by the temple, for the wall of the city, and for the house
that I shall enter into." The king granted my requests, because of the
good hand of my God on me.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then I came to the governors beyond the
River, and gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent with me
captains of the army and horsemen.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah
the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly,
because a man had come to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> So I came to Jerusalem, and was there
three days.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I arose in the night, I and some few men
with me; neither told I any man what my God put into my heart to do for
Jerusalem; neither was there any animal with me, except the animal that
I rode on.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I went out by night by the valley gate,
even toward the jackal's well, and to the dung gate, and viewed the
walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and its gates were consumed
with fire.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Then I went on to the spring gate and to
the king's pool: but there was no place for the animal that was under me
to pass.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then went I up in the night by the brook,
and viewed the wall; and I turned back, and entered by the valley gate,
and so returned.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> The rulers didn't know where I went, or
what I did; neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the
priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest who did
the work.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then I said to them, "You see the evil
case that we are in, how Jerusalem lies waste, and its gates are burned
with fire. Come, let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we won't be
disgraced."

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> I told them of the hand of my God which
was good on me, as also of the king's words that he had spoken to me.
They said, "Let's rise up and build." So they strengthened their hands
for the good work.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But when Sanballat the Horonite, and
Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they
ridiculed us, and despised us, and said, "What is this thing that you
are doing? Will you rebel against the king?"

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then answered I them, and said to them,
"The God of heaven will prosper us. Therefore we, his servants, will
arise and build; but you have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in
Jerusalem."

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with
his brothers the priests, and they built the sheep gate; they sanctified
it, and set up its doors; even to the tower of Hammeah they sanctified
it, to the tower of Hananel.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Next to him built the men of Jericho. Next
to them built Zaccur the son of Imri.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah
build; they laid its beams, and set up its doors, its bolts, and its
bars.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Next to them repaired Meremoth the son of
Uriah, the son of Hakkoz. Next to them repaired Meshullam the son of
Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel. Next to them repaired Zadok the son of
Baana.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Next to them the Tekoites repaired; but
their nobles didn't put their necks to the work of their lord.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> The old gate repaired Joiada the son of
Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid its beams, and set
up its doors, and its bolts, and its bars.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Next to them repaired Melatiah the
Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah,
\[that appertained\] to the throne of the governor beyond the River.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Next to him repaired Uzziel the son of
Harhaiah, goldsmiths. Next to him repaired Hananiah one of the
perfumers, and they fortified Jerusalem even to the broad wall.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Next to them repaired Rephaiah the son of
Hur, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Next to them repaired Jedaiah the son of
Harumaph, over against his house. Next to him repaired Hattush the son
of Hashabneiah.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hasshub
the son of Pahathmoab, repaired another portion, and the tower of the
furnaces.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Next to him repaired Shallum the son of
Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, he and his
daughters.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the
inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, and set up its doors, its bolts,
and its bars, and one thousand cubits of the wall to the dung gate.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> The dung gate repaired Malchijah the son
of Rechab, the ruler of the district of Beth Haccherem; he built it, and
set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> The spring gate repaired Shallun the son
of Colhozeh, the ruler of the district of Mizpah; he built it, and
covered it, and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and the wall
of the pool of Shelah by the king's garden, even to the stairs that go
down from the city of David.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> After him repaired Nehemiah the son of
Azbuk, the ruler of half the district of Beth Zur, to the place over
against the tombs of David, and to the pool that was made, and to the
house of the mighty men.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the
son of Bani. Next to him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of half the
district of Keilah, for his district.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> After him repaired their brothers, Bavvai
the son of Henadad, the ruler of half the district of Keilah.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Next to him repaired Ezer the son of
Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, another portion, over against the ascent to
the armory at the turning \[of the wall\].

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> After him Baruch the son of Zabbai
earnestly repaired another portion, from the turning \[of the wall\] to
the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> After him repaired Meremoth the son of
Uriah the son of Hakkoz another portion, from the door of the house of
Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> After him repaired the priests, the men
of the Plain.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> After them repaired Benjamin and Hasshub
over against their house. After them repaired Azariah the son of
Maaseiah the son of Ananiah beside his own house.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> After him repaired Binnui the son of
Henadad another portion, from the house of Azariah to the turning \[of
the wall\], and to the corner.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Palal the son of Uzai \[repaired\] over
against the turning \[of the wall\], and the tower that stands out from
the upper house of the king, which is by the court of the guard. After
him Pedaiah the son of Parosh \[repaired\].

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> (Now the Nethinim lived in Ophel, to the
place over against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that
stands out.)

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> After him the Tekoites repaired another
portion, over against the great tower that stands out, and to the wall
of Ophel.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Above the horse gate repaired the
priests, everyone over against his own house.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> After them repaired Zadok the son of
Immer over against his own house. After him repaired Shemaiah the son of
Shecaniah, the keeper of the east gate.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> After him repaired Hananiah the son of
Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another portion. After him
repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah over against his room.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> After him repaired Malchijah one of the
goldsmiths to the house of the Nethinim, and of the merchants, over
against the gate of Hammiphkad, and to the ascent of the corner.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> Between the ascent of the corner and the
sheep gate repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But it happened that when Sanballat heard
that we were building the wall, he was angry, and took great
indignation, and mocked the Jews.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> He spoke before his brothers and the army
of Samaria, and said, "What are these feeble Jews doing? Will they
fortify themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they finish in a day? Will
they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, since they are
burned?"

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he
said, "What they are building, if a fox climbed up it, he would break
down their stone wall."

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> "Hear, our God; for we are despised; and
turn back their reproach on their own head, give them up for a spoil in
a land of captivity;

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> don't cover their iniquity, and don't let
their sin be blotted out from before you; for they have insulted the
builders."

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> So we built the wall; and all the wall was
joined together to half \[the height\] of it: for the people had a mind
to work.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But it happened that when Sanballat,
Tobiah, the Arabians, the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites heard that the
repairing of the walls of Jerusalem went forward, \[and\] that the
breaches began to be stopped, then they were very angry;

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> and they conspired all of them together to
come and fight against Jerusalem, and to cause confusion therein.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But we made our prayer to our God, and set
a watch against them day and night, because of them.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Judah said, "The strength of the bearers
of burdens is fading, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able
to build the wall."

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Our adversaries said, "They shall not
know, neither see, until we come into the midst of them, and kill them,
and cause the work to cease."

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> It happened that when the Jews who lived
by them came, they said to us ten times from all places, "Wherever you
turn, they will attack us."

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Therefore set I in the lowest parts of
the space behind the wall, in the open places, I set \[there\] the
people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their
bows.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> I looked, and rose up, and said to the
nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, "Don't be
afraid of them! Remember the Lord, who is great and awesome, and fight
for your brothers, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your
houses."

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> It happened, when our enemies heard that
it was known to us, and God had brought their counsel to nothing, that
we returned all of us to the wall, everyone to his work.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> It happened from that time forth, that
half of my servants worked in the work, and half of them held the
spears, the shields, and the bows, and the coats of mail; and the rulers
were behind all the house of Judah.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> They all built the wall and those who
bore burdens loaded themselves; everyone with one of his hands worked in
the work, and with the other held his weapon;

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> and the builders, everyone wore his sword
at his side, and so built. He who sounded the trumpet was by me.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> I said to the nobles, and to the rulers
and to the rest of the people, "The work is great and large, and we are
separated on the wall, one far from another.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Wherever you hear the sound of the
trumpet, rally there to us. Our God will fight for us."

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> So we worked in the work: and half of
them held the spears from the rising of the morning until the stars
appeared.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Likewise at the same time said I to the
people, "Let everyone with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in
the night they may be a guard to us, and may labor in the day."

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> So neither I, nor my brothers, nor my
servants, nor the men of the guard who followed me, none of us took off
our clothes. Everyone took his weapon to the water.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then there arose a great cry of the people
and of their wives against their brothers the Jews.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> For there were that said, "We, our sons and
our daughters, are many. Let us get grain, that we may eat and live."

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Some also there were that said, "We are
mortgaging our fields, and our vineyards, and our houses. Let us get
grain, because of the famine."

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> There were also some who said, "We have
borrowed money for the king's tribute using our fields and our vineyards
as collateral.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our
brothers, our children as their children. Behold, we bring into bondage
our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters
have been brought into bondage. Neither is it in our power to help it;
for other men have our fields and our vineyards."

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I was very angry when I heard their cry and
these words.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Then I consulted with myself, and contended
with the nobles and the rulers, and said to them, "You exact usury,
everyone of his brother." I held a great assembly against them.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> I said to them, "We, after our ability,
have redeemed our brothers the Jews that were sold to the nations; and
would you even sell your brothers, and should they be sold to us?" Then
they held their peace, and found never a word.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Also I said, "The thing that you do is not
good. Ought you not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the
reproach of the nations our enemies?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> I likewise, my brothers and my servants,
lend them money and grain. Please let us stop this usury.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Please restore to them, even this day,
their fields, their vineyards, their olive groves, and their houses,
also the hundredth part of the money, and of the grain, the new wine,
and the oil, that you are charging them."

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then they said, "We will restore them,
and will require nothing of them; so will we do, even as you say." Then
I called the priests, and took an oath of them, that they would do
according to this promise.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Also I shook out my lap, and said, "So
may God shake out every man from his house, and from his labor, that
doesn't perform this promise; even thus be he shaken out, and emptied."
All the assembly said, "Amen," and praised Yahweh. The people did
according to this promise.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Moreover from the time that I was
appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth
year even to the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, \[that
is\], twelve years, I and my brothers have not eaten the bread of the
governor.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But the former governors who were before
me were supported by the people, and took bread and wine from them,
besides forty shekels of silver; yes, even their servants ruled over the
people: but I didn't do so, because of the fear of God.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Yes, also I continued in the work of this
wall, neither bought we any land: and all my servants were gathered
there to the work.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Moreover there were at my table, of the
Jews and the rulers, one hundred fifty men, besides those who came to us
from among the nations that were around us.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Now that which was prepared for one day
was one ox and six choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and
once in ten days store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this I didn't
demand the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy on this
people.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Remember to me, my God, for good, all
that I have done for this people.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now it happened, when it was reported to
Sanballat and Tobiah, and to Geshem the Arabian, and to the rest of our
enemies, that I had built the wall, and that there was no breach left
therein; (though even to that time I had not set up the doors in the
gates;)

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> that Sanballat and Geshem sent to me,
saying, "Come, let us meet together in \[one of\] the villages in the
plain of Ono." But they intended to harm me.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> I sent messengers to them, saying, "I am
doing a great work, so that I can't come down. Why should the work
cease, while I leave it, and come down to you?"

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> They sent to me four times after this sort;
and I answered them the same way.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then Sanballat sent his servant to me the
same way the fifth time with an open letter in his hand,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> in which was written, "It is reported among
the nations, and Gashmu says it, that you and the Jews intend to rebel.
Because of that, you are building the wall. You would be their king,
according to these words.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> You have also appointed prophets to preach
of you at Jerusalem, saying, 'There is a king in Judah!' Now it will be
reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and
let us take counsel together."

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Then I sent to him, saying, "There are no
such things done as you say, but you imagine them out of your own
heart."

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> For they all would have made us afraid,
saying, "Their hands will be weakened from the work, that it not be
done. But now, \[God\], strengthen my hands."

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> I went to the house of Shemaiah the son
of Delaiah the son of Mehetabel, who was shut in at his home; and he
said, "Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and
let us shut the doors of the temple; for they will come to kill you;
yes, in the night will they come to kill you."

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> I said, "Should such a man as I flee? Who
is there that, being such as I, would go into the temple to save his
life? I will not go in."

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> I discerned, and behold, God had not sent
him; but he pronounced this prophecy against me. Tobiah and Sanballat
had hired him.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> He hired so that I would be afraid, do
so, and sin, and that they might have material for an evil report, that
they might reproach me.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> "Remember, my God, Tobiah and Sanballat
according to these their works, and also the prophetess Noadiah, and the
rest of the prophets, that would have put me in fear."

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> So the wall was finished in the
twenty-fifth \[day\] of \[the month\] Elul, in fifty-two days.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> It happened, when all our enemies heard
\[of it\], that all the nations that were about us feared, and were much
cast down in their own eyes; for they perceived that this work was
worked of our God.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Moreover in those days the nobles of
Judah sent many letters to Tobiah, and \[the letters\] of Tobiah came to
them.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> For there were many in Judah sworn to
him, because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son of Arah; and his
son Jehohanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah
as wife.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Also they spoke of his good deeds before
me, and reported my words to him. Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Now it happened, when the wall was built,
and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the
Levites were appointed,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> that I put my brother Hanani, and Hananiah
the governor of the castle, in charge of Jerusalem; for he was a
faithful man, and feared God above many.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> I said to them, "Don't let the gates of
Jerusalem be opened until the sun is hot; and while they stand guard,
let them shut the doors, and you bar them: and appoint watches of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, everyone in his watch, with everyone near his
house."

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Now the city was wide and large; but the
people were few therein, and the houses were not built.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> My God put into my heart to gather together
the nobles, and the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned
by genealogy. I found the book of the genealogy of those who came up at
the first, and I found written therein:

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> These are the children of the province, who
went up out of the captivity of those who had been carried away, whom
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and who returned to
Jerusalem and to Judah, everyone to his city;

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah,
Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum,
Baanah. The number of the men of the people of Israel:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> The children of Parosh, two thousand one
hundred seventy-two.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> The children of Shephatiah, three hundred
seventy-two.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> The children of Arah, six hundred
fifty-two.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> The children of Pahathmoab, of the
children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred \[and\]
eighteen.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The children of Elam, one thousand two
hundred fifty-four.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The children of Zattu, eight hundred
forty-five.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> The children of Zaccai, seven hundred
sixty.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> The children of Binnui, six hundred
forty-eight.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> The children of Bebai, six hundred
twenty-eight.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> The children of Azgad, two thousand three
hundred twenty-two.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> The children of Adonikam, six hundred
sixty-seven.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The children of Bigvai, two thousand
sixty-seven.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> The children of Adin, six hundred
fifty-five.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> The children of Ater, of Hezekiah,
ninety-eight.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> The children of Hashum, three hundred
Twenty-eight.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> The children of Bezai, three hundred
twenty-four.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> The children of Hariph, one hundred
twelve.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The children of Gibeon, ninety-five.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, one
hundred eighty-eight.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> The men of Anathoth, one hundred
twenty-eight.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> The men of Beth Azmaveth, forty-two.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> The men of Kiriath Jearim, Chephirah, and
Beeroth, seven hundred forty-three.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred
twenty-one.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> The men of Michmas, one hundred and
twenty-two.

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> The men of Bethel and Ai, a hundred
twenty-three.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> The men of the other Nebo, fifty-two.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> The children of the other Elam, one
thousand two hundred fifty-four.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> The children of Harim, three hundred
twenty.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> The children of Jericho, three hundred
forty-five.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono,
seven hundred twenty-one.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> The children of Senaah, three thousand
nine hundred thirty.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> The priests: The children of Jedaiah, of
the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy-three.

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> The children of Immer, one thousand
fifty-two.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> The children of Pashhur, one thousand two
hundred forty-seven.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> The children of Harim, one thousand
\[and\] seventeen.

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of
Kadmiel, of the children of Hodevah, seventy-four.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> The singers: the children of Asaph, one
hundred forty-eight.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> The porters: the children of Shallum, the
children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the
children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, one hundred thirty-eight.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> The Nethinim: the children of Ziha, the
children of Hasupha, the children of Tabbaoth,

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> the children of Keros, the children of
Sia, the children of Padon,

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> the children of Lebana, the children of
Hagaba, the children of Salmai,

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> the children of Hanan, the children of
Giddel, the children of Gahar,

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> the children of Reaiah, the children of
Rezin, the children of Nekoda,

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> the children of Gazzam, the children of
Uzza, the children of Paseah.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> The children of Besai, the children of
Meunim, the children of Nephushesim,

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> the children of Bakbuk, the children of
Hakupha, the children of Harhur,

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> the children of Bazlith, the children of
Mehida, the children of Harsha,

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> the children of Barkos, the children of
Sisera, the children of Temah,

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> the children of Neziah, the children of
Hatipha.

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> The children of Solomon's servants: the
children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida,

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> the children of Jaala, the children of
Darkon, the children of Giddel,

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> the children of Shephatiah, the children
of Hattil, the children of Pochereth Hazzebaim, the children of Amon.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> All the Nethinim, and the children of
Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety-two.

<span id="an_7:61">7:61</span> These were those who went up from Tel
Melah, Tel Harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer; but they could not show
their fathers' houses, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel:

<span id="an_7:62">7:62</span> The children of Delaiah, the children of
Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred forty-two.

<span id="an_7:63">7:63</span> Of the priests: the children of Hobaiah,
the children of Hakkoz, the children of Barzillai, who took a wife of
the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their
name.

<span id="an_7:64">7:64</span> These sought their register \[among\]
those who were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore
were they deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.

<span id="an_7:65">7:65</span> The governor said to them, that they
should not eat of the most holy things, until there stood up a priest
with Urim and Thummim.

<span id="an_7:66">7:66</span> The whole assembly together was forty-two
thousand three hundred sixty,

<span id="an_7:67">7:67</span> besides their male servants and their
female servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred
thirty-seven: and they had two hundred forty-five singing men and
singing women.

<span id="an_7:68">7:68</span> Their horses were seven hundred
thirty-six; their mules, two hundred forty-five;

<span id="an_7:69">7:69</span> \[their\] camels, four hundred
thirty-five; \[their\] donkeys, six thousand seven hundred twenty.

<span id="an_7:70">7:70</span> Some from among the heads of fathers'
\[houses\] gave to the work. The governor gave to the treasury one
thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, and five hundred thirty priests'
garments.

<span id="an_7:71">7:71</span> Some of the heads of fathers' \[houses\]
gave into the treasury of the work twenty thousand darics of gold, and
two thousand two hundred minas of silver.

<span id="an_7:72">7:72</span> That which the rest of the people gave
was twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand minas of silver,
and sixty-seven priests' garments.

<span id="an_7:73">7:73</span> So the priests, and the Levites, and the
porters, and the singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinim, and
all Israel, lived in their cities. When the seventh month was come, the
children of Israel were in their cities.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> All the people gathered themselves together
as one man into the broad place that was before the water gate; and they
spoke to Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which
Yahweh had commanded to Israel.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Ezra the priest brought the law before the
assembly, both men and women, and all who could hear with understanding,
on the first day of the seventh month.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> He read therein before the broad place that
was before the water gate from early morning until midday, in the
presence of the men and the women, and of those who could understand;
and the ears of all the people were \[attentive\] to the book of the
law.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Ezra the scribe stood on a pulpit of wood,
which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah,
and Shema, and Anaiah, and Uriah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his
right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchijah,
and Hashum, and Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, \[and\] Meshullam.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Ezra opened the book in the sight of all
the people; (for he was above all the people;) and when he opened it,
all the people stood up:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> and Ezra blessed Yahweh, the great God. All
the people answered, "Amen, Amen," with the lifting up of their hands.
They bowed their heads, and worshiped Yahweh with their faces to the
ground.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah,
Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad,
Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, caused the people to understand the
law: and the people \[stood\] in their place.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> They read in the book, in the law of God,
distinctly; and they gave the sense, so that they understood the
reading.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra
the priest the scribe, and the Levites who taught the people, said to
all the people, "This day is holy to Yahweh your God. Don't mourn, nor
weep." For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Then he said to them, "Go your way. Eat
the fat, drink the sweet, and send portions to him for whom nothing is
prepared; for this day is holy to our Lord. Don't be grieved; for the
joy of Yahweh is your strength."

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> So the Levites stilled all the people,
saying, "Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be grieved."

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> All the people went their way to eat, and
to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because they
had understood the words that were declared to them.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> On the second day were gathered together
the heads of fathers' \[houses\] of all the people, the priests, and the
Levites, to Ezra the scribe, even to give attention to the words of the
law.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> They found written in the law, how that
Yahweh had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell
in booths in the feast of the seventh month;

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> and that they should publish and proclaim
in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, "Go out to the mountain,
and get olive branches, and branches of wild olive, and myrtle branches,
and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths, as it is
written."

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> So the people went out, and brought them,
and made themselves booths, everyone on the roof of his house, and in
their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the broad
place of the water gate, and in the broad place of the gate of Ephraim.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> All the assembly of those who were come
again out of the captivity made booths, and lived in the booths; for
since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun to that day the children of
Israel had not done so. There was very great gladness.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Also day by day, from the first day to
the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. They kept the feast
seven days; and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according to
the ordinance.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now in the twenty-fourth day of this month
the children of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackcloth,
and earth on them.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The seed of Israel separated themselves
from all foreigners, and stood and confessed their sins, and the
iniquities of their fathers.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> They stood up in their place, and read in
the book of the law of Yahweh their God a fourth part of the day; and
\[another\] fourth part they confessed, and worshiped Yahweh their God.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Then stood up on the stairs of the Levites,
Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, \[and\]
Chenani, and cried with a loud voice to Yahweh their God.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel,
Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, \[and\] Pethahiah,
said, "Stand up and bless Yahweh your God from everlasting to
everlasting! Bessed be your glorious name, which is exalted above all
blessing and praise!

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> You are Yahweh, even you alone. You have
made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their army, the earth and
all things that are on it, the seas and all that is in them, and you
preserve them all. The army of heaven worships you.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> You are Yahweh, the God who chose Abram,
and brought him out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gave him the name of
Abraham,

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> and found his heart faithful before you,
and made a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanite, the
Hittite, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite, and the
Girgashite, to give it to his seed, and have performed your words; for
you are righteous.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> "You saw the affliction of our fathers in
Egypt, and heard their cry by the Red Sea,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> and showed signs and wonders against
Pharaoh, and against all his servants, and against all the people of his
land; for you knew that they dealt proudly against them, and made a name
for yourself, as it is this day.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> You divided the sea before them, so that
they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and you cast
their pursuers into the depths, as a stone into the mighty waters.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Moreover, in a pillar of cloud you led
them by day; and in a pillar of fire by night, to give them light in the
way in which they should go.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> "You came down also on Mount Sinai, and
spoke with them from heaven, and gave them right ordinances and true
laws, good statutes and commandments,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> and made known to them your holy Sabbath,
and commanded them commandments, and statutes, and a law, by Moses your
servant,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> and gave them bread from the sky for
their hunger, and brought forth water for them out of the rock for their
thirst, and commanded them that they should go in to possess the land
which you had sworn to give them.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> "But they and our fathers dealt proudly
and hardened their neck, didn't listen to your commandments,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> and refused to obey, neither were they
mindful of your wonders that you did among them, but hardened their
neck, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to return to their
bondage. But you are a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow
to anger, and abundant in loving kindness, and didn't forsake them.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Yes, when they had made them a molten
calf, and said, 'This is your God who brought you up out of Egypt,' and
had committed awful blasphemies;

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> yet you in your manifold mercies didn't
forsake them in the wilderness: the pillar of cloud didn't depart from
over them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by
night, to show them light, and the way in which they should go.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> You gave also your good Spirit to
instruct them, and didn't withhold your manna from their mouth, and gave
them water for their thirst.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> "Yes, forty years you sustained them in
the wilderness. They lacked nothing. Their clothes didn't grow old, and
their feet didn't swell.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Moreover you gave them kingdoms and
peoples, which you allotted according to their portions. So they
possessed the land of Sihon, even the land of the king of Heshbon, and
the land of Og king of Bashan.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> You also multiplied their children as the
stars of the sky, and brought them into the land concerning which you
said to their fathers, that they should go in to possess it.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> "So the children went in and possessed
the land, and you subdued before them the inhabitants of the land, the
Canaanites, and gave them into their hands, with their kings, and the
peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they pleased.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> They took fortified cities, and a rich
land, and possessed houses full of all good things, cisterns dug out,
vineyards, and olive groves, and fruit trees in abundance. So they ate,
were filled, became fat, and delighted themselves in your great
goodness.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> "Nevertheless they were disobedient, and
rebelled against you, and cast your law behind their back, and killed
your prophets that testified against them to turn them again to you, and
they committed awful blasphemies.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Therefore you delivered them into the
hand of their adversaries, who distressed them. In the time of their
trouble, when they cried to you, you heard from heaven; and according to
your manifold mercies you gave them saviors who saved them out of the
hand of their adversaries.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> But after they had rest, they did evil
again before you; therefore left you them in the hand of their enemies,
so that they had the dominion over them; yet when they returned, and
cried to you, you heard from heaven; and many times you delivered them
according to your mercies,

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> and testified against them, that you
might bring them again to your law. Yet they dealt proudly, and didn't
listen to your commandments, but sinned against your ordinances, (which
if a man does, he shall live in them), turned their backs, stiffened
their neck, and would not hear.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Yet many years you put up with them, and
testified against them by your Spirit through your prophets. Yet would
they not give ear. Therefore you gave them into the hand of the peoples
of the lands.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> "Nevertheless in your manifold mercies
you did not make a full end of them, nor forsake them; for you are a
gracious and merciful God.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Now therefore, our God, the great, the
mighty, and the awesome God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness,
don't let all the travail seem little before you, that has come on us,
on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets,
and on our fathers, and on all your people, since the time of the kings
of Assyria to this day.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> However you are just in all that is come
on us; for you have dealt truly, but we have done wickedly;

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> neither have our kings, our princes, our
priests, nor our fathers, kept your law, nor listened to your
commandments and your testimonies with which you testified against them.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> For they have not served you in their
kingdom, and in your great goodness that you gave them, and in the large
and rich land which you gave before them, neither did they turn from
their wicked works.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> "Behold, we are servants this day, and as
for the land that you gave to our fathers to eat its fruit and its good,
behold, we are servants in it.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> It yields much increase to the kings whom
you have set over us because of our sins: also they have power over our
bodies, and over our livestock, at their pleasure, and we are in great
distress.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> Yet for all this, we make a sure
covenant, and write it; and our princes, our Levites, \[and\] our
priests, seal to it."

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now those who sealed were: Nehemiah the
governor, the son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah; these were the
priests.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> The Levites: namely, Jeshua the son of
Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> and their brothers, Shebaniah, Hodiah,
Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Hodiah, Bani, Beninu.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> The chiefs of the people: Parosh,
Pahathmoab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai,

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> and Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> Malluch, Harim, Baanah.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The rest of the people, the priests,
the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinim, and all those who
had separated themselves from the peoples of the lands to the law of
God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, everyone who had
knowledge, and understanding--

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> they joined with their brothers, their
nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's
law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do
all the commandments of Yahweh our Lord, and his ordinances and his
statutes;

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> and that we would not give our
daughters to the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters for our
sons;

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> and if the peoples of the land bring
wares or any grain on the Sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy of
them on the Sabbath, or on a holy day; and that we would forego the
seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Also we made ordinances for ourselves,
to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the
service of the house of our God;

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> for the show bread, and for the
continual meal offering, and for the continual burnt offering, for the
Sabbaths, for the new moons, for the set feasts, and for the holy
things, and for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for
all the work of the house of our God.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> We cast lots, the priests, the Levites,
and the people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our
God, according to our fathers' houses, at times appointed, year by year,
to burn on the altar of Yahweh our God, as it is written in the law;

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> and to bring the first fruits of our
ground, and the first fruits of all fruit of all kinds of trees, year by
year, to the house of Yahweh;

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> also the firstborn of our sons, and of
our livestock, as it is written in the law, and the firstborn of our
herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, to the
priests who minister in the house of our God;

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> and that we should bring the first
fruits of our dough, and our wave offerings, and the fruit of all kinds
of trees, the new wine and the oil, to the priests, to the rooms of the
house of our God; and the tithes of our ground to the Levites; for they,
the Levites, take the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> The priest the son of Aaron shall be
with the Levites, when the Levites take tithes: and the Levites shall
bring up the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the rooms,
into the treasure house.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> For the children of Israel and the
children of Levi shall bring the wave offering of the grain, of the new
wine, and of the oil, to the rooms, where are the vessels of the
sanctuary, and the priests who minister, and the porters, and the
singers. We will not forsake the house of our God.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> The princes of the people lived in
Jerusalem: the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to
dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts in the \[other\]
cities.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> The people blessed all the men who
willingly offered themselves to dwell in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Now these are the chiefs of the province
who lived in Jerusalem: but in the cities of Judah lived everyone in his
possession in their cities, \[to wit\], Israel, the priests, and the
Levites, and the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> In Jerusalem lived certain of the
children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of
Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of
Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the children of
Perez;

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> and Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son
of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib,
the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> All the sons of Perez who lived in
Jerusalem were four hundred sixty-eight valiant men.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> These are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the
son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of
Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> After him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred
twenty-eight.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Joel the son of Zichri was their
overseer; and Judah the son of Hassenuah was second over the city.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of
Joiarib, Jachin,

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of
Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the
ruler of the house of God,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> and their brothers who did the work of
the house, eight hundred twenty-two; and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the
son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of
Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> and his brothers, chiefs of fathers'
\[houses\], two hundred forty-two; and Amashsai the son of Azarel, the
son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> and their brothers, mighty men of
valor, one hundred twenty-eight; and their overseer was Zabdiel, the son
of Haggedolim.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of
Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni;

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> and Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the
chiefs of the Levites, who had the oversight of the outward business of
the house of God;

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son
of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who was the chief to begin the thanksgiving
in prayer, and Bakbukiah, the second among his brothers; and Abda the
son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> All the Levites in the holy city were
two hundred eighty-four.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon,
and their brothers, who kept watch at the gates, were one hundred
seventy-two.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> The residue of Israel, of the priests,
the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, everyone in his
inheritance.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> But the Nethinim lived in Ophel: and
Ziha and Gishpa were over the Nethinim.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> The overseer also of the Levites at
Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of
Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the singers, over the
business of the house of God.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> For there was a commandment from the
king concerning them, and a settled provision for the singers, as every
day required.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of the
children of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all
matters concerning the people.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> As for the villages, with their fields,
some of the children of Judah lived in Kiriath Arba and its towns, and
in Dibon and its towns, and in Jekabzeel and its villages,

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> and in Jeshua, and in Moladah, and Beth
Pelet,

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> and in Hazar Shual, and in Beersheba
and its towns,

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> and in Ziklag, and in Meconah and in
its towns,

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> and in En Rimmon, and in Zorah, and in
Jarmuth,

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages,
Lachish and its fields, Azekah and its towns. So they encamped from
Beersheba to the valley of Hinnom.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> The children of Benjamin also \[lived\]
from Geba \[onward\], at Michmash and Aija, and at Bethel and its towns,

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> Of the Levites, certain divisions in
Judah \[were joined\] to Benjamin.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Now these are the priests and the Levites
who went up with Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah,
Jeremiah, Ezra,

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were
the chiefs of the priests and of their brothers in the days of Jeshua.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui,
Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, \[and\] Mattaniah, who was over the
thanksgiving, he and his brothers.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Also Bakbukiah and Unno, their brothers,
were over against them according to their offices.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Jeshua became the father of Joiakim,
and Joiakim became the father of Eliashib, and Eliashib became the
father of Joiada,

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> and Joiada became the father of
Jonathan, and Jonathan became the father of Jaddua.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> In the days of Joiakim were priests,
heads of fathers' \[houses\]: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah,
Hananiah;

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah,
Jehohanan;

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah,
Joseph;

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon,
Meshullam;

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of
Moadiah, Piltai;

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah,
Jehonathan;

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> and of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah,
Uzzi;

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah,
Nethanel.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> As for the Levites, in the days of
Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, there were recorded the heads
of fathers' \[houses\]; also the priests, in the reign of Darius the
Persian.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> The sons of Levi, heads of fathers'
\[houses\], were written in the book of the chronicles, even until the
days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The chiefs of the Levites: Hashabiah,
Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brothers over
against them, to praise and give thanks, according to the commandment of
David the man of God, watch next to watch.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah,
Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the watch at the
storehouses of the gates.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> These were in the days of Joiakim the
son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the
governor, and of Ezra the priest the scribe.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> At the dedication of the wall of
Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them
to Jerusalem, to keep the dedication with gladness, both with giving
thanks, and with singing, with cymbals, stringed instruments, and with
harps.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> The sons of the singers gathered
themselves together, both out of the plain around Jerusalem, and from
the villages of the Netophathites;

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> also from Beth Gilgal, and out of the
fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the singers had built them villages
around Jerusalem.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> The priests and the Levites purified
themselves; and they purified the people, and the gates, and the wall.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Then I brought up the princes of Judah
on the wall, and appointed two great companies who gave thanks and went
in procession. \[One went\] on the right hand on the wall toward the
dung gate;

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> and after them went Hoshaiah, and half
of the princes of Judah,

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and
Jeremiah,

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> and certain of the priests' sons with
trumpets: Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of
Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph;

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> and his brothers, Shemaiah, and Azarel,
Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical
instruments of David the man of God; and Ezra the scribe was before
them.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> By the spring gate, and straight before
them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the ascent of
the wall, above the house of David, even to the water gate eastward.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> The other company of those who gave
thanks went to meet them, and I after them, with the half of the people,
on the wall, above the tower of the furnaces, even to the broad wall,

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> and above the gate of Ephraim, and by
the old gate, and by the fish gate, and the tower of Hananel, and the
tower of Hammeah, even to the sheep gate: and they stood still in the
gate of the guard.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> So stood the two companies of those who
gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with
me;

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> and the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah,
Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets;

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> and Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and
Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. The
singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> They offered great sacrifices that day,
and rejoiced; for God had made them rejoice with great joy; and the
women also and the children rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was
heard even afar off.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> On that day were men appointed over the
rooms for the treasures, for the wave offerings, for the first fruits,
and for the tithes, to gather into them, according to the fields of the
cities, the portions appointed by the law for the priests and Levites:
for Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites who waited.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> They performed the duty of their God,
and the duty of the purification, and \[so did\] the singers and the
porters, according to the commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> For in the days of David and Asaph of
old there was a chief of the singers, and songs of praise and
thanksgiving to God.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> All Israel in the days of Zerubbabel,
and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the
porters, as every day required: and they set apart \[that which was\]
for the Levites; and the Levites set apart \[that which was\] for the
sons of Aaron.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> On that day they read in the book of
Moses in the audience of the people; and therein was found written, that
an Ammonite and a Moabite should not enter into the assembly of God
forever,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> because they didn't meet the children of
Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them, to
curse them: however our God turned the curse into a blessing.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> It came to pass, when they had heard the
law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Now before this, Eliashib the priest, who
was appointed over the rooms of the house of our God, being allied to
Tobiah,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> had prepared for him a great room, where
before they laid the meal offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels,
and the tithes of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, which were given
by commandment to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the
wave offerings for the priests.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> But in all this \[time\] I was not at
Jerusalem; for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of
Babylon I went to the king: and after certain days asked I leave of the
king,

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> and I came to Jerusalem, and understood
the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobiah, in preparing him a room in
the courts of the house of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> It grieved me severely: therefore I cast
forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the room.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Then I commanded, and they cleansed the
rooms: and there brought I again the vessels of the house of God, with
the meal offerings and the frankincense.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> I perceived that the portions of the
Levites had not been given them; so that the Levites and the singers,
who did the work, had fled everyone to his field.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Then I contended with the rulers, and
said, "Why is the house of God forsaken?" I gathered them together, and
set them in their place.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then brought all Judah the tithe of the
grain and the new wine and the oil to the treasuries.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> I made treasurers over the treasuries,
Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah:
and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah; for
they were counted faithful, and their business was to distribute to
their brothers.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Remember me, my God, concerning this,
and don't wipe out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my
God, and for its observances.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> In those days saw I in Judah some men
treading winepresses on the Sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and
loading donkeys \[therewith\]; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all
kinds of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day:
and I testified \[against them\] in the day in which they sold food.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> There lived men of Tyre also therein,
who brought in fish, and all kinds of wares, and sold on the Sabbath to
the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Then I contended with the nobles of
Judah, and said to them, "What evil thing is this that you do, and
profane the Sabbath day?

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Didn't your fathers do thus, and didn't
our God bring all this evil on us, and on this city? Yet you bring more
wrath on Israel by profaning the Sabbath."

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> It came to pass that, when the gates of
Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the
doors should be shut, and commanded that they should not be opened until
after the Sabbath. I set some of my servants over the gates, that no
burden should be brought in on the Sabbath day.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> So the merchants and sellers of all
kinds of wares lodged outside of Jerusalem once or twice.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Then I testified against them, and said
to them, "Why do you stay around the wall? If you do so again, I will
lay hands on you." From that time on, they didn't come on the Sabbath.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> I commanded the Levites that they
should purify themselves, and that they should come and keep the gates,
to sanctify the Sabbath day. Remember to me, my God, this also, and
spare me according to the greatness of your loving kindness.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> In those days also saw I the Jews who
had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon, \[and\] of Moab:

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> and their children spoke half in the
speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language, but
according to the language of each people.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> I contended with them, and cursed them,
and struck certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them
swear by God, \[saying\], "You shall not give your daughters to their
sons, nor take their daughters for your sons, or for yourselves.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Didn't Solomon king of Israel sin by
these things? Yet among many nations was there no king like him, and he
was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel.
Nevertheless foreign women caused even him to sin.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Shall we then listen to you to do all
this great evil, to trespass against our God in marrying foreign women?"

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> One of the sons of Joiada, the son of
Eliashib the high priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite:
therefore I chased him from me.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Remember them, my God, because they
have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of
the Levites.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Thus I cleansed them from all
foreigners, and appointed duties for the priests and for the Levites,
everyone in his work;

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> and for the wood offering, at times
appointed, and for the first fruits. Remember me, my God, for good.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther](est.md)
