[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](lev)  [Next](deu.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Numbers

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses in the wilderness of
Sinai, in the Tent of Meeting, on the first day of the second month, in
the second year after they had come out of the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> "Take a census of all the congregation of
the children of Israel, by their families, by their fathers' houses,
according to the number of the names, every male, one by one;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> from twenty years old and upward, all who
are able to go out to war in Israel. You and Aaron shall number them by
their divisions.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> With you there shall be a man of every
tribe; everyone head of his fathers' house.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> These are the names of the men who shall
stand with you: Of Reuben: Elizur the son of Shedeur.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Of Simeon: Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Of Judah: Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Of Issachar: Nethanel the son of Zuar.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Of Zebulun: Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Of the children of Joseph: Of Ephraim:
Elishama the son of Ammihud. Of Manasseh: Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Of Benjamin: Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Of Dan: Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Of Asher: Pagiel the son of Ochran.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Of Gad: Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Of Naphtali: Ahira the son of Enan."

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> These are those who were called of the
congregation, the princes of the tribes of their fathers; they were the
heads of the thousands of Israel.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Moses and Aaron took these men who are
mentioned by name.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> They assembled all the congregation
together on the first day of the second month; and they declared their
ancestry by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the
number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, one by one.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> As Yahweh commanded Moses, so he numbered
them in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> The children of Reuben, Israel's
firstborn, their generations, by their families, by their fathers'
houses, according to the number of the names, one by one, every male
from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Reuben, were forty-six thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Of the children of Simeon, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, those who were
numbered of it, according to the number of the names, one by one, every
male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go out to
war;

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Simeon, were fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Of the children of Gad, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Gad, were forty-five thousand six hundred fifty.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Of the children of Judah, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Judah, were sixty-four thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Of the children of Issachar, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Issachar, were fifty-four thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Of the children of Zebulun, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Zebulun, were fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Of the children of Joseph, of the
children of Ephraim, their generations, by their families, by their
fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years
old and upward, all who were able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> Of the children of Manasseh, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Manasseh, were thirty-two thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> Of the children of Benjamin, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go out to war;

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Benjamin, were thirty-five thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Of the children of Dan, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go forth to war;

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Dan, were sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> Of the children of Asher, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go forth to war;

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Asher, were forty-one thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> Of the children of Naphtali, their
generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to
the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all who were
able to go forth to war;

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> those who were numbered of them, of the
tribe of Naphtali, were fifty-three thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> These are those who were numbered, whom
Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men:
they were each one for his fathers' house.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> So all those who were numbered of the
children of Israel by their fathers' houses, from twenty years old and
upward, all who were able to go out to war in Israel;

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> even all those who were numbered were six
hundred three thousand five hundred fifty.

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> But the Levites after the tribe of their
fathers were not numbered among them.

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> For Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> "Only the tribe of Levi you shall not
number, neither shall you take a census of them among the children of
Israel;

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> but appoint the Levites over the
Tabernacle of the Testimony, and over all its furnishings, and over all
that belongs to it. They shall carry the tabernacle, and all its
furnishings; and they shall take care of it, and shall encamp around it.

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> When the tabernacle is to move, the
Levites shall take it down; and when the tabernacle is to be set up, the
Levites shall set it up. The stranger who comes near shall be put to
death.

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> The children of Israel shall pitch their
tents, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own standard,
according to their divisions.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> But the Levites shall encamp around the
Tabernacle of the Testimony, that there may be no wrath on the
congregation of the children of Israel: and the Levites shall be
responsible for the Tabernacle of the Testimony."

<span id="an_1:54">1:54</span> Thus the children of Israel did.
According to all that Yahweh commanded Moses, so they did.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> "The children of Israel shall encamp every
man by his own standard, with the banners of their fathers' houses: at a
distance from the Tent of Meeting shall they encamp around it."

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Those who encamp on the east side toward
the sunrise shall be of the standard of the camp of Judah, according to
their divisions: and the prince of the children of Judah shall be
Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were seventy-four thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Those who encamp next to him shall be the
tribe of Issachar: and the prince of the children of Issachar shall be
Nethanel the son of Zuar.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of it, were fifty-four thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The tribe of Zebulun: and the prince of the
children of Zebulun shall be Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of it, were fifty-seven thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> All who were numbered of the camp of Judah
were one hundred eighty-six thousand four hundred, according to their
divisions. They shall set out first.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> "On the south side shall be the standard
of the camp of Reuben according to their divisions. The prince of the
children of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of it, were forty-six thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> "Those who encamp next to him shall be
the tribe of Simeon. The prince of the children of Simeon shall be
Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were fifty-nine thousand three hundred.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> "The tribe of Gad: and the prince of the
children of Gad shall be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were forty-five thousand six hundred fifty.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> "All who were numbered of the camp of
Reuben were one hundred fifty-one thousand four hundred fifty, according
to their armies. They shall set out second.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> "Then the Tent of Meeting shall set out,
with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps. As they encamp,
so shall they set out, every man in his place, by their standards.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> "On the west side shall be the standard
of the camp of Ephraim according to their divisions: and the prince of
the children of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were forty thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> "Next to him shall be the tribe of
Manasseh: and the prince of the children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel
the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were thirty-two thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> "The tribe of Benjamin: and the prince of
the children of Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> His army, and those who were numbered of
them, were thirty-five thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> "All who were numbered of the camp of
Ephraim were one hundred eight thousand one hundred, according to their
divisions. They shall set out third.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> "On the north side shall be the standard
of the camp of Dan according to their divisions: and the prince of the
children of Dan shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were sixty-two thousand seven hundred.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> "Those who encamp next to him shall be
the tribe of Asher: and the prince of the children of Asher shall be
Pagiel the son of Ochran.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were forty-one thousand and five hundred.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> "The tribe of Naphtali: and the prince of
the children of Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> His division, and those who were numbered
of them, were fifty-three thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> "All who were numbered of the camp of Dan
were one hundred fifty-seven thousand six hundred. They shall set out
last by their standards."

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> These are those who were numbered of the
children of Israel by their fathers' houses. All who were numbered of
the camps according to their armies were six hundred three thousand five
hundred fifty.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> But the Levites were not numbered among
the children of Israel; as Yahweh commanded Moses.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> Thus the children of Israel did.
According to all that Yahweh commanded Moses, so they encamped by their
standards, and so they set out, everyone by their families, according to
their fathers' houses.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now this is the history of the generations
of Aaron and Moses in the day that Yahweh spoke with Moses in Mount
Sinai.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> These are the names of the sons of Aaron:
Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> These are the names of the sons of Aaron,
the priests who were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the
priest's office.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Nadab and Abihu died before Yahweh, when
they offered strange fire before Yahweh, in the wilderness of Sinai, and
they had no children. Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's
office in the presence of Aaron their father.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> "Bring the tribe of Levi near, and set them
before Aaron the priest, that they may minister to him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> They shall keep his requirements, and the
requirements of the whole congregation before the Tent of Meeting, to do
the service of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> They shall keep all the furnishings of the
Tent of Meeting, and the obligations of the children of Israel, to do
the service of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> You shall give the Levites to Aaron and to
his sons. They are wholly given to him on the behalf of the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> You shall appoint Aaron and his sons, and
they shall keep their priesthood. The stranger who comes near shall be
put to death."

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> "Behold, I have taken the Levites from
among the children of Israel instead of all the firstborn who open the
womb among the children of Israel; and the Levites shall be mine:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> for all the firstborn are mine. On the
day that I struck down all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I made
holy to me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and animal. They shall
be mine. I am Yahweh."

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses in the wilderness
of Sinai, saying,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> "Count the children of Levi by their
fathers' houses, by their families. You shall count every male from a
month old and upward."

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Moses numbered them according to the word
of Yahweh, as he was commanded.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> These were the sons of Levi by their
names: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> These are the names of the sons of
Gershon by their families: Libni and Shimei.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The sons of Kohath by their families:
Amram, and Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> The sons of Merari by their families:
Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to
their fathers' houses.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Of Gershon was the family of the
Libnites, and the family of the Shimeites: these are the families of the
Gershonites.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Those who were numbered of them,
according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward,
even those who were numbered of them were seven thousand five hundred.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> The families of the Gershonites shall
encamp behind the tabernacle westward.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> The prince of the fathers' house of the
Gershonites shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> The duty of the sons of Gershon in the
Tent of Meeting shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, its covering, and
the screen for the door of the Tent of Meeting,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> and the hangings of the court, and the
screen for the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and around
the altar, and its cords for all of its service.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Of Kohath was the family of the
Amramites, and the family of the Izharites, and the family of the
Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites: these are the families of
the Kohathites.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> According to the number of all the males,
from a month old and upward, there were eight thousand six hundred,
keeping the requirements of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> The families of the sons of Kohath shall
encamp on the south side of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> The prince of the fathers' house of the
families of the Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Their duty shall be the ark, the table,
the lamp stand, the altars, the vessels of the sanctuary with which they
minister, and the screen, and all its service.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall
be prince of the princes of the Levites, with the oversight of those who
keep the requirements of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites,
and the family of the Mushites. These are the families of Merari.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Those who were numbered of them,
according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward,
were six thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The prince of the fathers' house of the
families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail. They shall encamp on
the north side of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> The appointed duty of the sons of Merari
shall be the tabernacle's boards, its bars, its pillars, its sockets,
all its instruments, all its service,

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> the pillars of the court around it, their
sockets, their pins, and their cords.

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> Those who encamp before the tabernacle
eastward, in front of the Tent of Meeting toward the sunrise, shall be
Moses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the requirements of the sanctuary
for the duty of the children of Israel. The stranger who comes near
shall be put to death.

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> All who were numbered of the Levites,
whom Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of Yahweh, by their
families, all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty-two
thousand.

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Number all the
firstborn males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward,
and take the number of their names.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> You shall take the Levites for me (I am
Yahweh) instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and
the livestock of the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the
livestock of the children of Israel."

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> Moses numbered, as Yahweh commanded him,
all the firstborn among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> All the firstborn males according to the
number of names, from a month old and upward, of those who were numbered
of them, were twenty-two thousand two hundred seventy-three.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> "Take the Levites instead of all the
firstborn among the children of Israel, and the livestock of the Levites
instead of their livestock; and the Levites shall be mine. I am Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> For the redemption of the two hundred
seventy-three of the firstborn of the children of Israel, who exceed the
number of the Levites,

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> you shall take five shekels apiece for
each one; after the shekel of the sanctuary you shall take them (the
shekel is twenty gerahs):

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> and you shall give the money, with which
the remainder of them is redeemed, to Aaron and to his sons."

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> Moses took the redemption money from
those who exceeded the number of those who were redeemed by the Levites;

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> from the firstborn of the children of
Israel he took the money, one thousand three hundred sixty-five shekels,
after the shekel of the sanctuary:

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> and Moses gave the redemption money to
Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of Yahweh, as Yahweh
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> "Take a census of the sons of Kohath from
among the sons of Levi, by their families, by their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> from thirty years old and upward even until
fifty years old, all who enter into the service, to do the work in the
Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> "This is the service of the sons of Kohath
in the Tent of Meeting, the most holy things.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> When the camp moves forward, Aaron shall go
in, and his sons, and they shall take down the veil of the screen, and
cover the ark of the Testimony with it,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> and shall put a covering of sealskin on it,
and shall spread over it a cloth all of blue, and shall put in its
poles.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> "On the table of show bread they shall
spread a blue cloth, and put on it the dishes, the spoons, the bowls,
and the cups with which to pour out; and the continual bread shall be on
it.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> They shall spread on them a scarlet cloth,
and cover the same with a covering of sealskin, and shall put in its
poles.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> "They shall take a blue cloth, and cover
the lampstand of the light, and its lamps, and its snuffers, and its
snuff dishes, and all its oil vessels, with which they minister to it.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> They shall put it and all its vessels
within a covering of sealskin, and shall put it on the frame.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> "On the golden altar they shall spread a
blue cloth, and cover it with a covering of sealskin, and shall put in
its poles.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> "They shall take all the vessels of
ministry, with which they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a
blue cloth, and cover them with a covering of sealskin, and shall put
them on the frame.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> "They shall take away the ashes from the
altar, and spread a purple cloth on it.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> They shall put on it all its vessels,
with which they minister about it, the fire pans, the flesh hooks, the
shovels, and the basins; all the vessels of the altar; and they shall
spread on it a covering of sealskin, and put in its poles.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> "When Aaron and his sons have finished
covering the sanctuary, and all the furniture of the sanctuary, as the
camp moves forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to carry
it: but they shall not touch the sanctuary, lest they die. These things
are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> "The duty of Eleazar the son of Aaron the
priest shall be the oil for the light, the sweet incense, the continual
meal offering, and the anointing oil, the requirements of all the
tabernacle, and of all that is in it, the sanctuary, and its
furnishings."

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> "Don't cut off the tribe of the families
of the Kohathites from among the Levites;

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> but thus do to them, that they may live,
and not die, when they approach to the most holy things: Aaron and his
sons shall go in, and appoint them everyone to his service and to his
burden;

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> but they shall not go in to see the
sanctuary even for a moment, lest they die."

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> "Take a census of the sons of Gershon
also, by their fathers' houses, by their families;

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> you shall count them from thirty years
old and upward until fifty years old; all who enter in to wait on the
service, to do the work in the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> "This is the service of the families of
the Gershonites, in serving and in bearing burdens:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> they shall carry the curtains of the
tabernacle, and the Tent of Meeting, its covering, and the covering of
sealskin that is above on it, and the screen for the door of the Tent of
Meeting,

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> and the hangings of the court, and the
screen for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle
and around the altar, and their cords, and all the instruments of their
service, and whatever shall be done with them. Therein shall they serve.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> At the commandment of Aaron and his sons
shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their
burden, and in all their service; and you shall appoint their duty to
them in all their responsibilities.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> This is the service of the families of
the sons of the Gershonites in the Tent of Meeting: and their duty shall
be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> "As for the sons of Merari, you shall
number them by their families, by their fathers' houses;

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> you shall count them from thirty years
old and upward even to fifty years old, everyone who enters on the
service, to do the work of the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> This is the duty of their burden,
according to all their service in the Tent of Meeting: the tabernacle's
boards, its bars, its pillars, its sockets,

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> and the pillars of the court around it,
and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their
instruments, and with all their service: and by name you shall appoint
the instruments of the duty of their burden.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> This is the service of the families of
the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the Tent of
Meeting, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest."

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> Moses and Aaron and the princes of the
congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites by their families, and
by their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, everyone who entered into the service, for work in the
Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Those who were numbered of them by their
families were two thousand seven hundred fifty.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> These are those who were numbered of the
families of the Kohathites, all who served in the Tent of Meeting, whom
Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Yahweh by
Moses.

<span id="an_4:38">4:38</span> Those who were numbered of the sons of
Gershon, their families, and by their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:39">4:39</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, everyone who entered into the service, for work in the
Tent of Meeting,

<span id="an_4:40">4:40</span> even those who were numbered of them, by
their families, by their fathers' houses, were two thousand six hundred
thirty.

<span id="an_4:41">4:41</span> These are those who were numbered of the
families of the sons of Gershon, all who served in the Tent of Meeting,
whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Yahweh.

<span id="an_4:42">4:42</span> Those who were numbered of the families
of the sons of Merari, by their families, by their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:43">4:43</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, everyone who entered into the service, for work in the
Tent of Meeting,

<span id="an_4:44">4:44</span> even those who were numbered of them by
their families, were three thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_4:45">4:45</span> These are those who were numbered of the
families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according
to the commandment of Yahweh by Moses.

<span id="an_4:46">4:46</span> All those who were numbered of the
Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the princes of Israel numbered, by
their families, and by their fathers' houses,

<span id="an_4:47">4:47</span> from thirty years old and upward even to
fifty years old, everyone who entered in to do the work of service, and
the work of bearing burdens in the Tent of Meeting,

<span id="an_4:48">4:48</span> even those who were numbered of them,
were eight thousand five hundred eighty.

<span id="an_4:49">4:49</span> According to the commandment of Yahweh
they were numbered by Moses, everyone according to his service, and
according to his burden. Thus were they numbered by him, as Yahweh
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> "Command the children of Israel that they
put out of the camp every leper, and everyone who has an issue, and
whoever is unclean by the dead.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Both you shall put male and female outside
of the camp; that they not defile their camp, in the midst of which I
dwell."

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> The children of Israel did so, and put them
out outside of the camp; as Yahweh spoke to Moses, so did the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> "Speak to the children of Israel: 'When a
man or woman commits any sin that men commit, so as to trespass against
Yahweh, and that soul is guilty;

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> then he shall confess his sin which he has
done, and he shall make restitution for his guilt in full, and add to it
the fifth part of it, and give it to him in respect of whom he has been
guilty.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But if the man has no kinsman to whom
restitution may be made for the guilt, the restitution for guilt which
is made to Yahweh shall be the priest's; besides the ram of the
atonement, by which atonement shall be made for him.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Every heave offering of all the holy things
of the children of Israel, which they present to the priest, shall be
his.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Every man's holy things shall be his:
whatever any man gives the priest, it shall be his.'"

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> "Speak to the children of Israel, and
tell them: 'If any man's wife goes astray, and is unfaithful to him,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> and a man lies with her carnally, and it
is hidden from the eyes of her husband, and is kept close, and she is
defiled, and there is no witness against her, and she isn't taken in the
act;

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> and the spirit of jealousy comes on him,
and he is jealous of his wife, and she is defiled: or if the spirit of
jealousy comes on him, and he is jealous of his wife, and she isn't
defiled:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> then the man shall bring his wife to the
priest, and shall bring her offering for her: the tenth part of an ephah
of barley meal. He shall pour no oil on it, nor put frankincense on it,
for it is a meal offering of jealousy, a meal offering of memorial,
bringing iniquity to memory.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> The priest shall bring her near, and set
her before Yahweh;

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> and the priest shall take holy water in
an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is on the floor of the
tabernacle the priest shall take, and put it into the water.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> The priest shall set the woman before
Yahweh, and let the hair of the woman's head go loose, and put the meal
offering of memorial in her hands, which is the meal offering of
jealousy. The priest shall have in his hand the water of bitterness that
brings a curse.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> The priest shall cause her to swear, and
shall tell the woman, "If no man has lain with you, and if you haven't
gone aside to uncleanness, being under your husband, be free from this
water of bitterness that brings a curse.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> But if you have gone astray, being under
your husband, and if you are defiled, and some man has lain with you
besides your husband:"

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> then the priest shall cause the woman to
swear with the oath of cursing, and the priest shall tell the woman,
"Yahweh make you a curse and an oath among your people, when Yahweh
allows your thigh to fall away, and your body to swell;

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> and this water that brings a curse will
go into your bowels, and make your body swell, and your thigh fall
away." The woman shall say, "Amen, Amen."

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> "'The priest shall write these curses in
a book, and he shall blot them out into the water of bitterness.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> He shall make the woman drink the water
of bitterness that causes the curse; and the water that causes the curse
shall enter into her and become bitter.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> The priest shall take the meal offering
of jealousy out of the woman's hand, and shall wave the meal offering
before Yahweh, and bring it to the altar.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> The priest shall take a handful of the
meal offering, as its memorial, and burn it on the altar, and afterward
shall make the woman drink the water.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> When he has made her drink the water,
then it shall happen, if she is defiled, and has committed a trespass
against her husband, that the water that causes the curse will enter
into her and become bitter, and her body will swell, and her thigh will
fall away: and the woman will be a curse among her people.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> If the woman isn't defiled, but is clean;
then she shall be free, and shall conceive seed.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> "'This is the law of jealousy, when a
wife, being under her husband, goes astray, and is defiled;

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> or when the spirit of jealousy comes on a
man, and he is jealous of his wife; then he shall set the woman before
Yahweh, and the priest shall execute on her all this law.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> The man shall be free from iniquity, and
that woman shall bear her iniquity.'"

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> "Speak to the children of Israel, and tell
them: 'When either man or woman shall make a special vow, the vow of a
Nazirite, to separate himself to Yahweh,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> he shall separate himself from wine and
strong drink. He shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of fermented
drink, neither shall he drink any juice of grapes, nor eat fresh grapes
or dried.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> All the days of his separation he shall eat
nothing that is made of the grapevine, from the seeds even to the skins.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> "'All the days of his vow of separation no
razor shall come on his head, until the days are fulfilled, in which he
separates himself to Yahweh. He shall be holy. He shall let the locks of
the hair of his head grow long.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> "'All the days that he separates himself to
Yahweh he shall not go near a dead body.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> He shall not make himself unclean for his
father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they
die; because his separation to God is on his head.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> All the days of his separation he is holy
to Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> "'If any man dies very suddenly beside him,
and he defiles the head of his separation; then he shall shave his head
in the day of his cleansing. On the seventh day he shall shave it.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> On the eighth day he shall bring two
turtledoves or two young pigeons to the priest, to the door of the Tent
of Meeting.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> The priest shall offer one for a sin
offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make atonement for
him, because he sinned by reason of the dead, and shall make his head
holy that same day.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> He shall separate to Yahweh the days of
his separation, and shall bring a male lamb a year old for a trespass
offering; but the former days shall be void, because his separation was
defiled.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> "'This is the law of the Nazirite: when
the days of his separation are fulfilled, he shall be brought to the
door of the Tent of Meeting,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> and he shall offer his offering to
Yahweh, one male lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt offering,
and one ewe lamb a year old without blemish for a sin offering, and one
ram without blemish for peace offerings,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes
of fine flour mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil,
and their meal offering, and their drink offerings.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> The priest shall present them before
Yahweh, and shall offer his sin offering, and his burnt offering.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> He shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of
peace offerings to Yahweh, with the basket of unleavened bread. The
priest shall offer also its meal offering, and its drink offering.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The Nazirite shall shave the head of his
separation at the door of the Tent of Meeting, and shall take the hair
of the head of his separation, and put it on the fire which is under the
sacrifice of peace offerings.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> The priest shall take the boiled shoulder
of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one
unleavened wafer, and shall put them on the hands of the Nazirite, after
he has shaved the head of his separation;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> and the priest shall wave them for a wave
offering before Yahweh. This is holy for the priest, together with the
breast that is waved and the thigh that is offered. After that the
Nazirite may drink wine.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> "'This is the law of the Nazirite who
vows, and of his offering to Yahweh for his separation, besides that
which he is able to get. According to his vow which he vows, so he must
do after the law of his separation.'"

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> "Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying,
'This is how you shall bless the children of Israel.' You shall tell
them,

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> 'Yahweh bless you, and keep you.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Yahweh make his face to shine on you, and
be gracious to you.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Yahweh lift up his face toward you, and
give you peace.'

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> "So they shall put my name on the
children of Israel; and I will bless them."

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> It happened on the day that Moses had
finished setting up the tabernacle, and had anointed it and sanctified
it, with all its furniture, and the altar with all its vessels, and had
anointed and sanctified them;

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> that the princes of Israel, the heads of
their fathers' houses, offered. These were the princes of the tribes.
These are they who were over those who were numbered:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> and they brought their offering before
Yahweh, six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon for every two of
the princes, and for each one an ox: and they presented them before the
tabernacle.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> "Accept these from them, that they may be
used in doing the service of the Tent of Meeting; and you shall give
them to the Levites, to every man according to his service."

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and
gave them to the Levites.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> He gave two wagons and four oxen to the
sons of Gershon, according to their service:

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> and he gave four wagons and eight oxen to
the sons of Merari, according to their service, under the direction of
Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> But to the sons of Kohath he gave none,
because the service of the sanctuary belonged to them; they carried it
on their shoulders.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> The princes gave offerings for the
dedication of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the
princes gave their offerings before the altar.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "They shall offer
their offering, each prince on his day, for the dedication of the
altar."

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> He who offered his offering the first day
was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah,

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> and his offering was: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> On the second day Nethanel the son of
Zuar, prince of Issachar, gave his offering.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He offered for his offering: one silver
platter, the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver
bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them
full of fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, five male lambs a year
old. This was the offering of Nethanel the son of Zuar.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> On the third day Eliab the son of Helon,
prince of the children of Zebulun

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> On the fourth day Elizur the son of
Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Elizur the son of Shedeur.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai, prince of the children of Simeon

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old: this was the offering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> On the sixth day, Eliasaph the son of
Deuel, prince of the children of Gad

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> On the seventh day Elishama the son of
Ammihud, prince of the children of Ephraim

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Elishama the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> On the eighth day Gamaliel the son of
Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manasseh

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="an_7:60">7:60</span> On the ninth day Abidan the son of
Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin

<span id="an_7:61">7:61</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:62">7:62</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:63">7:63</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:64">7:64</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:65">7:65</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="an_7:66">7:66</span> On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of
Ammishaddai, prince of the children of Dan

<span id="an_7:67">7:67</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:68">7:68</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:69">7:69</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:70">7:70</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:71">7:71</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="an_7:72">7:72</span> On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of
Ochran, prince of the children of Asher

<span id="an_7:73">7:73</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:74">7:74</span> one golden ladle of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:75">7:75</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:76">7:76</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:77">7:77</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Pagiel the son of Ochran.

<span id="an_7:78">7:78</span> On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan,
prince of the children of Naphtali

<span id="an_7:79">7:79</span> gave his offering: one silver platter,
the weight of which was one hundred thirty shekels, one silver bowl of
seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them full of
fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering;

<span id="an_7:80">7:80</span> one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of
incense;

<span id="an_7:81">7:81</span> one young bull, one ram, one male lamb a
year old, for a burnt offering;

<span id="an_7:82">7:82</span> one male goat for a sin offering;

<span id="an_7:83">7:83</span> and for the sacrifice of peace offerings,
two head of cattle, five rams, five male goats, and five male lambs a
year old. This was the offering of Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="an_7:84">7:84</span> This was the dedication of the altar, on
the day when it was anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve silver
platters, twelve silver bowls, twelve golden ladles;

<span id="an_7:85">7:85</span> each silver platter weighing one hundred
thirty shekels, and each bowl seventy; all the silver of the vessels two
thousand four hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary;

<span id="an_7:86">7:86</span> the twelve golden ladles, full of
incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary;
all the gold of the ladles weighed one hundred twenty shekels;

<span id="an_7:87">7:87</span> all the cattle for the burnt offering
twelve bulls, the rams twelve, the male lambs a year old twelve, and
their meal offering; and the male goats for a sin offering twelve;

<span id="an_7:88">7:88</span> and all the cattle for the sacrifice of
peace offerings twenty-four bulls, the rams sixty, the male goats sixty,
the male lambs a year old sixty. This was the dedication of the altar,
after it was anointed.

<span id="an_7:89">7:89</span> When Moses went into the Tent of Meeting
to speak with Yahweh, he heard his voice speaking to him from above the
mercy seat that was on the ark of the Testimony, from between the two
cherubim: and he spoke to him.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> "Speak to Aaron, and tell him, 'When you
light the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light in front of the
lampstand.'"

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Aaron did so. He lit its lamps to light the
area in front of the lampstand, as Yahweh commanded Moses.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> This was the workmanship of the lampstand,
beaten work of gold. From its base to its flowers, it was beaten work:
according to the pattern which Yahweh had shown Moses, so he made the
lampstand.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> "Take the Levites from among the children
of Israel, and cleanse them.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> You shall do this to them, to cleanse them:
sprinkle the water of cleansing on them, let them shave their whole
bodies with a razor, and let them wash their clothes, and cleanse
themselves.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Then let them take a young bull, and its
meal offering, fine flour mixed with oil; and another young bull you
shall take for a sin offering.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> You shall present the Levites before the
Tent of Meeting. You shall assemble the whole congregation of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> You shall present the Levites before
Yahweh. The children of Israel shall lay their hands on the Levites,

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> and Aaron shall offer the Levites before
Yahweh for a wave offering, on the behalf of the children of Israel,
that it may be theirs to do the service of Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> "The Levites shall lay their hands on the
heads of the bulls, and you shall offer the one for a sin offering, and
the other for a burnt offering to Yahweh, to make atonement for the
Levites.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> You shall set the Levites before Aaron,
and before his sons, and offer them as a wave offering to Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Thus you shall separate the Levites from
among the children of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> "After that, the Levites shall go in to
do the service of the Tent of Meeting: and you shall cleanse them, and
offer them as a wave offering.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> For they are wholly given to me from
among the children of Israel; instead of all who open the womb, even the
firstborn of all the children of Israel, I have taken them to me.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> For all the firstborn among the children
of Israel are mine, both man and animal. On the day that I struck all
the firstborn in the land of Egypt, I sanctified them for myself.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> I have taken the Levites instead of all
the firstborn among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> I have given the Levites as a gift to
Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel, to do the
service of the children of Israel in the Tent of Meeting, and to make
atonement for the children of Israel; that there be no plague among the
children of Israel, when the children of Israel come near to the
sanctuary."

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Moses, and Aaron, and all the
congregation of the children of Israel did so to the Levites. According
to all that Yahweh commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so the
children of Israel did to them.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> The Levites purified themselves from sin,
and they washed their clothes; and Aaron offered them for a wave
offering before Yahweh; and Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse
them.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> After that, the Levites went in to do
their service in the Tent of Meeting before Aaron, and before his sons:
as Yahweh had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they did to
them.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> "This is that which belongs to the
Levites: from twenty-five years old and upward they shall go in to wait
on the service in the work of the Tent of Meeting;

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> and from the age of fifty years they
shall cease waiting on the work, and shall serve no more,

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> but shall minister with their brothers in
the Tent of Meeting, to perform the duty, and shall do no service. You
shall do thus to the Levites concerning their duties."

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses in the wilderness of
Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they had come out of
the land of Egypt, saying,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> "Moreover let the children of Israel keep
the Passover in its appointed season.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> On the fourteenth day of this month, at
evening, you shall keep it in its appointed season--according to all its
statutes, and according to all its ordinances, you shall keep it."

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Moses spoke to the children of Israel, that
they should keep the Passover.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> They kept the Passover in the first month,
on the fourteenth day of the month, at evening, in the wilderness of
Sinai. According to all that Yahweh commanded Moses, so the children of
Israel did.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> There were certain men, who were unclean
because of the dead body of a man, so that they could not keep the
Passover on that day, and they came before Moses and before Aaron on
that day.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Those men said to him, "We are unclean
because of the dead body of a man. Why are we kept back, that we may not
offer the offering of Yahweh in its appointed season among the children
of Israel?"

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Moses answered them, "Wait, that I may hear
what Yahweh will command concerning you."

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> "Say to the children of Israel, 'If any
man of you or of your generations is unclean by reason of a dead body,
or is on a journey far away, he shall still keep the Passover to Yahweh.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> In the second month, on the fourteenth
day at evening they shall keep it; they shall eat it with unleavened
bread and bitter herbs.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> They shall leave none of it until the
morning, nor break a bone of it. According to all the statute of the
Passover they shall keep it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But the man who is clean, and is not on a
journey, and fails to keep the Passover, that soul shall be cut off from
his people. Because he didn't offer the offering of Yahweh in its
appointed season, that man shall bear his sin.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> "'If a foreigner lives among you, and
desires to keep the Passover to Yahweh; according to the statute of the
Passover, and according to its ordinance, so shall he do. You shall have
one statute, both for the foreigner, and for him who is born in the
land.'"

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> On the day that the tabernacle was raised
up, the cloud covered the tabernacle, even the Tent of the Testimony:
and at evening it was over the tabernacle as it were the appearance of
fire, until morning.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So it was continually. The cloud covered
it, and the appearance of fire by night.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Whenever the cloud was taken up from over
the Tent, then after that the children of Israel traveled; and in the
place where the cloud remained, there the children of Israel encamped.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> At the commandment of Yahweh, the
children of Israel traveled, and at the commandment of Yahweh they
encamped. As long as the cloud remained on the tabernacle they remained
encamped.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> When the cloud stayed on the tabernacle
many days, then the children of Israel kept Yahweh's command, and didn't
travel.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Sometimes the cloud was a few days on the
tabernacle; then according to the commandment of Yahweh they remained
encamped, and according to the commandment of Yahweh they traveled.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Sometimes the cloud was from evening
until morning; and when the cloud was taken up in the morning, they
traveled: or by day and by night, when the cloud was taken up, they
traveled.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Whether it was two days, or a month, or a
year that the cloud stayed on the tabernacle, remaining on it, the
children of Israel remained encamped, and didn't travel; but when it was
taken up, they traveled.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> At the commandment of Yahweh they
encamped, and at the commandment of Yahweh they traveled. They kept
Yahweh's command, at the commandment of Yahweh by Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> "Make two trumpets of silver. You shall
make them of beaten work. You shall use them for the calling of the
congregation, and for the journeying of the camps.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> When they blow them, all the congregation
shall gather themselves to you at the door of the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> If they blow just one, then the princes,
the heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves to you.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> When you blow an alarm, the camps that
lie on the east side shall go forward.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> When you blow an alarm the second time,
the camps that lie on the south side shall go forward. They shall blow
an alarm for their journeys.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But when the assembly is to be gathered
together, you shall blow, but you shall not sound an alarm.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> "The sons of Aaron, the priests, shall
blow the trumpets. This shall be to you for a statute forever throughout
your generations.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> When you go to war in your land against
the adversary who oppresses you, then you shall sound an alarm with the
trumpets. Then you will be remembered before Yahweh your God, and you
will be saved from your enemies.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> "Also in the day of your gladness, and
in your set feasts, and in the beginnings of your months, you shall blow
the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your
peace offerings; and they shall be to you for a memorial before your
God. I am Yahweh your God."

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> It happened in the second year, in the
second month, on the twentieth day of the month, that the cloud was
taken up from over the tabernacle of the testimony.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The children of Israel went forward
according to their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai; and the
cloud stayed in the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> They first went forward according to
the commandment of Yahweh by Moses.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> First, the standard of the camp of the
children of Judah went forward according to their armies. Nahshon the
son of Amminadab was over his army.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Nethanel the son of Zuar was over the
army of the tribe of the children of Issachar.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Eliab the son of Helon was over the
army of the tribe of the children of Zebulun.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> The tabernacle was taken down; and the
sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who bore the tabernacle, went
forward.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> The standard of the camp of Reuben went
forward according to their armies. Elizur the son of Shedeur was over
his army.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai was
over the army of the tribe of the children of Simeon.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Eliasaph the son of Deuel was over the
army of the tribe of the children of Gad.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The Kohathites set forward, bearing the
sanctuary. The others set up the tabernacle before they arrived.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The standard of the camp of the
children of Ephraim set forward according to their armies. Elishama the
son of Ammihud was over his army.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur was over
the army of the tribe of the children of Manasseh.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Abidan the son of Gideoni was over the
army of the tribe of the children of Benjamin.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> The standard of the camp of the
children of Dan, which was the rear guard of all the camps, set forward
according to their armies. Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai was over his
army.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Pagiel the son of Ochran was over the
army of the tribe of the children of Asher.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> Ahira the son of Enan was over the army
of the tribe of the children of Naphtali.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> Thus were the travels of the children
of Israel according to their armies; and they went forward.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Moses said to Hobab, the son of Reuel
the Midianite, Moses' father-in-law, "We are journeying to the place of
which Yahweh said, 'I will give it to you.' Come with us, and we will
treat you well; for Yahweh has spoken good concerning Israel."

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> He said to him, "I will not go; but I
will depart to my own land, and to my relatives."

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> He said, "Don't leave us, please;
because you know how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and you can be
our eyes.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> It shall be, if you go with us, yes, it
shall be, that whatever good Yahweh does to us, we will do the same to
you."

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> They set forward from the Mount of
Yahweh three days' journey. The ark of the covenant of Yahweh went
before them three days' journey, to seek out a resting place for them.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> The cloud of Yahweh was over them by
day, when they set forward from the camp.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> It happened, when the ark went forward,
that Moses said, "Rise up, Yahweh, and let your enemies be scattered!
Let those who hate you flee before you!"

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> When it rested, he said, "Return,
Yahweh, to the ten thousands of the thousands of Israel."

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> The people were complaining in the ears
of Yahweh. When Yahweh heard it, his anger was kindled; and Yahweh's
fire burnt among them, and consumed some of the outskirts of the camp.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> The people cried to Moses; and Moses
prayed to Yahweh, and the fire abated.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The name of that place was called
Taberah, because Yahweh's fire burnt among them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> The mixed multitude that was among them
lusted exceedingly: and the children of Israel also wept again, and
said, "Who will give us flesh to eat?

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> We remember the fish, which we ate in
Egypt for nothing; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the
onions, and the garlic;

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> but now we have lost our appetite. There
is nothing at all except this manna to look at."

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> The manna was like coriander seed, and
its appearance like the appearance of bdellium.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The people went around, gathered it, and
ground it in mills, or beat it in mortars, and boiled it in pots, and
made cakes of it. Its taste was like the taste of fresh oil.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> When the dew fell on the camp in the
night, the manna fell on it.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Moses heard the people weeping
throughout their families, every man at the door of his tent; and the
anger of Yahweh was kindled greatly; and Moses was displeased.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Moses said to Yahweh, "Why have you
treated with your servant so badly? Why haven't I found favor in your
sight, that you lay the burden of all this people on me?

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Have I conceived all this people? Have
I brought them forth, that you should tell me, 'Carry them in your
bosom, as a nurse carries a nursing infant, to the land which you swore
to their fathers?'

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Where could I get meat to give to all
this people? For they weep to me, saying, 'Give us meat, that we may
eat.'

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> I am not able to bear all this people
alone, because it is too heavy for me.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> If you treat me this way, please kill
me right now, if I have found favor in your sight; and don't let me see
my wretchedness."

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Gather to me
seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom you know to be the elders of
the people, and officers over them; and bring them to the Tent of
Meeting, that they may stand there with you.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> I will come down and talk with you
there. I will take of the Spirit which is on you, and will put it on
them; and they shall bear the burden of the people with you, that you
not bear it yourself alone.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> "Say to the people, 'Sanctify
yourselves against tomorrow, and you will eat flesh; for you have wept
in the ears of Yahweh, saying, "Who will give us flesh to eat? For it
was well with us in Egypt." Therefore Yahweh will give you flesh, and
you will eat.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> You will not eat one day, nor two days,
nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days,

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> but a whole month, until it come out at
your nostrils, and it is loathsome to you; because that you have
rejected Yahweh who is among you, and have wept before him, saying, "Why
did we come out of Egypt?"'"

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Moses said, "The people, among whom I
am, are six hundred thousand men on foot; and you have said, 'I will
give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.'

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Shall flocks and herds be slaughtered
for them, to be sufficient for them? Shall all the fish of the sea be
gathered together for them, to be sufficient for them?"

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Has Yahweh's
hand grown short? Now you will see whether my word will happen to you or
not."

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Moses went out, and told the people the
words of Yahweh; and he gathered seventy men of the elders of the
people, and set them around the Tent.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Yahweh came down in the cloud, and
spoke to him, and took of the Spirit that was on him, and put it on the
seventy elders: and it happened that when the Spirit rested on them,
they prophesied, but they did so no more.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> But two men remained in the camp. The
name of one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the Spirit
rested on them; and they were of those who were written, but had not
gone out to the Tent; and they prophesied in the camp.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> A young man ran, and told Moses, and
said, "Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp!"

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of
Moses, one of his chosen men, answered, "My lord Moses, forbid them!"

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Moses said to him, "Are you jealous for
my sake? I wish that all Yahweh's people were prophets, that Yahweh
would put his Spirit on them!"

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Moses went into the camp, he and the
elders of Israel.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> A wind from Yahweh went out and brought
quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, about a day's
journey on this side, and a day's journey on the other side, around the
camp, and about two cubits above the surface of the earth.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> The people rose up all that day, and
all the night, and all the next day, and gathered the quails. He who
gathered least gathered ten homers; and they spread them all abroad for
themselves around the camp.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> While the flesh was yet between their
teeth, before it was chewed, the anger of Yahweh was kindled against the
people, and Yahweh struck the people with a very great plague.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> The name of that place was called
Kibroth Hattaavah, because there they buried the people who lusted.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> From Kibroth Hattaavah the people
traveled to Hazeroth; and they stayed at Hazeroth.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses
because of the Cushite woman whom he had married; for he had married a
Cushite woman.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> They said, "Has Yahweh indeed spoken only
with Moses? Hasn't he spoken also with us?" And Yahweh heard it.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Now the man Moses was very humble, above
all the men who were on the surface of the earth.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Yahweh spoke suddenly to Moses, to Aaron,
and to Miriam, "You three come out to the Tent of Meeting!" The three of
them came out.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Yahweh came down in a pillar of cloud,
and stood at the door of the Tent, and called Aaron and Miriam; and they
both came forward.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> He said, "Hear now my words. If there is
a prophet among you, I Yahweh will make myself known to him in a vision.
I will speak with him in a dream.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> My servant Moses is not so. He is
faithful in all my house.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> With him I will speak mouth to mouth,
even plainly, and not in riddles; and he shall see Yahweh's form. Why
then were you not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses?"

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> The anger of Yahweh was kindled against
them; and he departed.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The cloud departed from over the Tent;
and behold, Miriam was leprous, as white as snow. Aaron looked at
Miriam, and behold, she was leprous.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Aaron said to Moses, "Oh, my lord,
please don't count this sin against us, in which we have done foolishly,
and in which we have sinned.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Let her not, I pray, be as one dead, of
whom the flesh is half consumed when he comes out of his mother's womb."

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Moses cried to Yahweh, saying, "Heal
her, God, I beg you!"

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "If her father
had but spit in her face, shouldn't she be ashamed seven days? Let her
be shut up outside of the camp seven days, and after that she shall be
brought in again."

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Miriam was shut up outside of the camp
seven days, and the people didn't travel until Miriam was brought in
again.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Afterward the people traveled from
Hazeroth, and encamped in the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> "Send men, that they may spy out the land
of Canaan, which I give to the children of Israel. Of every tribe of
their fathers, you shall send a man, every one a prince among them."

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Moses sent them from the wilderness of
Paran according to the commandment of Yahweh: all of them men who were
heads of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> These were their names: Of the tribe of
Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son
of Hori.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of
Jephunneh.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of
Joseph.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Of the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea the son
of Nun.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son
of Raphu.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the
son of Sodi.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Of the tribe of Joseph, \[namely\], of
the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of
Gemalli.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son
of Michael.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son
of Vophsi.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of
Machi.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> These are the names of the men who
Moses sent to spy out the land. Moses called Hoshea the son of Nun
Joshua.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Moses sent them to spy out the land of
Canaan, and said to them, "Go up this way by the South, and go up into
the hill country:

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and see the land, what it is; and the
people who dwell therein, whether they are strong or weak, whether they
are few or many;

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> and what the land is that they dwell
in, whether it is good or bad; and what cities they are that they dwell
in, whether in camps, or in strongholds;

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> and what the land is, whether it is fat
or lean, whether there is wood therein, or not. Be courageous, and bring
of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the first-ripe
grapes."

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> So they went up, and spied out the land
from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob, to the entrance of Hamath.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> They went up by the South, and came to
Hebron; and Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were
there. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> They came to the valley of Eshcol, and
cut down from there a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bore
it on a staff between two; \[they brought\] also of the pomegranates,
and of the figs.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> That place was called the valley of
Eshcol, because of the cluster which the children of Israel cut down
from there.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> They returned from spying out the land
at the end of forty days.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> They went and came to Moses, and to
Aaron, and to all the congregation of the children of Israel, to the
wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word to them, and to
all the congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> They told him, and said, "We came to
the land where you sent us; and surely it flows with milk and honey; and
this is its fruit.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> However the people who dwell in the
land are strong, and the cities are fortified, \[and\] very great: and
moreover we saw the children of Anak there.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> Amalek dwells in the land of the South:
and the Hittite, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, dwell in the hill
country; and the Canaanite dwells by the sea, and along by the side of
the Jordan."

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Caleb stilled the people before Moses,
and said, "Let us go up at once, and possess it; for we are well able to
overcome it."

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> But the men who went up with him said,
"We aren't able to go up against the people; for they are stronger than
we."

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> They brought up an evil report of the
land which they had spied out to the children of Israel, saying, "The
land, through which we have gone to spy it out, is a land that eats up
its inhabitants; and all the people who we saw in it are men of great
stature.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> There we saw the Nephilim, the sons of
Anak, who come of the Nephilim: and we were in our own sight as
grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight."

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> All the congregation lifted up their
voice, and cried; and the people wept that night.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> All the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole congregation said to
them, "Would that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would that we had
died in this wilderness!

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Why does Yahweh bring us to this land, to
fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will be a prey:
wouldn't it be better for us to return into Egypt?"

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> They said one to another, "Let us make a
captain, and let us return into Egypt."

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces
before all the assembly of the congregation of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son
of Jephunneh, who were of those who spied out the land, tore their
clothes:

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> and they spoke to all the congregation of
the children of Israel, saying, "The land, which we passed through to
spy it out, is an exceeding good land.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> If Yahweh delights in us, then he will
bring us into this land, and give it to us; a land which flows with milk
and honey.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Only don't rebel against Yahweh, neither
fear the people of the land; for they are bread for us: their defense is
removed from over them, and Yahweh is with us. Don't fear them."

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But all the congregation threatened to
stone them with stones. The glory of Yahweh appeared in the Tent of
Meeting to all the children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "How long will
this people despise me? and how long will they not believe in me, for
all the signs which I have worked among them?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> I will strike them with the pestilence,
and disinherit them, and will make of you a nation greater and mightier
than they."

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Moses said to Yahweh, "Then the
Egyptians will hear it; for you brought up this people in your might
from among them;

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> and they will tell it to the
inhabitants of this land. They have heard that you Yahweh are in the
midst of this people; for you Yahweh are seen face to face, and your
cloud stands over them, and you go before them, in a pillar of cloud by
day, and in a pillar of fire by night.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Now if you killed this people as one
man, then the nations which have heard the fame of you will speak,
saying,

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> 'Because Yahweh was not able to bring
this people into the land which he swore to them, therefore he has slain
them in the wilderness.'

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Now please let the power of the Lord be
great, according as you have spoken, saying,

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> 'Yahweh is slow to anger, and abundant
in loving kindness, forgiving iniquity and disobedience; and that will
by no means clear \[the guilty\], visiting the iniquity of the fathers
on the children, on the third and on the fourth generation.'

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Please pardon the iniquity of this
people according to the greatness of your loving kindness, and according
as you have forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now."

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Yahweh said, "I have pardoned according
to your word:

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> but in very deed, as I live, and as all
the earth shall be filled with the glory of Yahweh;

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> because all those men who have seen my
glory, and my signs, which I worked in Egypt and in the wilderness, yet
have tempted me these ten times, and have not listened to my voice;

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> surely they shall not see the land
which I swore to their fathers, neither shall any of those who despised
me see it:

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> but my servant Caleb, because he had
another spirit with him, and has followed me fully, him will I bring
into the land into which he went; and his seed shall possess it.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Now the Amalekite and the Canaanite
dwell in the valley: tomorrow turn, and go into the wilderness by the
way to the Red Sea."

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> "How long \[shall I bear\] with this
evil congregation, that murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings
of the children of Israel, which they murmur against me.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Tell them, 'As I live, says Yahweh,
surely as you have spoken in my ears, so will I do to you:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> your dead bodies shall fall in this
wilderness; and all who were numbered of you, according to your whole
number, from twenty years old and upward, who have murmured against me,

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> surely you shall not come into the
land, concerning which I swore that I would make you dwell therein,
except Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> But your little ones, that you said
should be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the land
which you have rejected.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> But as for you, your dead bodies shall
fall in this wilderness.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Your children shall be wanderers in the
wilderness forty years, and shall bear your prostitution, until your
dead bodies be consumed in the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> After the number of the days in which
you spied out the land, even forty days, for every day a year, you will
bear your iniquities, even forty years, and you will know my
alienation.'

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> I, Yahweh, have spoken, surely this
will I do to all this evil congregation, who are gathered together
against me: in this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they
shall die."

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> The men, whom Moses sent to spy out the
land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur against him,
by bringing up an evil report against the land,

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> even those men who did bring up an evil
report of the land, died by the plague before Yahweh.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh, remained alive of those men who went to spy out
the land.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> Moses told these words to all the
children of Israel: and the people mourned greatly.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> They rose up early in the morning, and
went up to the top of the mountain, saying, "Behold, we are here, and
will go up to the place which Yahweh has promised: for we have sinned."

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> Moses said, "Why now do you disobey the
commandment of Yahweh, since it shall not prosper?

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Don't go up, for Yahweh isn't among
you; that you not be struck down before your enemies.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> For there the Amalekite and the
Canaanite are before you, and you shall fall by the sword: because you
are turned back from following Yahweh, therefore Yahweh will not be with
you."

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> But they presumed to go up to the top
of the mountain: nevertheless the ark of the covenant of Yahweh, and
Moses, didn't depart out of the camp.

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> Then the Amalekite came down, and the
Canaanite who lived in that mountain, and struck them and beat them
down, even to Hormah.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> "Speak to the children of Israel, and
tell them, 'When you have come into the land of your habitations, which
I give to you,

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> and will make an offering by fire to
Yahweh, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice, to accomplish a vow, or as a
freewill offering, or in your set feasts, to make a pleasant aroma to
Yahweh, of the herd, or of the flock;

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> then he who offers his offering shall
offer to Yahweh a meal offering of a tenth part \[of an ephah\] of fine
flour mixed with the fourth part of a hin of oil:

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> and wine for the drink offering, the
fourth part of a hin, you shall prepare with the burnt offering, or for
the sacrifice, for each lamb.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> "'Or for a ram, you shall prepare for a
meal offering two tenth parts \[of an ephah\] of fine flour mixed with
the third part of a hin of oil:

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> and for the drink offering you shall
offer the third part of a hin of wine, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> When you prepare a bull for a burnt
offering, or for a sacrifice, to accomplish a vow, or for peace
offerings to Yahweh;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> then shall he offer with the bull a meal
offering of three tenth parts \[of an ephah\] of fine flour mixed with
half a hin of oil:

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> and you shall offer for the drink
offering half a hin of wine, for an offering made by fire, of a pleasant
aroma to Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Thus shall it be done for each bull, or
for each ram, or for each of the male lambs, or of the young goats.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> According to the number that you shall
prepare, so you shall do to everyone according to their number.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> "'All who are native-born shall do
these things in this way, in offering an offering made by fire, of a
pleasant aroma to Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> If a stranger lives as a foreigner with
you, or whoever may be among you throughout your generations, and will
offer an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh; as you
do, so he shall do.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> For the assembly, there shall be one
statute for you, and for the stranger who lives as a foreigner \[with
you\], a statute forever throughout your generations: as you are, so
shall the foreigner be before Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> One law and one ordinance shall be for
you, and for the stranger who lives as a foreigner with you.'"

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> "Speak to the children of Israel, and
tell them, 'When you come into the land where I bring you,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> then it shall be that when you eat of
the bread of the land, you shall offer up a wave offering to Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Of the first of your dough you shall
offer up a cake for a wave offering: as the wave offering of the
threshing floor, so you shall heave it.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Of the first of your dough you shall
give to Yahweh a wave offering throughout your generations.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> "'When you shall err, and not observe
all these commandments, which Yahweh has spoken to Moses,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> even all that Yahweh has commanded you
by Moses, from the day that Yahweh gave commandment, and onward
throughout your generations;

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> then it shall be, if it be done
unwittingly, without the knowledge of the congregation, that all the
congregation shall offer one young bull for a burnt offering, for a
pleasant aroma to Yahweh, with the meal offering of it, and the drink
offering of it, according to the ordinance, and one male goat for a sin
offering.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> The priest shall make atonement for all
the congregation of the children of Israel, and they shall be forgiven;
for it was an error, and they have brought their offering, an offering
made by fire to Yahweh, and their sin offering before Yahweh, for their
error:

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> and all the congregation of the
children of Israel shall be forgiven, and the stranger who lives as a
foreigner among them; for in respect of all the people it was done
unwittingly.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> "'If one person sins unwittingly, then
he shall offer a female goat a year old for a sin offering.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> The priest shall make atonement for the
soul who errs, when he sins unwittingly, before Yahweh, to make
atonement for him; and he shall be forgiven.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> You shall have one law for him who does
anything unwittingly, for him who is native-born among the children of
Israel, and for the stranger who lives as a foreigner among them.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> "'But the soul who does anything with a
high hand, whether he is native-born or a foreigner, the same blasphemes
Yahweh; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Because he has despised the word of
Yahweh, and has broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut
off; his iniquity shall be on him.'"

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> While the children of Israel were in
the wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks on the Sabbath day.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Those who found him gathering sticks
brought him to Moses and Aaron, and to all the congregation.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> They put him in custody, because it had
not been declared what should be done to him.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "The man shall
surely be put to death: all the congregation shall stone him with stones
outside of the camp."

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> All the congregation brought him
outside of the camp, and stoned him to death with stones; as Yahweh
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> "Speak to the children of Israel, and
tell them that they should make themselves fringes in the borders of
their garments throughout their generations, and that they put on the
fringe of each border a cord of blue:

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> and it shall be to you for a fringe,
that you may look on it, and remember all the commandments of Yahweh,
and do them; and that you not follow after your own heart and your own
eyes, after which you use to play the prostitute;

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> that you may remember and do all my
commandments, and be holy to your God.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> I am Yahweh your God, who brought you
out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am Yahweh your God."

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of
Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and
On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took \[men\]:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> and they rose up before Moses, with
certain of the children of Israel, two hundred fifty princes of the
congregation, called to the assembly, men of renown;

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> and they assembled themselves together
against Moses and against Aaron, and said to them, "You take too much on
yourself, since all the congregation are holy, everyone of them, and
Yahweh is among them: why then lift yourselves up above the assembly of
Yahweh?"

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> When Moses heard it, he fell on his face:

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> and he spoke to Korah and to all his
company, saying, "In the morning Yahweh will show who are his, and who
is holy, and will cause him to come near to him: even him whom he shall
choose he will cause to come near to him.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Do this: take censers, Korah, and all his
company;

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> and put fire in them, and put incense on
them before Yahweh tomorrow: and it shall be that the man whom Yahweh
chooses, he shall be holy. You have gone too far, you sons of Levi!"

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Moses said to Korah, "Hear now, you sons
of Levi!

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Is it a small thing to you, that the God
of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring
you near to himself, to do the service of the tabernacle of Yahweh, and
to stand before the congregation to minister to them;

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> and that he has brought you near, and
all your brothers the sons of Levi with you? and do you seek the
priesthood also?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Therefore you and all your company are
gathered together against Yahweh: and Aaron, what is he that you murmur
against him?"

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram,
the sons of Eliab; and they said, "We won't come up:

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> is it a small thing that you have
brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in
the wilderness, but you must also make yourself a prince over us?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Moreover you haven't brought us into a
land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of fields and
vineyards: will you put out the eyes of these men? We won't come up."

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Moses was very angry, and said to
Yahweh, "Don't respect their offering: I have not taken one donkey from
them, neither have I hurt one of them."

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Moses said to Korah, "You and all your
company go before Yahweh, you, and they, and Aaron, tomorrow:

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> and each man take his censer, and put
incense on them, and each man bring before Yahweh his censer, two
hundred fifty censers; you also, and Aaron, each his censer."

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> They each took his censer, and put fire
in them, and laid incense thereon, and stood at the door of the Tent of
Meeting with Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Korah assembled all the congregation
against them to the door of the Tent of Meeting: and the glory of Yahweh
appeared to all the congregation.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> "Separate yourselves from among this
congregation, that I may consume them in a moment!"

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> They fell on their faces, and said,
"God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and will
you be angry with all the congregation?"

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> "Speak to the congregation, saying,
'Get away from around the tent of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram!'"

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Moses rose up and went to Dathan and
Abiram; and the elders of Israel followed him.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> He spoke to the congregation, saying,
"Depart, please, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing
of theirs, lest you be consumed in all their sins!"

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> So they went away from the tent of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came
out, and stood at the door of their tents, and their wives, and their
sons, and their little ones.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Moses said, "Hereby you shall know that
Yahweh has sent me to do all these works; for \[I have\] not \[done
them\] of my own mind.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> If these men die the common death of
all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men; then
Yahweh hasn't sent me.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> But if Yahweh make a new thing, and the
ground open its mouth, and swallow them up, with all that appertain to
them, and they go down alive into Sheol; then you shall understand that
these men have despised Yahweh."

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> It happened, as he made an end of
speaking all these words, that the ground split apart that was under
them;

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> and the earth opened its mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their households, and all the men who appertained
to Korah, and all their goods.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> So they, and all that appertained to
them, went down alive into Sheol: and the earth closed on them, and they
perished from among the assembly.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> All Israel that were around them fled
at the cry of them; for they said, "Lest the earth swallow us up!"

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> Fire came forth from Yahweh, and
devoured the two hundred fifty men who offered the incense.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> "Speak to Eleazar the son of Aaron the
priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, and scatter the
fire yonder; for they are holy,

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> even the censers of these sinners
against their own lives; and let them be made beaten plates for a
covering of the altar: for they offered them before Yahweh; therefore
they are holy; and they shall be a sign to the children of Israel."

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> Eleazar the priest took the bronze
censers, which those who were burnt had offered; and they beat them out
for a covering of the altar,

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> to be a memorial to the children of
Israel, to the end that no stranger, who isn't of the seed of Aaron,
comes near to burn incense before Yahweh; that he not be as Korah, and
as his company: as Yahweh spoke to him by Moses.

<span id="an_16:41">16:41</span> But on the next day all the
congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and
against Aaron, saying, "You have killed Yahweh's people!"

<span id="an_16:42">16:42</span> It happened, when the congregation was
assembled against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the
Tent of Meeting: and behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of
Yahweh appeared.

<span id="an_16:43">16:43</span> Moses and Aaron came to the front of
the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_16:44">16:44</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_16:45">16:45</span> "Get away from among this congregation,
that I may consume them in a moment!" They fell on their faces.

<span id="an_16:46">16:46</span> Moses said to Aaron, "Take your censer,
and put fire from off the altar in it, and lay incense on it, and carry
it quickly to the congregation, and make atonement for them; for wrath
has gone out from Yahweh! The plague has begun."

<span id="an_16:47">16:47</span> Aaron did as Moses said, and ran into
the midst of the assembly; and behold, the plague has begun among the
people: and he put on the incense, and made atonement for the people.

<span id="an_16:48">16:48</span> He stood between the dead and the
living; and the plague was stayed.

<span id="an_16:49">16:49</span> Now those who died by the plague were
fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides those who died about the
matter of Korah.

<span id="an_16:50">16:50</span> Aaron returned to Moses to the door of
the Tent of Meeting: and the plague was stayed.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> "Speak to the children of Israel, and
take of them rods, one for each fathers' house, of all their princes
according to their fathers' houses, twelve rods: write every man's name
on his rod.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> You shall write Aaron's name on the rod
of Levi; for there shall be one rod for each head of their fathers'
houses.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> You shall lay them up in the Tent of
Meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> It shall happen, that the rod of the man
whom I shall choose shall bud: and I will make to cease from me the
murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against you."

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Moses spoke to the children of Israel;
and all their princes gave him rods, for each prince one, according to
their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron was among
their rods.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Moses laid up the rods before Yahweh in
the tent of the testimony.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> It happened on the next day, that Moses
went into the tent of the testimony; and behold, the rod of Aaron for
the house of Levi was budded, and put forth buds, and produced blossoms,
and bore ripe almonds.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Moses brought out all the rods from
before Yahweh to all the children of Israel: and they looked, and took
every man his rod.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Put back the rod
of Aaron before the testimony, to be kept for a token against the
children of rebellion; that you may make an end of their murmurings
against me, that they not die."

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Moses did so. As Yahweh commanded him,
so he did.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> The children of Israel spoke to Moses,
saying, "Behold, we perish! We are undone! We are all undone!

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Everyone who comes near, who comes near
to the tabernacle of Yahweh, dies! Will we all perish?"

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Yahweh said to Aaron, "You and your sons
and your fathers' house with you shall bear the iniquity of the
sanctuary; and you and your sons with you shall bear the iniquity of
your priesthood.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Your brothers also, the tribe of Levi,
the tribe of your father, bring near with you, that they may be joined
to you, and minister to you: but you and your sons with you shall be
before the tent of the testimony.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> They shall keep your commands, and the
duty of all the Tent: only they shall not come near to the vessels of
the sanctuary and to the altar, that they not die, neither they, nor
you.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> They shall be joined to you, and keep the
responsibility of the Tent of Meeting, for all the service of the Tent:
and a stranger shall not come near to you.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> "You shall perform the duty of the
sanctuary, and the duty of the altar; that there be wrath no more on the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> I, behold, I have taken your brothers the
Levites from among the children of Israel: to you they are a gift, given
to Yahweh, to do the service of the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> You and your sons with you shall keep
your priesthood for everything of the altar, and for that within the
veil; and you shall serve: I give you the priesthood as a service of
gift: and the stranger who comes near shall be put to death."

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Yahweh spoke to Aaron, "I, behold, I have
given you the command of my wave offerings, even all the holy things of
the children of Israel; to you have I given them by reason of the
anointing, and to your sons, as a portion forever.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> This shall be yours of the most holy
things, \[reserved\] from the fire: every offering of theirs, even every
meal offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every
trespass offering of theirs, which they shall render to me, shall be
most holy for you and for your sons.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> You shall eat of it like the most holy
things. Every male shall eat of it. It shall be holy to you.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> "This is yours, too: the wave offering
of their gift, even all the wave offerings of the children of Israel. I
have given them to you, and to your sons and to your daughters with you,
as a portion forever. Everyone who is clean in your house shall eat of
it.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> "All the best of the oil, and all the
best of the vintage, and of the grain, the first fruits of them which
they give to Yahweh, to you have I given them.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> The first-ripe fruits of all that is in
their land, which they bring to Yahweh, shall be yours; everyone who is
clean in your house shall eat of it.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> "Everything devoted in Israel shall be
yours.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Everything that opens the womb, of all
flesh which they offer to Yahweh, both of man and animal shall be yours:
nevertheless you shall surely redeem the firstborn of man, and you shall
redeem the firstborn of unclean animals.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> You shall redeem those who are to be
redeemed of them from a month old, according to your estimation, for
five shekels of money, after the shekel of the sanctuary (the same is
twenty gerahs).

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> "But you shall not redeem the firstborn
of a cow, or the firstborn of a sheep, or the firstborn of a goat. They
are holy. You shall sprinkle their blood on the altar, and shall burn
their fat for an offering made by fire, for a pleasant aroma to Yahweh.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Their flesh shall be yours, as the wave
offering breast and as the right thigh, it shall be yours.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> All the wave offerings of the holy
things, which the children of Israel offer to Yahweh, have I given you,
and your sons and your daughters with you, as a portion forever: it is a
covenant of salt forever before Yahweh to you and to your seed with
you."

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Yahweh said to Aaron, "You shall have
no inheritance in their land, neither shall you have any portion among
them. I am your portion and your inheritance among the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> "To the children of Levi, behold, I
have given all the tithe in Israel for an inheritance, in return for
their service which they serve, even the service of the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Henceforth the children of Israel shall
not come near the Tent of Meeting, lest they bear sin, and die.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> But the Levites shall do the service of
the Tent of Meeting, and they shall bear their iniquity: it shall be a
statute forever throughout your generations; and among the children of
Israel they shall have no inheritance.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> For the tithe of the children of
Israel, which they offer as a wave offering to Yahweh, I have given to
the Levites for an inheritance: therefore I have said to them, 'Among
the children of Israel they shall have no inheritance.'"

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> "Moreover you shall speak to the
Levites, and tell them, 'When you take of the children of Israel the
tithe which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then you
shall offer up a wave offering of it for Yahweh, a tithe of the tithe.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> Your wave offering shall be reckoned to
you, as though it were the grain of the threshing floor, and as the
fullness of the winepress.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Thus you also shall offer a wave
offering to Yahweh of all your tithes, which you receive of the children
of Israel; and of it you shall give Yahweh's wave offering to Aaron the
priest.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Out of all your gifts you shall offer
every wave offering of Yahweh, of all its best, even the holy part of it
out of it.'

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> "Therefore you shall tell them, 'When
you heave its best from it, then it shall be reckoned to the Levites as
the increase of the threshing floor, and as the increase of the
winepress.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> You shall eat it in every place, you
and your households: for it is your reward in return for your service in
the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> You shall bear no sin by reason of it,
when you have heaved from it its best: and you shall not profane the
holy things of the children of Israel, that you not die.'"

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron,
saying,

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> "This is the statute of the law which
Yahweh has commanded: Speak to the children of Israel, that they bring
you a red heifer without spot, in which is no blemish, \[and\] on which
never came yoke.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> You shall give her to Eleazar the priest,
and he shall bring her forth outside of the camp, and one shall kill her
before his face:

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> and Eleazar the priest shall take of her
blood with his finger, and sprinkle her blood toward the front of the
Tent of Meeting seven times.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> One shall burn the heifer in his sight;
her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he burn:

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> and the priest shall take cedar wood, and
hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the
heifer.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Then the priest shall wash his clothes,
and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into
the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the evening.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He who burns her shall wash his clothes
in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the
evening.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> "A man who is clean shall gather up the
ashes of the heifer, and lay them up outside of the camp in a clean
place; and it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of
Israel for a water for impurity: it is a sin offering.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> He who gathers the ashes of the heifer
shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening: and it shall
be to the children of Israel, and to the stranger who lives as a
foreigner among them, for a statute forever.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> "He who touches the dead body of any
man shall be unclean seven days:

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> the same shall purify himself with
water on the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean: but if
he doesn't purify himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall
not be clean.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Whoever touches a dead person, the body
of a man who has died, and doesn't purify himself, defiles the
tabernacle of Yahweh; and that soul shall be cut off from Israel:
because the water for impurity was not sprinkled on him, he shall be
unclean; his uncleanness is yet on him.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> "This is the law when a man dies in a
tent: everyone who comes into the tent, and everyone who is in the tent,
shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Every open vessel, which has no
covering bound on it, is unclean.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> "Whoever in the open field touches one
who is slain with a sword, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a
grave, shall be unclean seven days.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> "For the unclean they shall take of the
ashes of the burning of the sin offering; and running water shall be put
thereto in a vessel:

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> and a clean person shall take hyssop,
and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it on the tent, and on all the
vessels, and on the persons who were there, and on him who touched the
bone, or the slain, or the dead, or the grave:

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> and the clean person shall sprinkle on
the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day: and on the seventh
day he shall purify him; and he shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and shall be clean at evening.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> But the man who shall be unclean, and
shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from the midst of
the assembly, because he has defiled the sanctuary of Yahweh: the water
for impurity has not been sprinkled on him; he is unclean.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> It shall be a perpetual statute to
them: and he who sprinkles the water for impurity shall wash his
clothes, and he who touches the water for impurity shall be unclean
until evening.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> "Whatever the unclean person touches
shall be unclean; and the soul that touches it shall be unclean until
evening."

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> The children of Israel, even the whole
congregation, came into the wilderness of Zin in the first month: and
the people stayed in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried
there.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> There was no water for the congregation:
and they assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> The people strove with Moses, and spoke,
saying, "We wish that we had died when our brothers died before Yahweh!

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Why have you brought the assembly of
Yahweh into this wilderness, that we should die there, we and our
animals?

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Why have you made us to come up out of
Egypt, to bring us in to this evil place? It is no place of seed, or of
figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates; neither is there any water to
drink."

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Moses and Aaron went from the presence of
the assembly to the door of the Tent of Meeting, and fell on their
faces: and the glory of Yahweh appeared to them.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> "Take the rod, and assemble the
congregation, you, and Aaron your brother, and speak to the rock before
their eyes, that it give forth its water; and you shall bring forth to
them water out of the rock; so you shall give the congregation and their
livestock drink."

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Moses took the rod from before Yahweh, as
he commanded him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly
together before the rock, and he said to them, "Hear now, you rebels;
shall we bring you water out of this rock for you?"

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Moses lifted up his hand, and struck
the rock with his rod twice: and water came forth abundantly, and the
congregation drank, and their livestock.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Yahweh said to Moses and Aaron,
"Because you didn't believe in me, to sanctify me in the eyes of the
children of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the
land which I have given them."

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> These are the waters of Meribah;
because the children of Israel strove with Yahweh, and he was sanctified
in them.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to
the king of Edom, saying: "Thus says your brother Israel: You know all
the travail that has happened to us:

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> how our fathers went down into Egypt,
and we lived in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians dealt ill with us,
and our fathers:

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> and when we cried to Yahweh, he heard
our voice, and sent an angel, and brought us forth out of Egypt: and
behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of your border.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> "Please let us pass through your land:
we will not pass through field or through vineyard, neither will we
drink of the water of the wells: we will go along the king's highway; we
will not turn aside to the right hand nor to the left, until we have
passed your border."

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Edom said to him, "You shall not pass
through me, lest I come out with the sword against you."

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> The children of Israel said to him, "We
will go up by the highway; and if we drink of your water, I and my
livestock, then will I give its price: let me only, without \[doing\]
anything \[else\], pass through on my feet."

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> He said, "You shall not pass through."
Edom came out against him with many people, and with a strong hand.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Thus Edom refused to give Israel
passage through his border, so Israel turned away from him.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> They traveled from Kadesh: and the
children of Israel, even the whole congregation, came to Mount Hor.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses and Aaron in
Mount Hor, by the border of the land of Edom, saying,

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> "Aaron shall be gathered to his people;
for he shall not enter into the land which I have given to the children
of Israel, because you rebelled against my word at the waters of
Meribah.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and
bring them up to Mount Hor;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> and strip Aaron of his garments, and
put them on Eleazar his son: and Aaron shall be gathered \[to his
people\], and shall die there."

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> Moses did as Yahweh commanded: and they
went up into Mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Moses stripped Aaron of his garments,
and put them on Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there on the top of the
mountain: and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mountain.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> When all the congregation saw that
Aaron was dead, they wept for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of
Israel.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The Canaanite, the king of Arad, who
lived in the South, heard tell that Israel came by the way of Atharim;
and he fought against Israel, and took some of them captive.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Israel vowed a vow to Yahweh, and said,
"If you will indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will
utterly destroy their cities."

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Yahweh listened to the voice of Israel,
and delivered up the Canaanites; and they utterly destroyed them and
their cities: and the name of the place was called Hormah.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> They traveled from Mount Hor by the way
to the Red Sea, to compass the land of Edom: and the soul of the people
was much discouraged because of the way.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The people spoke against God, and against
Moses, "Why have you brought us up out of Egypt to die in the
wilderness? For there is no bread, and there is no water; and our soul
loathes this light bread."

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Yahweh sent fiery serpents among the
people, and they bit the people; and many people of Israel died.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> The people came to Moses, and said, "We
have sinned, because we have spoken against Yahweh, and against you.
Pray to Yahweh, that he take away the serpents from us." Moses prayed
for the people.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Make a fiery
serpent, and set it on a standard: and it shall happen, that everyone
who is bitten, when he sees it, shall live."

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Moses made a serpent of brass, and set it
on the standard: and it happened, that if a serpent had bitten any man,
when he looked to the serpent of brass, he lived.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The children of Israel traveled, and
encamped in Oboth.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> They traveled from Oboth, and encamped
at Iyeabarim, in the wilderness which is before Moab, toward the
sunrise.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> From there they traveled, and encamped
in the valley of Zered.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> From there they traveled, and encamped
on the other side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness, that comes
out of the border of the Amorites: for the Arnon is the border of Moab,
between Moab and the Amorites.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Therefore it is said in the book of the
Wars of Yahweh, "Vaheb in Suphah, the valleys of the Arnon,

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> the slope of the valleys that incline
toward the dwelling of Ar, leans on the border of Moab."

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> From there they traveled to Beer: that
is the well of which Yahweh said to Moses, "Gather the people together,
and I will give them water."

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> Then sang Israel this song: "Spring up,
well; sing to it:

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> the well, which the princes dug, which
the nobles of the people dug, with the scepter, and with their poles."
From the wilderness \[they traveled\] to Mattanah;

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> and from Mattanah to Nahaliel; and from
Nahaliel to Bamoth;

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> and from Bamoth to the valley that is
in the field of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looks down on the
desert.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of
the Amorites, saying,

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> "Let me pass through your land: we will
not turn aside into field, or into vineyard; we will not drink of the
water of the wells: we will go by the king's highway, until we have
passed your border."

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Sihon would not allow Israel to pass
through his border: but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went
out against Israel into the wilderness, and came to Jahaz; and he fought
against Israel.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Israel struck him with the edge of the
sword, and possessed his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, even to the
children of Ammon; for the border of the children of Ammon was strong.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> Israel took all these cities: and
Israel lived in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all
its towns.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the
king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab,
and taken all his land out of his hand, even to the Arnon.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Therefore those who speak in proverbs
say, "Come to Heshbon. Let the city of Sihon be built and established;

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> for a fire has gone out of Heshbon, a
flame from the city of Sihon. It has devoured Ar of Moab, The lords of
the high places of the Arnon.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Woe to you, Moab! You are undone,
people of Chemosh! He has given his sons as fugitives, and his daughters
into captivity, to Sihon king of the Amorites.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> We have shot at them. Heshbon has
perished even to Dibon. We have laid waste even to Nophah, Which reaches
to Medeba."

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Thus Israel lived in the land of the
Amorites.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Moses sent to spy out Jazer; and they
took its towns, and drove out the Amorites who were there.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> They turned and went up by the way of
Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he and all his
people, to battle at Edrei.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Don't fear him:
for I have delivered him into your hand, and all his people, and his
land; and you shall do to him as you did to Sihon king of the Amorites,
who lived at Heshbon."

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> So they struck him, and his sons and
all his people, until there was none left him remaining: and they
possessed his land.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> The children of Israel traveled, and
encamped in the plains of Moab beyond the Jordan at Jericho.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Balak the son of Zippor saw all that
Israel had done to the Amorites.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Moab was very afraid of the people,
because they were many: and Moab was distressed because of the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Moab said to the elders of Midian, "Now
this multitude will lick up all that is around us, as the ox licks up
the grass of the field." Balak the son of Zippor was king of Moab at
that time.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> He sent messengers to Balaam the son of
Beor, to Pethor, which is by the River, to the land of the children of
his people, to call him, saying, "Behold, there is a people who came out
from Egypt. Behold, they cover the surface of the earth, and they are
staying opposite me.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Please come now therefore curse me this
people; for they are too mighty for me: perhaps I shall prevail, that we
may strike them, and that I may drive them out of the land; for I know
that he whom you bless is blessed, and he whom you curse is cursed."

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> The elders of Moab and the elders of
Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they
came to Balaam, and spoke to him the words of Balak.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He said to them, "Lodge here this night,
and I will bring you word again, as Yahweh shall speak to me." The
princes of Moab stayed with Balaam.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> God came to Balaam, and said, "Who are
these men with you?"

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Balaam said to God, "Balak the son of
Zippor, king of Moab, has sent to me, \[saying\],

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> 'Behold, the people that is come out of
Egypt, it covers the surface of the earth: now, come curse me them;
perhaps I shall be able to fight against them, and shall drive them
out.'"

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> God said to Balaam, "You shall not go
with them. You shall not curse the people; for they are blessed."

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Balaam rose up in the morning, and said
to the princes of Balak, "Go to your land; for Yahweh refuses to permit
me to go with you."

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The princes of Moab rose up, and they
went to Balak, and said, "Balaam refuses to come with us."

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Balak sent yet again princes, more, and
more honorable than they.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> They came to Balaam, and said to him,
"Thus says Balak the son of Zippor, 'Please let nothing hinder you from
coming to me:

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> for I will promote you to very great
honor, and whatever you say to me I will do. Please come therefore, and
curse this people for me.'"

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Balaam answered the servants of Balak,
"If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I can't go
beyond the word of Yahweh my God, to do less or more.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Now therefore, please wait also here
this night, that I may know what Yahweh will speak to me more."

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> God came to Balaam at night, and said
to him, "If the men have come to call you, rise up, go with them; but
only the word which I speak to you, that you shall do."

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Balaam rose up in the morning, and
saddled his donkey, and went with the princes of Moab.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> God's anger was kindled because he
went; and the angel of Yahweh placed himself in the way for an adversary
against him. Now he was riding on his donkey, and his two servants were
with him.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> The donkey saw the angel of Yahweh
standing in the way, with his sword drawn in his hand; and the donkey
turned aside out of the way, and went into the field: and Balaam struck
the donkey, to turn her into the way.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Then the angel of Yahweh stood in a
narrow path between the vineyards, a wall being on this side, and a wall
on that side.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> The donkey saw the angel of Yahweh, and
she thrust herself to the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against the
wall: and he struck her again.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> The angel of Yahweh went further, and
stood in a narrow place, where there was no way to turn either to the
right hand or to the left.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> The donkey saw the angel of Yahweh, and
she lay down under Balaam: and Balaam's anger was kindled, and he struck
the donkey with his staff.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Yahweh opened the mouth of the donkey,
and she said to Balaam, "What have I done to you, that you have struck
me these three times?"

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Balaam said to the donkey, "Because you
have mocked me, I wish there were a sword in my hand, for now I would
have killed you."

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> The donkey said to Balaam, "Am I not
your donkey, on which you have ridden all your life long to this day?
Was I ever in the habit of doing so to you?" He said, "No."

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> Then Yahweh opened the eyes of Balaam,
and he saw the angel of Yahweh standing in the way, with his sword drawn
in his hand; and he bowed his head, and fell on his face.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> The angel of Yahweh said to him, "Why
have you struck your donkey these three times? Behold, I have come forth
as an adversary, because your way is perverse before me:

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> and the donkey saw me, and turned aside
before me these three times. Unless she had turned aside from me, surely
now I would have killed you, and saved her alive."

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> Balaam said to the angel of Yahweh, "I
have sinned; for I didn't know that you stood in the way against me. Now
therefore, if it displeases you, I will go back again."

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> The angel of Yahweh said to Balaam, "Go
with the men; but only the word that I shall speak to you, that you
shall speak." So Balaam went with the princes of Balak.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> When Balak heard that Balaam had come,
he went out to meet him to the City of Moab, which is on the border of
the Arnon, which is in the utmost part of the border.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> Balak said to Balaam, "Didn't I
earnestly send to you to call you? Why didn't you come to me? Am I not
able indeed to promote you to honor?"

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> Balaam said to Balak, "Behold, I have
come to you: have I now any power at all to speak anything? The word
that God puts in my mouth, that shall I speak."

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> Balaam went with Balak, and they came
to Kiriath Huzoth.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> Balak sacrificed cattle and sheep, and
sent to Balaam, and to the princes who were with him.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> It happened in the morning, that Balak
took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal; and he saw
from there the utmost part of the people.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Balaam said to Balak, "Build me here
seven altars, and prepare me here seven bulls and seven rams."

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Balak did as Balaam had spoken; and Balak
and Balaam offered on every altar a bull and a ram.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Balaam said to Balak, "Stand by your
burnt offering, and I will go: perhaps Yahweh will come to meet me; and
whatever he shows me I will tell you." He went to a bare height.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> God met Balaam: and he said to him, "I
have prepared the seven altars, and I have offered up a bull and a ram
on every altar."

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Yahweh put a word in Balaam's mouth, and
said, "Return to Balak, and thus you shall speak."

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> He returned to him, and behold, he was
standing by his burnt offering, he, and all the princes of Moab.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> He took up his parable, and said, "From
Aram has Balak brought me, the king of Moab from the mountains of the
East. Come, curse Jacob for me. Come, defy Israel.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> How shall I curse whom God has not
cursed? How shall I defy whom Yahweh has not defied?

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> For from the top of the rocks I see him.
From the hills I see him. Behold, it is a people that dwells alone, and
shall not be reckoned among the nations.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Who can count the dust of Jacob, or
number the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous!
Let my last end be like his!"

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Balak said to Balaam, "What have you
done to me? I took you to curse my enemies, and behold, you have blessed
them altogether."

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> He answered and said, "Must I not take
heed to speak that which Yahweh puts in my mouth?"

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Balak said to him, "Please come with me
to another place, where you may see them; you shall see but the utmost
part of them, and shall not see them all: and curse me them from there."

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> He took him into the field of Zophim,
to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered up a bull and
a ram on every altar.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> He said to Balak, "Stand here by your
burnt offering, while I meet \[Yahweh\] yonder."

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Yahweh met Balaam, and put a word in
his mouth, and said, "Return to Balak, and say this."

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> He came to him, and behold, he was
standing by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab with him. Balak
said to him, "What has Yahweh spoken?"

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> He took up his parable, and said, "Rise
up, Balak, and hear! Listen to me, you son of Zippor.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> God is not a man, that he should lie,
nor the son of man, that he should repent. Has he said, and will he not
do it? Or has he spoken, and will he not make it good?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Behold, I have received a command to
bless. He has blessed, and I can't reverse it.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> He has not seen iniquity in Jacob.
Neither has he seen perverseness in Israel. Yahweh his God is with him.
The shout of a king is among them.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> God brings them out of Egypt. He has as
it were the strength of the wild ox.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Surely there is no enchantment with
Jacob; Neither is there any divination with Israel. Now it shall be said
of Jacob and of Israel, What has God done!

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Behold, the people rises up as a
lioness, As a lion he lifts himself up. He shall not lie down until he
eat of the prey, and drinks the blood of the slain."

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Balak said to Balaam, "Neither curse
them at all, nor bless them at all."

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> But Balaam answered Balak, "Didn't I
tell you, saying, 'All that Yahweh speaks, that I must do?'"

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Balak said to Balaam, "Come now, I will
take you to another place; perhaps it will please God that you may curse
me them from there."

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor,
that looks down on the desert.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Balaam said to Balak, "Build me here
seven altars, and prepare me here seven bulls and seven rams."

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Balak did as Balaam had said, and
offered up a bull and a ram on every altar.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> When Balaam saw that it pleased Yahweh to
bless Israel, he didn't go, as at the other times, to meet with
enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderness.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw
Israel dwelling according to their tribes; and the Spirit of God came on
him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> He took up his parable, and said, "Balaam
the son of Beor says, the man whose eye was closed says;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> he says, who hears the words of God, who
sees the vision of the Almighty, falling down, and having his eyes open:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> How goodly are your tents, Jacob, and
your tents, Israel!

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> As valleys they are spread forth, as
gardens by the riverside, as aloes which Yahweh has planted, as cedar
trees beside the waters.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Water shall flow from his buckets. His
seed shall be in many waters. His king shall be higher than Agag. His
kingdom shall be exalted.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> God brings him out of Egypt. He has as it
were the strength of the wild ox. He shall eat up the nations his
adversaries, shall break their bones in pieces, and pierce them with his
arrows.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> He couched, he lay down as a lion, as a
lioness; who shall rouse him up? Everyone who blesses you is blessed.
Everyone who curses you is cursed."

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Balak's anger was kindled against
Balaam, and he struck his hands together; and Balak said to Balaam, "I
called you to curse my enemies, and, behold, you have altogether blessed
them these three times.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Therefore now flee you to your place! I
thought to promote you to great honor; but, behold, Yahweh has kept you
back from honor."

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Balaam said to Balak, "Didn't I also
tell your messengers who you sent to me, saying,

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> 'If Balak would give me his house full
of silver and gold, I can't go beyond the word of Yahweh, to do either
good or bad of my own mind. I will say what Yahweh says'?

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Now, behold, I go to my people: come,
\[and\] I will inform you what this people shall do to your people in
the latter days."

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> He took up his parable, and said,
"Balaam the son of Beor says, the man whose eye was closed says;

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> he says, who hears the words of God,
knows the knowledge of the Most High, and who sees the vision of the
Almighty, Falling down, and having his eyes open:

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> I see him, but not now. I see him, but
not near. A star will come out of Jacob. A scepter will rise out of
Israel, and shall strike through the corners of Moab, and break down all
the sons of Sheth.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Edom shall be a possession. Seir, his
enemies, also shall be a possession, while Israel does valiantly.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Out of Jacob shall one have dominion,
and shall destroy the remnant from the city."

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> He looked at Amalek, and took up his
parable, and said, "Amalek was the first of the nations, But his latter
end shall come to destruction."

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> He looked at the Kenite, and took up
his parable, and said, "Your dwelling place is strong. Your nest is set
in the rock.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Nevertheless Kain shall be wasted,
until Asshur carries you away captive."

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> He took up his parable, and said,
"Alas, who shall live when God does this?

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> But ships \[shall come\] from the coast
of Kittim. They shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber. He also
shall come to destruction."

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Balaam rose up, and went and returned
to his place; and Balak also went his way.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Israel stayed in Shittim; and the people
began to play the prostitute with the daughters of Moab:

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> for they called the people to the
sacrifices of their gods; and the people ate, and bowed down to their
gods.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Israel joined himself to Baal Peor: and
the anger of Yahweh was kindled against Israel.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Take all the
chiefs of the people, and hang them up to Yahweh before the sun, that
the fierce anger of Yahweh may turn away from Israel."

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Moses said to the judges of Israel,
"Everyone kill his men who have joined themselves to Baal Peor."

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Behold, one of the children of Israel
came and brought to his brothers a Midianite woman in the sight of
Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the children of
Israel, while they were weeping at the door of the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> When Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the
son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from the midst of the
congregation, and took a spear in his hand;

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> and he went after the man of Israel into
the pavilion, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and
the woman through her body. So the plague was stayed from the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Those who died by the plague were
twenty-four thousand.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> "Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son
of Aaron the priest, has turned my wrath away from the children of
Israel, in that he was jealous with my jealousy among them, so that I
didn't consume the children of Israel in my jealousy.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Therefore say, 'Behold, I give to him
my covenant of peace:

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> and it shall be to him, and to his seed
after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood; because he was
jealous for his God, and made atonement for the children of Israel.'"

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> Now the name of the man of Israel that
was slain, who was slain with the Midianite woman, was Zimri, the son of
Salu, a prince of a fathers' house among the Simeonites.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> The name of the Midianite woman who was
slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was head of the people of a
fathers' house in Midian.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> "Harass the Midianites, and strike
them;

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> for they harassed you with their wiles,
with which they have deceived you in the matter of Peor, and in the
matter of Cozbi, the daughter of the prince of Midian, their sister, who
was slain on the day of the plague in the matter of Peor."

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> It happened after the plague, that Yahweh
spoke to Moses and to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> "Take a census of all the congregation of
the children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, by their
fathers' houses, all who are able to go forth to war in Israel."

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with
them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> "\[Take a census of the people\], from
twenty years old and upward; as Yahweh commanded Moses and the children
of Israel." These are those that came out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Reuben, the firstborn of Israel; the sons
of Reuben: \[of\] Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the
family of the Palluites;

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites;
of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> These are the families of the Reubenites;
and those who were numbered of them were forty-three thousand seven
hundred thirty.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> The sons of Pallu: Eliab.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> The sons of Eliab: Nemuel, and Dathan,
and Abiram. These are that Dathan and Abiram, who were called of the
congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company
of Korah, when they strove against Yahweh,

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> and the earth opened its mouth, and
swallowed them up together with Korah, when that company died; what time
the fire devoured two hundred fifty men, and they became a sign.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Notwithstanding, the sons of Korah
didn't die.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> The sons of Simeon after their
families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family
of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites;

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites;
of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> These are the families of the
Simeonites, twenty-two thousand two hundred.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The sons of Gad after their families:
of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the
Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the Shunites;

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of
Eri, the family of the Erites;

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> of Arod, the family of the Arodites; of
Areli, the family of the Arelites.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> These are the families of the sons of
Gad according to those who were numbered of them, forty thousand and
five hundred.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> The sons of Judah: Er and Onan; and Er
and Onan died in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> The sons of Judah after their families
were: of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the family of
the Perezites; of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> The sons of Perez were: of Hezron, the
family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> These are the families of Judah
according to those who were numbered of them, seventy-six thousand five
hundred.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> The sons of Issachar after their
families: \[of\] Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the family
of the Punites;

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> of Jashub, the family of the
Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> These are the families of Issachar
according to those who were numbered of them, sixty-four thousand three
hundred.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> The sons of Zebulun after their
families: of Sered, the family of the Seredites; of Elon, the family of
the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> These are the families of the
Zebulunites according to those who were numbered of them, sixty thousand
five hundred.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> The sons of Joseph after their
families: Manasseh and Ephraim.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> The sons of Manasseh: of Machir, the
family of the Machirites; and Machir became the father of Gilead; of
Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> These are the sons of Gilead: \[of\]
Iezer, the family of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of the
Helekites;

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> and \[of\] Asriel, the family of the
Asrielites; and \[of\] Shechem, the family of the Shechemites;

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> and \[of\] Shemida, the family of the
Shemidaites; and \[of\] Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no
sons, but daughters: and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were
Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> These are the families of Manasseh; and
those who were numbered of them were fifty-two thousand seven hundred.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> These are the sons of Ephraim after
their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; of
Becher, the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, the family of the
Tahanites.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> These are the sons of Shuthelah: of
Eran, the family of the Eranites.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> These are the families of the sons of
Ephraim according to those who were numbered of them, thirty-two
thousand five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their
families.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> The sons of Benjamin after their
families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of
the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites;

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> of Shephupham, the family of the
Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> The sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman:
\[of Ard\], the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of the
Naamites.

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> These are the sons of Benjamin after
their families; and those who were numbered of them were forty-five
thousand six hundred.

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> These are the sons of Dan after their
families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the
families of Dan after their families.

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> All the families of the Shuhamites,
according to those who were numbered of them, were sixty-four thousand
four hundred.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> The sons of Asher after their families:
of Imnah, the family of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of the
Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Berites.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the
family of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> The name of the daughter of Asher was
Serah.

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> These are the families of the sons of
Asher according to those who were numbered of them, fifty-three thousand
and four hundred.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> The sons of Naphtali after their
families: of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family
of the Gunites;

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites;
of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> These are the families of Naphtali
according to their families; and those who were numbered of them were
forty-five thousand four hundred.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> These are those who were numbered of
the children of Israel, six hundred one thousand seven hundred thirty.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> "To these the land shall be divided for
an inheritance according to the number of names.

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> To the more you shall give the more
inheritance, and to the fewer you shall give the less inheritance: to
everyone according to those who were numbered of him shall his
inheritance be given.

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> Notwithstanding, the land shall be
divided by lot: according to the names of the tribes of their fathers
they shall inherit.

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> According to the lot shall their
inheritance be divided between the more and the fewer."

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> These are those who were numbered of
the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the
Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the
family of the Merarites.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> These are the families of Levi: the
family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the
Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites.
Kohath became the father of Amram.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> The name of Amram's wife was Jochebed,
the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt: and she bore to
Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> To Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu,
Eleazar and Ithamar.

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> Nadab and Abihu died, when they offered
strange fire before Yahweh.

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> Those who were numbered of them were
twenty-three thousand, every male from a month old and upward: for they
were not numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no
inheritance given them among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> These are those who were numbered by
Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the
plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> But among these there was not a man of
them who were numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who numbered the
children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> For Yahweh had said of them, They shall
surely die in the wilderness. There was not left a man of them, except
Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Then drew near the daughters of
Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the
son of Manasseh, of the families of Manasseh the son of Joseph; and
these are the names of his daughters: Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and
Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> They stood before Moses, and before
Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and all the congregation, at
the door of the Tent of Meeting, saying,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> "Our father died in the wilderness, and
he was not among the company of those who gathered themselves together
against Yahweh in the company of Korah: but he died in his own sin; and
he had no sons.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Why should the name of our father be
taken away from among his family, because he had no son? Give to us a
possession among the brothers of our father."

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Moses brought their cause before Yahweh.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> "The daughters of Zelophehad speak right:
you shall surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their
father's brothers; and you shall cause the inheritance of their father
to pass to them.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> You shall speak to the children of
Israel, saying, 'If a man dies, and has no son, then you shall cause his
inheritance to pass to his daughter.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> If he has no daughter, then you shall
give his inheritance to his brothers.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> If he has no brothers, then you shall
give his inheritance to his father's brothers.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> If his father has no brothers, then you
shall give his inheritance to his kinsman who is next to him of his
family, and he shall possess it: and it shall be to the children of
Israel a statute \[and\] ordinance, as Yahweh commanded Moses.'"

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Go up into this
mountain of Abarim, and see the land which I have given to the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> When you have seen it, you also shall
be gathered to your people, as Aaron your brother was gathered;

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> because you rebelled against my word in
the wilderness of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me
at the waters before their eyes." (These are the waters of Meribah of
Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.)

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Moses spoke to Yahweh, saying,

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> "Let Yahweh, the God of the spirits of
all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation,

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> who may go out before them, and who may
come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them
in; that the congregation of Yahweh not be as sheep which have no
shepherd."

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Yahweh said to Moses, "Take Joshua the
son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay your hand on him;

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> and set him before Eleazar the priest,
and before all the congregation; and commission him in their sight.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> You shall put of your honor on him,
that all the congregation of the children of Israel may obey.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> He shall stand before Eleazar the
priest, who shall inquire for him by the judgment of the Urim before
Yahweh: at his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come
in, both he, and all the children of Israel with him, even all the
congregation."

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Moses did as Yahweh commanded him; and
he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all
the congregation:

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> and he laid his hands on him, and
commissioned him, as Yahweh spoke by Moses.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> "Command the children of Israel, and tell
them, 'My offering, my food for my offerings made by fire, of a pleasant
aroma to me, you shall observe to offer to me in their due season.'

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> You shall tell them, 'This is the
offering made by fire which you shall offer to Yahweh: male lambs a year
old without blemish, two day by day, for a continual burnt offering.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> You shall offer the one lamb in the
morning, and you shall offer the other lamb at evening;

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> with the tenth part of an ephah of fine
flour for a meal offering, mixed with the fourth part of a hin of beaten
oil.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> It is a continual burnt offering, which
was ordained in Mount Sinai for a pleasant aroma, an offering made by
fire to Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Its drink offering shall be the fourth
part of a hin for the one lamb. You shall pour out a drink offering of
strong drink to Yahweh in the holy place.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The other lamb you shall offer at
evening: as the meal offering of the morning, and as the drink offering
of it, you shall offer it, an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma
to Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> "'On the Sabbath day two male lambs a
year old without blemish, and two tenth parts \[of an ephah\] of fine
flour for a meal offering, mixed with oil, and the drink offering of it:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> this is the burnt offering of every
Sabbath, besides the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering of
it.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> "'In the beginnings of your months you
shall offer a burnt offering to Yahweh: two young bulls, and one ram,
seven male lambs a year old without blemish;

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> and three tenth parts \[of an ephah\]
of fine flour for a meal offering, mixed with oil, for each bull; and
two tenth parts of fine flour for a meal offering, mixed with oil, for
the one ram;

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> and a tenth part of fine flour mixed
with oil for a meal offering to every lamb; for a burnt offering of a
pleasant aroma, an offering made by fire to Yahweh.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Their drink offerings shall be half a
hin of wine for a bull, and the third part of a hin for the ram, and the
fourth part of a hin for a lamb: this is the burnt offering of every
month throughout the months of the year.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> One male goat for a sin offering to
Yahweh; it shall be offered besides the continual burnt offering, and
the drink offering of it.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> "'In the first month, on the fourteenth
day of the month, is Yahweh's Passover.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> On the fifteenth day of this month
shall be a feast: seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> In the first day shall be a holy
convocation: you shall do no servile work;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> but you shall offer an offering made by
fire, a burnt offering to Yahweh: two young bulls, and one ram, and
seven male lambs a year old; they shall be to you without blemish;

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> and their meal offering, fine flour
mixed with oil: you shall offer three tenth parts for a bull, and two
tenth parts for the ram.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> You shall offer a tenth part for every
lamb of the seven lambs;

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> and one male goat for a sin offering,
to make atonement for you.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> You shall offer these besides the burnt
offering of the morning, which is for a continual burnt offering.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> In this way you shall offer daily, for
seven days, the food of the offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma
to Yahweh: it shall be offered besides the continual burnt offering, and
the drink offering of it.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> On the seventh day you shall have a
holy convocation: you shall do no servile work.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> "'Also in the day of the first fruits,
when you offer a new meal offering to Yahweh in your \[feast of\] weeks,
you shall have a holy convocation; you shall do no servile work;

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> but you shall offer a burnt offering
for a pleasant aroma to Yahweh: two young bulls, one ram, seven male
lambs a year old;

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> and their meal offering, fine flour
mixed with oil, three tenth parts for each bull, two tenth parts for the
one ram,

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> a tenth part for every lamb of the
seven lambs;

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> one male goat, to make atonement for
you.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Besides the continual burnt offering,
and the meal offering of it, you shall offer them (they shall be to you
without blemish), and their drink offerings.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> "'In the seventh month, on the first day
of the month, you shall have a holy convocation; you shall do no servile
work: it is a day of blowing of trumpets to you.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> You shall offer a burnt offering for a
pleasant aroma to Yahweh: one young bull, one ram, seven male lambs a
year old without blemish;

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> and their meal offering, fine flour mixed
with oil, three tenth parts for the bull, two tenth parts for the ram,

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> and one tenth part for every lamb of the
seven lambs;

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> and one male goat for a sin offering, to
make atonement for you;

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> besides the burnt offering of the new
moon, and the meal offering of it, and the continual burnt offering and
the meal offering of it, and their drink offerings, according to their
ordinance, for a pleasant aroma, an offering made by fire to Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> "'On the tenth day of this seventh month
you shall have a holy convocation; and you shall afflict your souls: you
shall do no kind of work;

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> but you shall offer a burnt offering to
Yahweh for a pleasant aroma: one young bull, one ram, seven male lambs a
year old; they shall be to you without blemish;

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> and their meal offering, fine flour mixed
with oil, three tenth parts for the bull, two tenth parts for the one
ram,

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> a tenth part for every lamb of the
seven lambs:

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> one male goat for a sin offering;
besides the sin offering of atonement, and the continual burnt offering,
and the meal offering of it, and their drink offerings.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> "'On the fifteenth day of the seventh
month you shall have a holy convocation; you shall do no servile work,
and you shall keep a feast to Yahweh seven days:

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> and you shall offer a burnt offering,
an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh; thirteen young
bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year old; they shall be without
blemish;

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> and their meal offering, fine flour
mixed with oil, three tenth parts for every bull of the thirteen bulls,
two tenth parts for each ram of the two rams,

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> and a tenth part for every lamb of the
fourteen lambs;

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> and one male goat for a sin offering,
besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the
drink offering of it.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> "'On the second day \[you shall offer\]
twelve young bulls, two rams, fourteen male lambs a year old without
blemish;

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> and their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to
their number, after the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> and one male goat for a sin offering;
besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and
their drink offerings.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> "'On the third day eleven bulls, two
rams, fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish;

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> and their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to
their number, after the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> and one male goat for a sin offering;
besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and
the drink offering of it.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> "'On the fourth day ten bulls, two
rams, fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish;

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to
their number, after the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> and one male goat for a sin offering;
besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the
drink offering of it.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> "'On the fifth day nine bulls, two
rams, fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish;

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> and their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to
their number, after the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> and one male goat for a sin offering,
besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and
the drink offering of it.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> "'On the sixth day eight bulls, two
rams, fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish;

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> and their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to
their number, after the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> and one male goat for a sin offering;
besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the
drink offerings of it.

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> "'On the seventh day seven bulls, two
rams, fourteen male lambs a year old without blemish;

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> and their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the bulls, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to
their number, after the ordinance;

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> and one male goat for a sin offering;
besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the
drink offering of it.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> "'On the eighth day you shall have a
solemn assembly: you shall do no servile work;

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> but you shall offer a burnt offering,
an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh: one bull, one
ram, seven male lambs a year old without blemish;

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> their meal offering and their drink
offerings for the bull, for the ram, and for the lambs, shall be
according to their number, after the ordinance:

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> and one male goat for a sin offering,
besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and
the drink offering of it.

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> "'You shall offer these to Yahweh in
your set feasts, besides your vows, and your freewill offerings, for
your burnt offerings, and for your meal offerings, and for your drink
offerings, and for your peace offerings.'"

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> Moses told the children of Israel
according to all that Yahweh commanded Moses.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of
the children of Israel, saying, "This is the thing which Yahweh has
commanded.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> When a man vows a vow to Yahweh, or
swears an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his
word; he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> "Also when a woman vows a vow to Yahweh,
and binds herself by a bond, being in her father's house, in her youth,

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> and her father hears her vow, and her
bond with which she has bound her soul, and her father holds his peace
at her; then all her vows shall stand, and every bond with which she has
bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> But if her father disallow her in the day
that he hears, none of her vows, or of her bonds with which she has
bound her soul, shall stand: and Yahweh will forgive her, because her
father disallowed her.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> "If she is \[married\] to a husband,
while her vows are on her, or the rash utterance of her lips, with which
she has bound her soul,

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> and her husband hear it, and hold his
peace at her in the day that he hears it; then her vows shall stand, and
her bonds with which she has bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> But if her husband disallow her in the
day that he hears it, then he shall make void her vow which is on her,
and the rash utterance of her lips, with which she has bound her soul:
and Yahweh will forgive her.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> "But the vow of a widow, or of her who is
divorced, \[even\] everything with which she has bound her soul, shall
stand against her.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> "If she vowed in her husband's house,
or bound her soul by a bond with an oath,

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> and her husband heard it, and held his
peace at her, and didn't disallow her; then all her vows shall stand,
and every bond with which she bound her soul shall stand.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> But if her husband made them null and
void in the day that he heard them, then whatever proceeded out of her
lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not
stand: her husband has made them void; and Yahweh will forgive her.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Every vow, and every binding oath to
afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make
it void.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> But if her husband altogether hold his
peace at her from day to day, then he establishes all her vows, or all
her bonds, which are on her: he has established them, because he held
his peace at her in the day that he heard them.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> But if he shall make them null and void
after that he has heard them, then he shall bear her iniquity."

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> These are the statutes, which Yahweh
commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between a father and his
daughter, being in her youth, in her father's house.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> "Avenge the children of Israel for the
Midianites. Afterward you shall be gathered to your people."

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Moses spoke to the people, saying, "Arm
men from among you for the war, that they may go against Midian, to
execute Yahweh's vengeance on Midian.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Of every tribe one thousand, throughout
all the tribes of Israel, you shall send to the war."

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> So there were delivered, out of the
thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed
for war.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Moses sent them, one thousand of every
tribe, to the war, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to
the war, with the vessels of the sanctuary and the trumpets for the
alarm in his hand.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> They warred against Midian, as Yahweh
commanded Moses; and they killed every male.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> They killed the kings of Midian with the
rest of their slain: Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the
five kings of Midian: Balaam also the son of Beor they killed with the
sword.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> The children of Israel took captive the
women of Midian and their little ones; and all their livestock, and all
their flocks, and all their goods, they took for a prey.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> All their cities in the places in which
they lived, and all their encampments, they burnt with fire.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> They took all the spoil, and all the
prey, both of man and of animal.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> They brought the captives, and the
prey, and the spoil, to Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and to the
congregation of the children of Israel, to the camp at the plains of
Moab, which are by the Jordan at Jericho.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all
the princes of the congregation, went forth to meet them outside of the
camp.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Moses was angry with the officers of
the army, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds, who
came from the service of the war.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Moses said to them, "Have you saved all
the women alive?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Behold, these caused the children of
Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against Yahweh
in the matter of Peor, and so the plague was among the congregation of
Yahweh.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Now therefore kill every male among the
little ones, and kill every woman who has known man by lying with him.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> But all the girls, who have not known
man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> "Encamp outside of the camp seven days:
whoever has killed any person, and whoever has touched any slain, purify
yourselves on the third day and on the seventh day, you and your
captives.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> As to every garment, and all that is
made of skin, and all work of goats' \[hair\], and all things made of
wood, you shall purify yourselves."

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> Eleazar the priest said to the men of
war who went to the battle, "This is the statute of the law which Yahweh
has commanded Moses:

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> however the gold, and the silver, the
brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead,

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> everything that may withstand the fire,
you shall make to go through the fire, and it shall be clean;
nevertheless it shall be purified with the water for impurity: and all
that doesn't withstand the fire you shall make to go through the water.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> You shall wash your clothes on the
seventh day, and you shall be clean; and afterward you shall come into
the camp."

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> "Take the sum of the prey that was
taken, both of man and of animal, you, and Eleazar the priest, and the
heads of the fathers' \[houses\] of the congregation;

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> and divide the prey into two parts:
between the men skilled in war, who went out to battle, and all the
congregation.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Levy a tribute to Yahweh of the men of
war who went out to battle: one soul of five hundred, \[both\] of the
persons, and of the cattle, and of the donkeys, and of the flocks:

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> take it of their half, and give it to
Eleazar the priest, for Yahweh's wave offering.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Of the children of Israel's half, you
shall take one drawn out of every fifty, of the persons, of the cattle,
of the donkeys, and of the flocks, \[even\] of all the livestock, and
give them to the Levites, who perform the duty of the tabernacle of
Yahweh."

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Moses and Eleazar the priest did as
Yahweh commanded Moses.

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> Now the prey, over and above the booty
which the men of war took, was six hundred seventy-five thousand sheep,

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> and seventy-two thousand head of
cattle,

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> and sixty-one thousand donkeys,

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> and thirty-two thousand persons in all,
of the women who had not known man by lying with him.

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> The half, which was the portion of
those who went out to war, was in number three hundred thirty-seven
thousand five hundred sheep:

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> and Yahweh's tribute of the sheep was
six hundred seventy-five.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> The cattle were thirty-six thousand; of
which Yahweh's tribute was seventy-two.

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> The donkeys were thirty thousand five
hundred; of which Yahweh's tribute was sixty-one.

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> The persons were sixteen thousand; of
whom Yahweh's tribute was thirty-two persons.

<span id="an_31:41">31:41</span> Moses gave the tribute, which was
Yahweh's wave offering, to Eleazar the priest, as Yahweh commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_31:42">31:42</span> Of the children of Israel's half, which
Moses divided off from the men who warred

<span id="an_31:43">31:43</span> (now the congregation's half was three
hundred thirty-seven thousand five hundred sheep,

<span id="an_31:44">31:44</span> and thirty-six thousand head of cattle,

<span id="an_31:45">31:45</span> and thirty thousand five hundred
donkeys,

<span id="an_31:46">31:46</span> and sixteen thousand persons),

<span id="an_31:47">31:47</span> even of the children of Israel's half,
Moses took one drawn out of every fifty, both of man and of animal, and
gave them to the Levites, who performed the duty of the tabernacle of
Yahweh; as Yahweh commanded Moses.

<span id="an_31:48">31:48</span> The officers who were over the
thousands of the army, the captains of thousands, and the captains of
hundreds, came near to Moses;

<span id="an_31:49">31:49</span> and they said to Moses, "Your servants
have taken the sum of the men of war who are under our command, and
there lacks not one man of us.

<span id="an_31:50">31:50</span> We have brought Yahweh's offering, what
every man has gotten, of jewels of gold, armlets, and bracelets, signet
rings, earrings, and necklaces, to make atonement for our souls before
Yahweh."

<span id="an_31:51">31:51</span> Moses and Eleazar the priest took the
gold of them, even all worked jewels.

<span id="an_31:52">31:52</span> All the gold of the wave offering that
they offered up to Yahweh, of the captains of thousands, and of the
captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred fifty shekels.

<span id="an_31:53">31:53</span> (\[For\] the men of war had taken
booty, every man for himself.)

<span id="an_31:54">31:54</span> Moses and Eleazar the priest took the
gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into
the Tent of Meeting, for a memorial for the children of Israel before
Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> Now the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad had a very great multitude of livestock: and when they
saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that behold, the place
was a place for livestock;

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> the children of Gad and the children of
Reuben came and spoke to Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and to the
princes of the congregation, saying,

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> "Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and
Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon,

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> the land which Yahweh struck before the
congregation of Israel, is a land for livestock; and your servants have
livestock."

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> They said, "If we have found favor in
your sight, let this land be given to your servants for a possession;
don't bring us over the Jordan."

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Moses said to the children of Gad, and to
the children of Reuben, "Shall your brothers go to the war, and shall
you sit here?

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> Why do you discourage the heart of the
children of Israel from going over into the land which Yahweh has given
them?

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> Your fathers did so when I sent them from
Kadesh Barnea to see the land.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> For when they went up to the valley of
Eshcol, and saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the children of
Israel, that they should not go into the land which Yahweh had given
them.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Yahweh's anger was kindled in that day,
and he swore, saying,

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> 'Surely none of the men who came up out
of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I
swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me:

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> except Caleb the son of Jephunneh the
Kenizzite, and Joshua the son of Nun; because they have followed Yahweh
completely.'

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Yahweh's anger was kindled against
Israel, and he made them wander back and forth in the wilderness forty
years, until all the generation, who had done evil in the sight of
Yahweh, was consumed.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> "Behold, you have risen up in your
fathers' place, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce
anger of Yahweh toward Israel.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> For if you turn away from after him, he
will yet again leave them in the wilderness; and you will destroy all
this people."

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> They came near to him, and said, "We
will build sheepfolds here for our livestock, and cities for our little
ones:

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> but we ourselves will be ready armed to
go before the children of Israel, until we have brought them to their
place: and our little ones shall dwell in the fortified cities because
of the inhabitants of the land.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> We will not return to our houses, until
the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> For we will not inherit with them on
the other side of the Jordan, and forward; because our inheritance is
fallen to us on this side of the Jordan eastward."

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Moses said to them, "If you will do
this thing, if you will arm yourselves to go before Yahweh to the war,

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> and every armed man of you will pass
over the Jordan before Yahweh, until he has driven out his enemies from
before him,

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> and the land is subdued before Yahweh;
then afterward you shall return, and be guiltless towards Yahweh, and
towards Israel; and this land shall be to you for a possession before
Yahweh.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> "But if you will not do so, behold, you
have sinned against Yahweh; and be sure your sin will find you out.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> Build cities for your little ones, and
folds for your sheep; and do that which has proceeded out of your
mouth."

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> The children of Gad and the children of
Reuben spoke to Moses, saying, "Your servants will do as my lord
commands.

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Our little ones, our wives, our flocks,
and all our livestock, shall be there in the cities of Gilead;

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> but your servants will pass over, every
man who is armed for war, before Yahweh to battle, as my lord says."

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> So Moses commanded concerning them to
Eleazar the priest, and to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the heads of
the fathers' \[houses\] of the tribes of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> Moses said to them, "If the children of
Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over the Jordan, every
man who is armed to battle, before Yahweh, and the land shall be subdued
before you; then you shall give them the land of Gilead for a
possession:

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> but if they will not pass over with you
armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan."

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> The children of Gad and the children of
Reuben answered, saying, "As Yahweh has said to your servants, so will
we do.

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> We will pass over armed before Yahweh
into the land of Canaan, and the possession of our inheritance \[shall
remain\] with us beyond the Jordan."

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> Moses gave to them, even to the
children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and to the half-tribe of
Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites,
and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, according to the cities
of it with \[their\] borders, even the cities of the surrounding land.

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> The children of Gad built Dibon, and
Ataroth, and Aroer,

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> and Atrothshophan, and Jazer, and
Jogbehah,

<span id="an_32:36">32:36</span> and Beth Nimrah, and Beth Haran:
fortified cities, and folds for sheep.

<span id="an_32:37">32:37</span> The children of Reuben built Heshbon,
and Elealeh, and Kiriathaim,

<span id="an_32:38">32:38</span> and Nebo, and Baal Meon, (their names
being changed), and Sibmah: and they gave other names to the cities
which they built.

<span id="an_32:39">32:39</span> The children of Machir the son of
Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorites who
were therein.

<span id="an_32:40">32:40</span> Moses gave Gilead to Machir the son of
Manasseh; and he lived therein.

<span id="an_32:41">32:41</span> Jair the son of Manasseh went and took
its towns, and called them Havvoth Jair.

<span id="an_32:42">32:42</span> Nobah went and took Kenath, and its
villages, and called it Nobah, after his own name.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> These are the journeys of the children of
Israel, when they went forth out of the land of Egypt by their armies
under the hand of Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Moses wrote their goings out according to
their journeys by the commandment of Yahweh: and these are their
journeys according to their goings out.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> They traveled from Rameses in the first
month, on the fifteenth day of the first month; on the next day after
the Passover the children of Israel went out with a high hand in the
sight of all the Egyptians,

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> while the Egyptians were burying all
their firstborn, whom Yahweh had struck among them: on their gods also
Yahweh executed judgments.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> The children of Israel traveled from
Rameses, and encamped in Succoth.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> They traveled from Succoth, and encamped
in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderness.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> They traveled from Etham, and turned back
to Pihahiroth, which is before Baal Zephon: and they encamped before
Migdol.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> They traveled from before Hahiroth, and
passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness: and they went
three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham, and encamped in Marah.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> They traveled from Marah, and came to
Elim: and in Elim were twelve springs of water, and seventy palm trees;
and they encamped there.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> They traveled from Elim, and encamped
by the Red Sea.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> They traveled from the Red Sea, and
encamped in the wilderness of Sin.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> They traveled from the wilderness of
Sin, and encamped in Dophkah.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> They traveled from Dophkah, and
encamped in Alush.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> They traveled from Alush, and encamped
in Rephidim, where there was no water for the people to drink.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> They traveled from Rephidim, and
encamped in the wilderness of Sinai.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> They traveled from the wilderness of
Sinai, and encamped in Kibroth Hattaavah.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> They traveled from Kibroth Hattaavah,
and encamped in Hazeroth.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> They traveled from Hazeroth, and
encamped in Rithmah.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> They traveled from Rithmah, and
encamped in Rimmon Perez.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> They traveled from Rimmon Perez, and
encamped in Libnah.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> They traveled from Libnah, and encamped
in Rissah.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> They traveled from Rissah, and encamped
in Kehelathah.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> They traveled from Kehelathah, and
encamped in Mount Shepher.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> They traveled from Mount Shepher, and
encamped in Haradah.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> They traveled from Haradah, and
encamped in Makheloth.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> They traveled from Makheloth, and
encamped in Tahath.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> They traveled from Tahath, and encamped
in Terah.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> They traveled from Terah, and encamped
in Mithkah.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> They traveled from Mithkah, and
encamped in Hashmonah.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> They traveled from Hashmonah, and
encamped in Moseroth.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> They traveled from Moseroth, and
encamped in Bene Jaakan.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> They traveled from Bene Jaakan, and
encamped in Hor Haggidgad.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> They traveled from Hor Haggidgad, and
encamped in Jotbathah.

<span id="an_33:34">33:34</span> They traveled from Jotbathah, and
encamped in Abronah.

<span id="an_33:35">33:35</span> They traveled from Abronah, and
encamped in Ezion Geber.

<span id="an_33:36">33:36</span> They traveled from Ezion Geber, and
encamped in the wilderness of Zin (the same is Kadesh).

<span id="an_33:37">33:37</span> They traveled from Kadesh, and encamped
in Mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.

<span id="an_33:38">33:38</span> Aaron the priest went up into Mount Hor
at the commandment of Yahweh, and died there, in the fortieth year after
the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fifth
month, on the first day of the month.

<span id="an_33:39">33:39</span> Aaron was one hundred twenty-three
years old when he died in Mount Hor.

<span id="an_33:40">33:40</span> The Canaanite, the king of Arad, who
lived in the South in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_33:41">33:41</span> They traveled from Mount Hor, and
encamped in Zalmonah.

<span id="an_33:42">33:42</span> They traveled from Zalmonah, and
encamped in Punon.

<span id="an_33:43">33:43</span> They traveled from Punon, and encamped
in Oboth.

<span id="an_33:44">33:44</span> They traveled from Oboth, and encamped
in Iye Abarim, in the border of Moab.

<span id="an_33:45">33:45</span> They traveled from Iyim, and encamped
in Dibon Gad.

<span id="an_33:46">33:46</span> They traveled from Dibon Gad, and
encamped in Almon Diblathaim.

<span id="an_33:47">33:47</span> They traveled from Almon Diblathaim,
and encamped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.

<span id="an_33:48">33:48</span> They traveled from the mountains of
Abarim, and encamped in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

<span id="an_33:49">33:49</span> They encamped by the Jordan, from Beth
Jeshimoth even to Abel Shittim in the plains of Moab.

<span id="an_33:50">33:50</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses in the plains of
Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,

<span id="an_33:51">33:51</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and
tell them, "When you pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,

<span id="an_33:52">33:52</span> then you shall drive out all the
inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their figured
\[stones\], and destroy all their molten images, and demolish all their
high places:

<span id="an_33:53">33:53</span> and you shall take possession of the
land, and dwell therein; for I have given given the land to you to
possess it.

<span id="an_33:54">33:54</span> You shall inherit the land by lot
according to your families; to the more you shall give the more
inheritance, and to the fewer you shall give the less inheritance:
wherever the lot falls to any man, that shall be his. You shall inherit
according to the tribes of your fathers.

<span id="an_33:55">33:55</span> "But if you do not drive out the
inhabitants of the land from before you, then those you let remain of
them will be as pricks in your eyes and as thorns in your sides, and
they will harass you in the land in which you dwell.

<span id="an_33:56">33:56</span> It shall happen that as I thought to do
to them, so will I do to you."

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> "Command the children of Israel, and tell
them, 'When you come into the land of Canaan (this is the land that
shall fall to you for an inheritance, even the land of Canaan according
to its borders),

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> then your south quarter shall be from the
wilderness of Zin along by the side of Edom, and your south border shall
be from the end of the Salt Sea eastward;

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> and your border shall turn about
southward of the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass along to Zin; and the
goings out of it shall be southward of Kadesh Barnea; and it shall go
forth to Hazar Addar, and pass along to Azmon;

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> and the border shall turn about from
Azmon to the brook of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the
sea.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> "'For the western border, you shall have
the great sea and the border \[of it\]: this shall be your west border.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> "'This shall be your north border: from
the great sea you shall mark out for you Mount Hor;

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> from Mount Hor you shall mark out to the
entrance of Hamath; and the goings out of the border shall be at Zedad;

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> and the border shall go forth to Ziphron,
and the goings out of it shall be at Hazar Enan: this shall be your
north border.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> "'You shall mark out your east border
from Hazar Enan to Shepham;

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> and the border shall go down from
Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shall go
down, and shall reach to the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward;

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> and the border shall go down to the
Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the Salt Sea. This shall be
your land according to its borders around it.'"

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> Moses commanded the children of Israel,
saying, "This is the land which you shall inherit by lot, which Yahweh
has commanded to give to the nine tribes, and to the half-tribe;

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> for the tribe of the children of Reuben
according to their fathers' houses, and the tribe of the children of Gad
according to their fathers' houses, have received, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh have received, their inheritance:

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> the two tribes and the half-tribe have
received their inheritance beyond the Jordan at Jericho eastward, toward
the sunrise."

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> "These are the names of the men who
shall divide the land to you for inheritance: Eleazar the priest, and
Joshua the son of Nun.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> You shall take one prince of every
tribe, to divide the land for inheritance.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> These are the names of the men: Of the
tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> Of the tribe of the children of Simeon,
Shemuel the son of Ammihud.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the
son of Chislon.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Of the tribe of the children of Dan a
prince, Bukki the son of Jogli.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Of the children of Joseph: of the tribe
of the children of Manasseh a prince, Hanniel the son of Ephod.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> Of the tribe of the children of Ephraim
a prince, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Of the tribe of the children of Zebulun
a prince, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> Of the tribe of the children of
Issachar a prince, Paltiel the son of Azzan.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Of the tribe of the children of Asher a
prince, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> Of the tribe of the children of
Naphtali a prince, Pedahel the son of Ammihud."

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> These are they whom Yahweh commanded to
divide the inheritance to the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses in the plains of
Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> "Command the children of Israel that they
give to the Levites of the inheritance of their possession cities to
dwell in; and you shall give suburbs for the cities around them to the
Levites.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> The cities shall they have to dwell in;
and their suburbs shall be for their livestock, and for their substance,
and for all their animals.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> "The suburbs of the cities, which you
shall give to the Levites, shall be from the wall of the city and
outward one thousand cubits around it.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> You shall measure outside of the city for
the east side two thousand cubits, and for the south side two thousand
cubits, and for the west side two thousand cubits, and for the north
side two thousand cubits, the city being in the midst. This shall be to
them the suburbs of the cities.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> "The cities which you shall give to the
Levites, they shall be the six cities of refuge, which you shall give
for the manslayer to flee to: and besides them you shall give forty-two
cities.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> All the cities which you shall give to
the Levites shall be forty-eight cities together with their suburbs.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> Concerning the cities which you shall
give of the possession of the children of Israel, from the many you
shall take many; and from the few you shall take few: everyone according
to his inheritance which he inherits shall give of his cities to the
Levites."

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying,

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> "Speak to the children of Israel, and
tell them, 'When you pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> then you shall appoint you cities to be
cities of refuge for you, that the manslayer who kills any person
unwittingly may flee there.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> The cities shall be to you for refuge
from the avenger, that the manslayer not die, until he stands before the
congregation for judgment.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> The cities which you shall give shall
be for you six cities of refuge.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> You shall give three cities beyond the
Jordan, and you shall give three cities in the land of Canaan; they
shall be cities of refuge.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> For the children of Israel, and for the
stranger and for the foreigner living among them, shall these six cities
be for refuge; that everyone who kills any person unwittingly may flee
there.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> "'But if he struck him with an
instrument of iron, so that he died, he is a murderer: the murderer
shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> If he struck him with a stone in the
hand, by which a man may die, and he died, he is a murderer: the
murderer shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> Or if he struck him with a weapon of
wood in the hand, by which a man may die, and he died, he is a murderer:
the murderer shall surely be put to death.

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> The avenger of blood shall himself put
the murderer to death: when he meets him, he shall put him to death.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> If he thrust him of hatred, or hurled
at him, lying in wait, so that he died,

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> or in enmity struck him with his hand,
so that he died; he who struck him shall surely be put to death; he is a
murderer: the avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death, when he
meets him.

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> "'But if he thrust him suddenly without
enmity, or hurled on him anything without lying in wait,

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> or with any stone, by which a man may
die, not seeing him, and cast it on him, so that he died, and he was not
his enemy, neither sought his harm;

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> then the congregation shall judge
between the striker and the avenger of blood according to these
ordinances;

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> and the congregation shall deliver the
manslayer out of the hand of the avenger of blood, and the congregation
shall restore him to his city of refuge, where he was fled: and he shall
dwell therein until the death of the high priest, who was anointed with
the holy oil.

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> "'But if the manslayer shall at any
time go beyond the border of his city of refuge, where he flees,

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> and the avenger of blood find him
outside of the border of his city of refuge, and the avenger of blood
kill the manslayer; he shall not be guilty of blood,

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> because he should have remained in his
city of refuge until the death of the high priest: but after the death
of the high priest the manslayer shall return into the land of his
possession.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> "'These things shall be for a statute
\[and\] ordinance to you throughout your generations in all your
dwellings.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> "'Whoever kills any person, the
murderer shall be slain at the mouth of witnesses: but one witness shall
not testify against any person that he die.

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> "'Moreover you shall take no ransom for
the life of a murderer who is guilty of death; but he shall surely be
put to death.

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> "'You shall take no ransom for him who
is fled to his city of refuge, that he may come again to dwell in the
land, until the death of the priest.

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> "'So you shall not pollute the land in
which you are: for blood, it pollutes the land; and no expiation can be
made for the land for the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood
of him who shed it.

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> You shall not defile the land which you
inhabit, in the midst of which I dwell: for I, Yahweh, dwell in the
midst of the children of Israel.'"

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> The heads of the fathers' \[houses\] of
the family of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of
Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spoke
before Moses, and before the princes, the heads of the fathers'
\[houses\] of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> and they said, "Yahweh commanded my lord
to give the land for inheritance by lot to the children of Israel: and
my lord was commanded by Yahweh to give the inheritance of Zelophehad
our brother to his daughters.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> If they are married to any of the sons of
the \[other\] tribes of the children of Israel, then will their
inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of our fathers, and will
be added to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they shall belong: so
will it be taken away from the lot of our inheritance.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> When the jubilee of the children of
Israel shall be, then will their inheritance be added to the inheritance
of the tribe whereunto they shall belong: so will their inheritance be
taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers."

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Moses commanded the children of Israel
according to the word of Yahweh, saying, "The tribe of the sons of
Joseph speaks right.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> This is the thing which Yahweh does
command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them be
married to whom they think best; only into the family of the tribe of
their father shall they be married.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> So shall no inheritance of the children
of Israel remove from tribe to tribe; for the children of Israel shall
all keep the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> Every daughter who possesses an
inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel shall be wife to one
of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel
may possess every man the inheritance of his fathers.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> So shall no inheritance remove from one
tribe to another tribe; for the tribes of the children of Israel shall
each keep his own inheritance."

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> The daughters of Zelophehad did as
Yahweh commanded Moses:

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> for Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and
Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were married to their
father's brothers' sons.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> They were married into the families of
the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph; and their inheritance remained
in the tribe of the family of their father.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> These are the commandments and the
ordinances which Yahweh commanded by Moses to the children of Israel in
the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy](deu.md)
