[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](eph)  [Next](col.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Philippians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ;
To all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the
overseers and servants:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you, and peace from God, our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I thank my God whenever I remember you,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> always in every request of mine on behalf
of you all making my requests with joy,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> for your partnership in furtherance of the
Good News from the first day until now;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> being confident of this very thing, that he
who began a good work in you will complete it until the day of Jesus
Christ.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> It is even right for me to think this way
on behalf of all of you, because I have you in my heart, because, both
in my bonds and in the defense and confirmation of the Good News, you
all are partakers with me of grace.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For God is my witness, how I long after all
of you in the tender mercies of Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> This I pray, that your love may abound yet
more and more in knowledge and all discernment;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> so that you may approve the things that
are excellent; that you may be sincere and without offense to the day of
Christ;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise
of God.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Now I desire to have you know, brothers,
that the things which happened to me have turned out rather to the
progress of the Good News;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> so that it became evident to the whole
palace guard, and to all the rest, that my bonds are in Christ;

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> and that most of the brothers in the
Lord, being confident through my bonds, are more abundantly bold to
speak the word of God without fear.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Some indeed preach Christ even out of
envy and strife, and some also out of good will.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The former insincerely preach Christ from
selfish ambition, thinking that they add affliction to my chains;

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> but the latter out of love, knowing that
I am appointed for the defense of the Good News.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> What does it matter? Only that in every
way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed. I rejoice in
this, yes, and will rejoice.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> For I know that this will turn out to my
salvation, through your supplication and the supply of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> according to my earnest expectation and
hope, that I will in no way be disappointed, but with all boldness, as
always, now also Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by life,
or by death.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For to me to live is Christ, and to die
is gain.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But if I live on in the flesh, this will
bring fruit from my work; yet I don't know what I will choose.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But I am in a dilemma between the two,
having the desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Yet, to remain in the flesh is more
needful for your sake.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Having this confidence, I know that I
will remain, yes, and remain with you all, for your progress and joy in
the faith,

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> that your rejoicing may abound in Christ
Jesus in me through my presence with you again.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Only let your way of life be worthy of
the Good News of Christ, that, whether I come and see you or am absent,
I may hear of your state, that you stand firm in one spirit, with one
soul striving for the faith of the Good News;

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> and in nothing frightened by the
adversaries, which is for them a proof of destruction, but to you of
salvation, and that from God.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Because it has been granted to you on
behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer on his
behalf,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> having the same conflict which you saw in
me, and now hear is in me.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> If there is therefore any exhortation in
Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if
any tender mercies and compassion,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> make my joy full, by being like-minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> doing nothing through rivalry or through
conceit, but in humility, each counting others better than himself;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> each of you not just looking to his own
things, but each of you also to the things of others.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Have this in your mind, which was also in
Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who, existing in the form of God, didn't
consider equality with God a thing to be grasped,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> but emptied himself, taking the form of a
servant, being made in the likeness of men.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And being found in human form, he humbled
himself, becoming obedient to death, yes, the death of the cross.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Therefore God also highly exalted him, and
gave to him the name which is above every name;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of those in heaven, those on earth, and those under the
earth,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> So then, my beloved, even as you have
always obeyed, not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence,
work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For it is God who works in you both to
will and to work, for his good pleasure.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Do all things without murmurings and
disputes,

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> that you may become blameless and
harmless, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, among whom you are seen as lights in the world,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> holding up the word of life; that I may
have something to boast in the day of Christ, that I didn't run in vain
nor labor in vain.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Yes, and if I am poured out on the
sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice, and rejoice with you
all.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> In the same way, you also rejoice, and
rejoice with me.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send
Timothy to you soon, that I also may be cheered up when I know how you
are doing.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For I have no one else like-minded, who
will truly care about you.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For they all seek their own, not the
things of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But you know the proof of him, that, as a
child serves a father, so he served with me in furtherance of the Good
News.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Therefore I hope to send him at once, as
soon as I see how it will go with me.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But I trust in the Lord that I myself
also will come shortly.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> But I counted it necessary to send to you
Epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker, fellow soldier, and your
apostle and servant of my need;

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> since he longed for you all, and was very
troubled, because you had heard that he was sick.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> For indeed he was sick, nearly to death,
but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I
might not have sorrow on sorrow.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> I have sent him therefore the more
diligently, that, when you see him again, you may rejoice, and that I
may be the less sorrowful.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Receive him therefore in the Lord with
all joy, and hold such in honor,

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> because for the work of Christ he came
near to death, risking his life to supply that which was lacking in your
service toward me.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord.
To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not tiresome, but for
you it is safe.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil
workers, beware of the false circumcision.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For we are the circumcision, who worship
God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> though I myself might have confidence even
in the flesh. If any other man thinks that he has confidence in the
flesh, I yet more:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of
Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; concerning the
law, a Pharisee;

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> concerning zeal, persecuting the assembly;
concerning the righteousness which is in the law, found blameless.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> However, what things were gain to me, these
have I counted loss for Christ.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Yes most certainly, and I count all things
to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord,
for whom I suffered the loss of all things, and count them nothing but
refuse, that I may gain Christ

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> and be found in him, not having a
righteousness of my own, that which is of the law, but that which is
through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> that I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, becoming conformed
to his death;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> if by any means I may attain to the
resurrection from the dead.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Not that I have already obtained, or am
already made perfect; but I press on, if it is so that I may take hold
of that for which also I was taken hold of by Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Brothers, I don't regard myself as yet
having taken hold, but one thing I do. Forgetting the things which are
behind, and stretching forward to the things which are before,

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I press on toward the goal for the prize
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Let us therefore, as many as are perfect,
think this way. If in anything you think otherwise, God will also reveal
that to you.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Nevertheless, to the extent that we have
already attained, let us walk by the same rule. Let us be of the same
mind.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Brothers, be imitators together of me,
and note those who walk this way, even as you have us for an example.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> For many walk, of whom I told you often,
and now tell you even weeping, as the enemies of the cross of Christ,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> whose end is destruction, whose god is
the belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who think about earthly
things.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For our citizenship is in heaven, from
where we also wait for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> who will change the body of our
humiliation to be conformed to the body of his glory, according to the
working by which he is able even to subject all things to himself.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore, my brothers, beloved and longed
for, my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord, my beloved.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> I exhort Euodia, and I exhort Syntyche, to
think the same way in the Lord.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Yes, I beg you also, true yokefellow, help
these women, for they labored with me in the Good News, with Clement
also, and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of
life.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Rejoice in the Lord always! Again I will
say, Rejoice!

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Let your gentleness be known to all men.
The Lord is at hand.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In nothing be anxious, but in everything,
by prayer and petition with thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known to God.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And the peace of God, which surpasses all
understanding, will guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Finally, brothers, whatever things are
true, whatever things are honorable, whatever things are just, whatever
things are pure, whatever things are lovely, whatever things are of good
report; if there is any virtue, and if there is any praise, think about
these things.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> The things which you learned, received,
heard, and saw in me: do these things, and the God of peace will be with
you.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> But I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that
now at length you have revived your thought for me; in which you did
indeed take thought, but you lacked opportunity.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Not that I speak in respect to lack, for
I have learned in whatever state I am, to be content in it.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> I know how to be humbled, and I know also
how to abound. In everything and in all things I have learned the secret
both to be filled and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in need.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> I can do all things through Christ, who
strengthens me.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> However you did well that you shared in
my affliction.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> You yourselves also know, you
Philippians, that in the beginning of the Good News, when I departed
from Macedonia, no assembly shared with me in the matter of giving and
receiving but you only.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For even in Thessalonica you sent once
and again to my need.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Not that I seek for the gift, but I seek
for the fruit that increases to your account.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But I have all things, and abound. I am
filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things that came from you,
a sweet-smelling fragrance, an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice to
God.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> My God will supply every need of yours
according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Now to our God and Father be the glory
forever and ever! Amen.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The
brothers who are with me greet you.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> All the saints greet you, especially
those who are of Caesar's household.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians](col.md)
