[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psa)  [Next](ecc.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Proverbs

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon, the son of David,
king of Israel:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to know wisdom and instruction; to discern
the words of understanding;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> to receive instruction in wise dealing, in
righteousness, justice, and equity;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to give prudence to the simple, knowledge
and discretion to the young man:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> that the wise man may hear, and increase in
learning; that the man of understanding may attain to sound counsel:

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> to understand a proverb, and parables, the
words and riddles of the wise.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The fear of Yahweh is the beginning of
knowledge; but the foolish despise wisdom and instruction.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> My son, listen to your father's
instruction, and don't forsake your mother's teaching:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> for they will be a garland to grace your
head, and chains around your neck.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> My son, if sinners entice you, don't
consent.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> If they say, "Come with us, Let's lay in
wait for blood; let's lurk secretly for the innocent without cause;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> let's swallow them up alive like Sheol,
and whole, like those who go down into the pit.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> We'll find all valuable wealth. We'll
fill our houses with spoil.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> You shall cast your lot among us. We'll
all have one purse."

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> My son, don't walk in the way with them.
Keep your foot from their path,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> for their feet run to evil. They hurry to
shed blood.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For in vain is the net spread in the
sight of any bird:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> but these lay wait for their own blood.
They lurk secretly for their own lives.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So are the ways of everyone who is greedy
for gain. It takes away the life of its owners.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wisdom calls aloud in the street. She
utters her voice in the public squares.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> She calls at the head of noisy places. At
the entrance of the city gates, she utters her words:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> "How long, you simple ones, will you love
simplicity? How long will mockers delight themselves in mockery, and
fools hate knowledge?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Turn at my reproof. Behold, I will pour
out my spirit on you. I will make known my words to you.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Because I have called, and you have
refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no one has paid attention;

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> but you have ignored all my counsel, and
wanted none of my reproof;

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> I also will laugh at your disaster. I
will mock when calamity overtakes you;

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> when calamity overtakes you like a storm,
when your disaster comes on like a whirlwind; when distress and anguish
come on you.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then will they call on me, but I will not
answer. They will seek me diligently, but they will not find me;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> because they hated knowledge, and didn't
choose the fear of Yahweh.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> They wanted none of my counsel. They
despised all my reproof.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Therefore they will eat of the fruit of
their own way, and be filled with their own schemes.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> For the backsliding of the simple will
kill them. The careless ease of fools will destroy them.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> But whoever listens to me will dwell
securely, and will be at ease, without fear of harm."

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My son, if you will receive my words, and
store up my commandments within you;

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So as to turn your ear to wisdom, and apply
your heart to understanding;

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Yes, if you call out for discernment, and
lift up your voice for understanding;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> If you seek her as silver, and search for
her as for hidden treasures:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> then you will understand the fear of
Yahweh, and find the knowledge of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For Yahweh gives wisdom. Out of his mouth
comes knowledge and understanding.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He lays up sound wisdom for the upright. He
is a shield to those who walk in integrity;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> that he may guard the paths of justice, and
preserve the way of his saints.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then you will understand righteousness and
justice, equity and every good path.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For wisdom will enter into your heart.
Knowledge will be pleasant to your soul.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Discretion will watch over you.
Understanding will keep you,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> to deliver you from the way of evil, from
the men who speak perverse things;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> who forsake the paths of uprightness, to
walk in the ways of darkness;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> who rejoice to do evil, and delight in
the perverseness of evil;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> who are crooked in their ways, and
wayward in their paths:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> To deliver you from the strange woman,
even from the foreigner who flatters with her words;

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> who forsakes the friend of her youth, and
forgets the covenant of her God:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> for her house leads down to death, her
paths to the dead.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> None who go to her return again, neither
do they attain to the paths of life:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> that you may walk in the way of good men,
and keep the paths of the righteous.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For the upright will dwell in the land.
The perfect will remain in it.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But the wicked will be cut off from the
land. The treacherous will be rooted out of it.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> My son, don't forget my teaching; but let
your heart keep my commandments:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> for length of days, and years of life, and
peace, will they add to you.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Don't let kindness and truth forsake you.
Bind them around your neck. Write them on the tablet of your heart.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> So you will find favor, and good
understanding in the sight of God and man.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Trust in Yahweh with all your heart, and
don't lean on your own understanding.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> In all your ways acknowledge him, and he
will make your paths straight.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Don't be wise in your own eyes. Fear
Yahweh, and depart from evil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> It will be health to your body, and
nourishment to your bones.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Honor Yahweh with your substance, with the
first fruits of all your increase:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> so your barns will be filled with plenty,
and your vats will overflow with new wine.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> My son, don't despise Yahweh's
discipline, neither be weary of his reproof:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> for whom Yahweh loves, he reproves; even
as a father reproves the son in whom he delights.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Happy is the man who finds wisdom, the
man who gets understanding.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For her good profit is better than
getting silver, and her return is better than fine gold.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> She is more precious than rubies. None of
the things you can desire are to be compared to her.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Length of days is in her right hand. In
her left hand are riches and honor.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Her ways are ways of pleasantness. All
her paths are peace.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> She is a tree of life to those who lay
hold of her. Happy is everyone who retains her.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> By wisdom Yahweh founded the earth. By
understanding, he established the heavens.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> By his knowledge, the depths were broken
up, and the skies drop down the dew.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> My son, let them not depart from your
eyes. Keep sound wisdom and discretion:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> so they will be life to your soul, and
grace for your neck.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then you shall walk in your way securely.
Your foot won't stumble.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> When you lie down, you will not be
afraid. Yes, you will lie down, and your sleep will be sweet.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Don't be afraid of sudden fear, neither
of the desolation of the wicked, when it comes:

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> for Yahweh will be your confidence, and
will keep your foot from being taken.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Don't withhold good from those to whom it
is due, when it is in the power of your hand to do it.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Don't say to your neighbor, "Go, and come
again; tomorrow I will give it to you," when you have it by you.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Don't devise evil against your neighbor,
since he dwells securely by you.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Don't strive with a man without cause, if
he has done you no harm.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Don't envy the man of violence. Choose
none of his ways.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For the perverse is an abomination to
Yahweh, but his friendship is with the upright.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> Yahweh's curse is in the house of the
wicked, but he blesses the habitation of the righteous.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Surely he mocks the mockers, but he gives
grace to the humble.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The wise will inherit glory, but shame
will be the promotion of fools.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Listen, sons, to a father's instruction.
Pay attention and know understanding;

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> for I give you sound learning. Don't
forsake my law.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For I was a son to my father, tender and an
only child in the sight of my mother.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> He taught me, and said to me: "Let your
heart retain my words. Keep my commandments, and live.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Get wisdom. Get understanding. Don't
forget, neither swerve from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Don't forsake her, and she will preserve
you. Love her, and she will keep you.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Wisdom is supreme. Get wisdom. Yes, though
it costs all your possessions, get understanding.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Esteem her, and she will exalt you. She
will bring you to honor, when you embrace her.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> She will give to your head a garland of
grace. She will deliver a crown of splendor to you."

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Listen, my son, and receive my sayings.
The years of your life will be many.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I have taught you in the way of wisdom. I
have led you in straight paths.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> When you go, your steps will not be
hampered. When you run, you will not stumble.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Take firm hold of instruction. Don't let
her go. Keep her, for she is your life.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Don't enter into the path of the wicked.
Don't walk in the way of evil men.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Avoid it, and don't pass by it. Turn from
it, and pass on.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For they don't sleep, unless they do
evil. Their sleep is taken away, unless they make someone fall.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> For they eat the bread of wickedness, and
drink the wine of violence.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But the path of the righteous is like the
dawning light, that shines more and more until the perfect day.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The way of the wicked is like darkness.
They don't know what they stumble over.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> My son, attend to my words. Turn your ear
to my sayings.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Let them not depart from your eyes. Keep
them in the midst of your heart.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For they are life to those who find them,
and health to their whole body.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Keep your heart with all diligence, for
out of it is the wellspring of life.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Put away from yourself a perverse mouth.
Put corrupt lips far from you.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Let your eyes look straight ahead. Fix
your gaze directly before you.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Make the path of your feet level. Let all
of your ways be established.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Don't turn to the right hand nor to the
left. Remove your foot from evil.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> My son, pay attention to my wisdom. Turn
your ear to my understanding:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> that you may maintain discretion, that your
lips may preserve knowledge.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For the lips of an adulteress drip honey.
Her mouth is smoother than oil,

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But in the end she is as bitter as
wormwood, and as sharp as a two-edged sword.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Her feet go down to death. Her steps lead
straight to Sheol.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> She gives no thought to the way of life.
Her ways are crooked, and she doesn't know it.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Now therefore, my sons, listen to me. Don't
depart from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Remove your way far from her. Don't come
near the door of her house,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> lest you give your honor to others, and
your years to the cruel one;

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> lest strangers feast on your wealth, and
your labors enrich another man's house.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> You will groan at your latter end, when
your flesh and your body are consumed,

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> and say, "How I have hated instruction,
and my heart despised reproof;

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> neither have I obeyed the voice of my
teachers, nor turned my ear to those who instructed me!

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I have come to the brink of utter ruin,
in the midst of the gathered assembly."

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Drink water out of your own cistern,
running water out of your own well.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Should your springs overflow in the
streets, streams of water in the public squares?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let them be for yourself alone, not for
strangers with you.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Let your spring be blessed. Rejoice in
the wife of your youth.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> A loving doe and a graceful deer-- let
her breasts satisfy you at all times. Be captivated always with her
love.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For why should you, my son, be captivated
with an adulteress? Why embrace the bosom of another?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For the ways of man are before the eyes
of Yahweh. He examines all his paths.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The evil deeds of the wicked ensnare him.
The cords of his sin hold him firmly.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> He will die for lack of instruction. In
the greatness of his folly, he will go astray.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> My son, if you have become collateral for
your neighbor, if you have struck your hands in pledge for a stranger;

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> You are trapped by the words of your mouth.
You are ensnared with the words of your mouth.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Do this now, my son, and deliver yourself,
since you have come into the hand of your neighbor. Go, humble yourself.
Press your plea with your neighbor.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Give no sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to
your eyelids.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Free yourself, like a gazelle from the hand
of the hunter, like a bird from the snare of the fowler.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Go to the ant, you sluggard. Consider her
ways, and be wise;

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> which having no chief, overseer, or ruler,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> provides her bread in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> How long will you sleep, sluggard? When
will you arise out of your sleep?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> A little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to sleep:

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> so your poverty will come as a robber,
and your scarcity as an armed man.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> A worthless person, a man of iniquity, is
he who walks with a perverse mouth;

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> who winks with his eyes, who signals with
his feet, who motions with his fingers;

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> in whose heart is perverseness, who
devises evil continually, who always sows discord.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Therefore his calamity will come
suddenly. He will be broken suddenly, and that without remedy.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> There are six things which Yahweh hates;
yes, seven which are an abomination to him:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> haughty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that
shed innocent blood;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> a heart that devises wicked schemes, feet
that are swift in running to mischief,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> a false witness who utters lies, and he
who sows discord among brothers.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> My son, keep your father's commandment,
and don't forsake your mother's teaching.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Bind them continually on your heart. Tie
them around your neck.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> When you walk, it will lead you. When you
sleep, it will watch over you. When you awake, it will talk with you.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the commandment is a lamp, and the
law is light. Reproofs of instruction are the way of life,

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> to keep you from the immoral woman, from
the flattery of the wayward wife's tongue.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Don't lust after her beauty in your
heart, neither let her captivate you with her eyelids.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> For a prostitute reduces you to a piece
of bread. The adulteress hunts for your precious life.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Can a man scoop fire into his lap, and
his clothes not be burned?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Or can one walk on hot coals, and his
feet not be scorched?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> So is he who goes in to his neighbor's
wife. Whoever touches her will not be unpunished.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> Men don't despise a thief, if he steals
to satisfy himself when he is hungry:

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> but if he is found, he shall restore
seven times. He shall give all the wealth of his house.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> He who commits adultery with a woman is
void of understanding. He who does it destroys his own soul.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> He will get wounds and dishonor. His
reproach will not be wiped away.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> For jealousy arouses the fury of the
husband. He won't spare in the day of vengeance.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> He won't regard any ransom, neither will
he rest content, though you give many gifts.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> My son, keep my words. Lay up my
commandments within you.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Keep my commandments and live! Guard my
teaching as the apple of your eye.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Bind them on your fingers. Write them on
the tablet of your heart.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Tell wisdom, "You are my sister." Call
understanding your relative,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> that they may keep you from the strange
woman, from the foreigner who flatters with her words.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For at the window of my house, I looked out
through my lattice.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> I saw among the simple ones. I discerned
among the youths a young man void of understanding,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> passing through the street near her corner,
he went the way to her house,

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> in the twilight, in the evening of the day,
in the middle of the night and in the darkness.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Behold, there a woman met him with the
attire of a prostitute, and with crafty intent.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> She is loud and defiant. Her feet don't
stay in her house.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Now she is in the streets, now in the
squares, and lurking at every corner.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> So she caught him, and kissed him. With
an impudent face she said to him:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> "Sacrifices of peace offerings are with
me. This day I have paid my vows.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Therefore I came out to meet you, to
diligently seek your face, and I have found you.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have spread my couch with carpets of
tapestry, with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes,
and cinnamon.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Come, let's take our fill of loving until
the morning. Let's solace ourselves with loving.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For my husband isn't at home. He has gone
on a long journey.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> He has taken a bag of money with him. He
will come home at the full moon."

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> With persuasive words, she led him
astray. With the flattering of her lips, she seduced him.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> He followed her immediately, as an ox
goes to the slaughter, as a fool stepping into a noose.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Until an arrow strikes through his liver,
as a bird hurries to the snare, and doesn't know that it will cost his
life.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Now therefore, sons, listen to me. Pay
attention to the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Don't let your heart turn to her ways.
Don't go astray in her paths,

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> for she has thrown down many wounded.
Yes, all her slain are a mighty army.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Her house is the way to Sheol, going down
to the rooms of death.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Doesn't wisdom cry out? Doesn't
understanding raise her voice?

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> On the top of high places by the way, where
the paths meet, she stands.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Beside the gates, at the entry of the city,
at the entry doors, she cries aloud:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> "To you men, I call! I send my voice to the
sons of mankind.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> You simple, understand prudence. You fools,
be of an understanding heart.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Hear, for I will speak excellent things.
The opening of my lips is for right things.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For my mouth speaks truth. Wickedness is an
abomination to my lips.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> All the words of my mouth are in
righteousness. There is nothing crooked or perverse in them.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They are all plain to him who understands,
right to those who find knowledge.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Receive my instruction rather than
silver; knowledge rather than choice gold.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For wisdom is better than rubies. All the
things that may be desired can't be compared to it.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> "I, wisdom, have made prudence my
dwelling. Find out knowledge and discretion.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The fear of Yahweh is to hate evil. I
hate pride, arrogance, the evil way, and the perverse mouth.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Counsel and sound knowledge are mine. I
have understanding and power.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> By me kings reign, and princes decree
justice.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> By me princes rule; nobles, and all the
righteous rulers of the earth.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> I love those who love me. Those who seek
me diligently will find me.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> With me are riches, honor, enduring
wealth, and prosperity.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> My fruit is better than gold, yes, than
fine gold; my yield than choice silver.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> I walk in the way of righteousness, in
the midst of the paths of justice;

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> That I may give wealth to those who love
me. I fill their treasuries.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> "Yahweh possessed me in the beginning of
his work, before his deeds of old.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, before the earth existed.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> When there were no depths, I was brought
forth, when there were no springs abounding with water.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> Before the mountains were settled in
place, before the hills, I was brought forth;

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> while as yet he had not made the earth,
nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> When he established the heavens, I was
there; when he set a circle on the surface of the deep,

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> when he established the clouds above,
when the springs of the deep became strong,

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> when he gave to the sea its boundary,
that the waters should not violate his commandment, when he marked out
the foundations of the earth;

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> then I was the craftsman by his side. I
was a delight day by day, always rejoicing before him,

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Rejoicing in his whole world. My delight
was with the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> "Now therefore, my sons, listen to me,
for blessed are those who keep my ways.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Hear instruction, and be wise. Don't
refuse it.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Blessed is the man who hears me, watching
daily at my gates, waiting at my door posts.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> For whoever finds me, finds life, and
will obtain favor from Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> But he who sins against me wrongs his own
soul. All those who hate me love death."

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Wisdom has built her house. She has carved
out her seven pillars.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> She has prepared her meat. She has mixed
her wine. She has also set her table.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> She has sent out her maidens. She cries
from the highest places of the city:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> "Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!"
As for him who is void of understanding, she says to him,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> "Come, eat some of my bread, Drink some of
the wine which I have mixed!

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Leave your simple ways, and live. Walk in
the way of understanding."

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He who corrects a mocker invites insult. He
who reproves a wicked man invites abuse.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Don't reprove a scoffer, lest he hate you.
Reprove a wise man, and he will love you.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Instruct a wise man, and he will be still
wiser. Teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The fear of Yahweh is the beginning of
wisdom. The knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For by me your days will be multiplied.
The years of your life will be increased.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If you are wise, you are wise for
yourself. If you mock, you alone will bear it.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> The foolish woman is loud, Undisciplined,
and knows nothing.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> She sits at the door of her house, on a
seat in the high places of the city,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> To call to those who pass by, who go
straight on their ways,

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> "Whoever is simple, let him turn in
here." as for him who is void of understanding, she says to him,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> "Stolen water is sweet. Food eaten in
secret is pleasant."

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> But he doesn't know that the dead are
there, that her guests are in the depths of Sheol.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son makes
a glad father; but a foolish son brings grief to his mother.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Treasures of wickedness profit nothing,
but righteousness delivers from death.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Yahweh will not allow the soul of the
righteous to go hungry, but he thrusts away the desire of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> He becomes poor who works with a lazy
hand, but the hand of the diligent brings wealth.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> He who gathers in summer is a wise son,
but he who sleeps during the harvest is a son who causes shame.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Blessings are on the head of the
righteous, but violence covers the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The memory of the righteous is blessed,
but the name of the wicked will rot.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The wise in heart accept commandments,
but a chattering fool will fall.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He who walks blamelessly walks surely,
but he who perverts his ways will be found out.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> One winking with the eye causes sorrow,
but a chattering fool will fall.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The mouth of the righteous is a spring
of life, but violence covers the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Hatred stirs up strife, but love covers
all wrongs.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Wisdom is found on the lips of him who
has discernment, but a rod is for the back of him who is void of
understanding.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Wise men lay up knowledge, but the
mouth of the foolish is near ruin.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city. The destruction of the poor is their poverty.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The labor of the righteous leads to
life. The increase of the wicked leads to sin.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> He is in the way of life who heeds
correction, but he who forsakes reproof leads others astray.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> He who hides hatred has lying lips. He
who utters a slander is a fool.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> In the multitude of words there is no
lack of disobedience, but he who restrains his lips does wisely.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> The tongue of the righteous is like
choice silver. The heart of the wicked is of little worth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The lips of the righteous feed many,
but the foolish die for lack of understanding.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Yahweh's blessing brings wealth, and he
adds no trouble to it.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> It is a fool's pleasure to do
wickedness, but wisdom is a man of understanding's pleasure.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> What the wicked fear, will overtake
them, but the desire of the righteous will be granted.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> When the whirlwind passes, the wicked
is no more; but the righteous stand firm forever.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke
to the eyes, so is the sluggard to those who send him.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The fear of Yahweh prolongs days, but
the years of the wicked shall be shortened.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The prospect of the righteous is joy,
but the hope of the wicked will perish.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> The way of Yahweh is a stronghold to
the upright, but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> The righteous will never be removed,
but the wicked will not dwell in the land.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> The mouth of the righteous brings forth
wisdom, but the perverse tongue will be cut off.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> The lips of the righteous know what is
acceptable, but the mouth of the wicked is perverse.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> A false balance is an abomination to
Yahweh, but accurate weights are his delight.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> When pride comes, then comes shame, but
with humility comes wisdom.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The integrity of the upright shall guide
them, but the perverseness of the treacherous shall destroy them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Riches don't profit in the day of wrath,
but righteousness delivers from death.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The righteousness of the blameless will
direct his way, but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The righteousness of the upright shall
deliver them, but the unfaithful will be trapped by evil desires.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> When a wicked man dies, hope perishes,
and expectation of power comes to nothing.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> A righteous person is delivered out of
trouble, and the wicked takes his place.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> With his mouth the godless man destroys
his neighbor, but the righteous will be delivered through knowledge.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> When it goes well with the righteous,
the city rejoices. When the wicked perish, there is shouting.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By the blessing of the upright, the
city is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> One who despises his neighbor is void
of wisdom, but a man of understanding holds his peace.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> One who brings gossip betrays a
confidence, but one who is of a trustworthy spirit is one who keeps a
secret.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Where there is no wise guidance, the
nation falls, but in the multitude of counselors there is victory.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He who is collateral for a stranger
will suffer for it, but he who refuses pledges of collateral is secure.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> A gracious woman obtains honor, but
violent men obtain riches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> The merciful man does good to his own
soul, but he who is cruel troubles his own flesh.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Wicked people earn deceitful wages, but
one who sows righteousness reaps a sure reward.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> He who is truly righteous gets life. He
who pursues evil gets death.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Those who are perverse in heart are an
abomination to Yahweh, but those whose ways are blameless are his
delight.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Most certainly, the evil man will not
be unpunished, but the seed of the righteous will be delivered.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> Like a gold ring in a pig's snout, is a
beautiful woman who lacks discretion.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The desire of the righteous is only
good. The expectation of the wicked is wrath.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> There is one who scatters, and
increases yet more. There is one who withholds more than is appropriate,
but gains poverty.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> The liberal soul shall be made fat. He
who waters shall be watered also himself.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> People curse someone who withholds
grain, but blessing will be on the head of him who sells it.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> He who diligently seeks good seeks
favor, but he who searches after evil, it shall come to him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> He who trusts in his riches will fall,
but the righteous shall flourish as the green leaf.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> He who troubles his own house shall
inherit the wind. The foolish shall be servant to the wise of heart.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The fruit of the righteous is a tree of
life. He who is wise wins souls.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Behold, the righteous shall be repaid
in the earth; how much more the wicked and the sinner!

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Whoever loves correction loves knowledge,
but he who hates reproof is stupid.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> A good man shall obtain favor from
Yahweh, but he will condemn a man of wicked devices.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> A man shall not be established by
wickedness, but the root of the righteous shall not be moved.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A worthy woman is the crown of her
husband, but a disgraceful wife is as rottenness in his bones.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> The thoughts of the righteous are just,
but the advice of the wicked is deceitful.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The words of the wicked are about lying
in wait for blood, but the speech of the upright rescues them.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> The wicked are overthrown, and are no
more, but the house of the righteous shall stand.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> A man shall be commended according to his
wisdom, but he who has a warped mind shall be despised.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Better is he who is lightly esteemed, and
has a servant, than he who honors himself, and lacks bread.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> A righteous man respects the life of
his animal, but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He who tills his land shall have plenty
of bread, but he who chases fantasies is void of understanding.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The wicked desires the plunder of evil
men, but the root of the righteous flourishes.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> An evil man is trapped by sinfulness of
lips, but the righteous shall come out of trouble.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> A man shall be satisfied with good by
the fruit of his mouth. The work of a man's hands shall be rewarded to
him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The way of a fool is right in his own
eyes, but he who is wise listens to counsel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> A fool shows his annoyance the same
day, but one who overlooks an insult is prudent.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He who is truthful testifies honestly,
but a false witness lies.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> There is one who speaks rashly like the
piercing of a sword, but the tongue of the wise heals.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Truth's lips will be established
forever, but a lying tongue is only momentary.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Deceit is in the heart of those who
plot evil, but joy comes to the promoters of peace.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> No mischief shall happen to the
righteous, but the wicked shall be filled with evil.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Lying lips are an abomination to
Yahweh, but those who do the truth are his delight.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> A prudent man keeps his knowledge, but
the hearts of fools proclaim foolishness.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The hands of the diligent ones shall
rule, but laziness ends in slave labor.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Anxiety in a man's heart weighs it
down, but a kind word makes it glad.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> A righteous person is cautious in
friendship, but the way of the wicked leads them astray.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> The slothful man doesn't roast his
game, but the possessions of diligent men are prized.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> In the way of righteousness is life; in
its path there is no death.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> A wise son listens to his father's
instruction, but a scoffer doesn't listen to rebuke.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> By the fruit of his lips, a man enjoys
good things; but the unfaithful crave violence.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He who guards his mouth guards his soul.
One who opens wide his lips comes to ruin.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The soul of the sluggard desires, and has
nothing, but the desire of the diligent shall be fully satisfied.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> A righteous man hates lies, but a wicked
man brings shame and disgrace.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Righteousness guards the way of
integrity, but wickedness overthrows the sinner.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> There are some who pretend to be rich,
yet have nothing. There are some who pretend to be poor, yet have great
wealth.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> The ransom of a man's life is his riches,
but the poor hear no threats.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> The light of the righteous shines
brightly, but the lamp of the wicked is snuffed out.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Pride only breeds quarrels, but with
ones who take advice is wisdom.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Wealth gained dishonestly dwindles
away, but he who gathers by hand makes it grow.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but
when longing is fulfilled, it is a tree of life.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Whoever despises instruction will pay
for it, but he who respects a command will be rewarded.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The teaching of the wise is a spring of
life, to turn from the snares of death.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Good understanding wins favor; but the
way of the unfaithful is hard.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Every prudent man acts from knowledge,
but a fool exposes folly.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> A wicked messenger falls into trouble,
but a trustworthy envoy gains healing.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Poverty and shame come to him who
refuses discipline, but he who heeds correction shall be honored.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Longing fulfilled is sweet to the soul,
but fools detest turning from evil.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> One who walks with wise men grows wise,
but a companion of fools suffers harm.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Misfortune pursues sinners, but
prosperity rewards the righteous.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> A good man leaves an inheritance to his
children's children, but the wealth of the sinner is stored for the
righteous.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> An abundance of food is in poor
people's fields, but injustice sweeps it away.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> One who spares the rod hates his son,
but one who loves him is careful to discipline him.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The righteous one eats to the
satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked goes hungry.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Every wise woman builds her house, but
the foolish one tears it down with her own hands.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He who walks in his uprightness fears
Yahweh, but he who is perverse in his ways despises him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> The fool's talk brings a rod to his back,
but the lips of the wise protect them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Where no oxen are, the crib is clean, but
much increase is by the strength of the ox.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> A truthful witness will not lie, but a
false witness pours out lies.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> A scoffer seeks wisdom, and doesn't find
it, but knowledge comes easily to a discerning person.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Stay away from a foolish man, for you
won't find knowledge on his lips.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The wisdom of the prudent is to think
about his way, but the folly of fools is deceit.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Fools mock at making atonement for sins,
but among the upright there is good will.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The heart knows its own bitterness and
joy; he will not share these with a stranger.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The house of the wicked will be
overthrown, but the tent of the upright will flourish.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> There is a way which seems right to a
man, but in the end it leads to death.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Even in laughter the heart may be
sorrowful, and mirth may end in heaviness.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The unfaithful will be repaid for his
own ways; likewise a good man will be rewarded for his ways.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> A simple man believes everything, but
the prudent man carefully considers his ways.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> A wise man fears, and shuns evil, but
the fool is hotheaded and reckless.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> He who is quick to become angry will
commit folly, and a crafty man is hated.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> The simple inherit folly, but the
prudent are crowned with knowledge.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The evil bow down before the good, and
the wicked at the gates of the righteous.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> The poor person is shunned even by his
own neighbor, but the rich person has many friends.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He who despises his neighbor sins, but
blessed is he who has pity on the poor.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Don't they go astray who plot evil? But
love and faithfulness belong to those who plan good.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In all hard work there is profit, but
the talk of the lips leads only to poverty.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The crown of the wise is their riches,
but the folly of fools crowns them with folly.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> A truthful witness saves souls, but a
false witness is deceitful.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> In the fear of Yahweh is a secure
fortress, and he will be a refuge for his children.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> The fear of Yahweh is a fountain of
life, turning people from the snares of death.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the multitude of people is the
king's glory, but in the lack of people is the destruction of the
prince.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> He who is slow to anger has great
understanding, but he who has a quick temper displays folly.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> The life of the body is a heart at
peace, but envy rots the bones.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> He who oppresses the poor shows
contempt for his Maker, but he who is kind to the needy honors him.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The wicked is brought down in his
calamity, but in death, the righteous has a refuge.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Wisdom rests in the heart of one who
has understanding, and is even made known in the inward part of fools.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin
is a disgrace to any people.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> The king's favor is toward a servant
who deals wisely, but his wrath is toward one who causes shame.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a
harsh word stirs up anger.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The tongue of the wise commends
knowledge, but the mouth of fools gush out folly.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Yahweh's eyes are everywhere, keeping
watch on the evil and the good.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> A gentle tongue is a tree of life, but
deceit in it crushes the spirit.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> A fool despises his father's correction,
but he who heeds reproof shows prudence.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> In the house of the righteous is much
treasure, but the income of the wicked brings trouble.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The lips of the wise spread knowledge;
not so with the heart of fools.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> The sacrifice made by the wicked is an
abomination to Yahweh, but the prayer of the upright is his delight.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The way of the wicked is an abomination
to Yahweh, but he loves him who follows after righteousness.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> There is stern discipline for one who
forsakes the way: whoever hates reproof shall die.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Sheol and Abaddon are before Yahweh--
how much more then the hearts of the children of men!

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> A scoffer doesn't love to be reproved;
he will not go to the wise.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> A glad heart makes a cheerful face; but
an aching heart breaks the spirit.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The heart of one who has understanding
seeks knowledge, but the mouths of fools feed on folly.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> All the days of the afflicted are
wretched, but one who has a cheerful heart enjoys a continual feast.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Better is little, with the fear of
Yahweh, than great treasure with trouble.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Better is a dinner of herbs, where love
is, than a fattened calf with hatred.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> A wrathful man stirs up contention, but
one who is slow to anger appeases strife.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> The way of the sluggard is like a thorn
patch, but the path of the upright is a highway.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> A wise son makes a father glad, but a
foolish man despises his mother.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Folly is joy to one who is void of
wisdom, but a man of understanding keeps his way straight.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Where there is no counsel, plans fail;
but in a multitude of counselors they are established.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Joy comes to a man with the reply of
his mouth. How good is a word at the right time!

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> The path of life leads upward for the
wise, to keep him from going downward to Sheol.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Yahweh will uproot the house of the
proud, but he will keep the widow's borders intact.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Yahweh detests the thoughts of the
wicked, but the thoughts of the pure are pleasing.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> He who is greedy for gain troubles his
own house, but he who hates bribes will live.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> The heart of the righteous weighs
answers, but the mouth of the wicked gushes out evil.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Yahweh is far from the wicked, but he
hears the prayer of the righteous.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> The light of the eyes rejoices the
heart. Good news gives health to the bones.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> The ear that listens to reproof lives,
and will be at home among the wise.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> He who refuses correction despises his
own soul, but he who listens to reproof gets understanding.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> The fear of Yahweh teaches wisdom.
Before honor is humility.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> The plans of the heart belong to man, but
the answer of the tongue is from Yahweh.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> All the ways of a man are clean in his
own eyes; but Yahweh weighs the motives.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Commit your deeds to Yahweh, and your
plans shall succeed.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Yahweh has made everything for its own
end-- yes, even the wicked for the day of evil.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Everyone who is proud in heart is an
abomination to Yahweh: they shall certainly not be unpunished.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned
for. By the fear of Yahweh men depart from evil.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> When a man's ways please Yahweh, he makes
even his enemies to be at peace with him.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Better is a little with righteousness,
than great revenues with injustice.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> A man's heart plans his course, but
Yahweh directs his steps.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Inspired judgments are on the lips of
the king. He shall not betray his mouth.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Honest balances and scales are
Yahweh's; all the weights in the bag are his work.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> It is an abomination for kings to do
wrong, for the throne is established by righteousness.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Righteous lips are the delight of
kings. They value one who speaks the truth.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The king's wrath is a messenger of
death, but a wise man will pacify it.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the light of the king's face is
life. His favor is like a cloud of the spring rain.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> How much better it is to get wisdom
than gold! Yes, to get understanding is to be chosen rather than silver.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The highway of the upright is to depart
from evil. He who keeps his way preserves his soul.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Pride goes before destruction, and a
haughty spirit before a fall.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> It is better to be of a lowly spirit
with the poor, than to divide the plunder with the proud.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> He who heeds the Word finds prosperity.
Whoever trusts in Yahweh is blessed.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The wise in heart shall be called
prudent. Pleasantness of the lips promotes instruction.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Understanding is a fountain of life to
one who has it, but the punishment of fools is their folly.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The heart of the wise instructs his
mouth, and adds learning to his lips.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Pleasant words are a honeycomb, sweet
to the soul, and health to the bones.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> There is a way which seems right to a
man, but in the end it leads to death.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> The appetite of the laboring man labors
for him; for his mouth urges him on.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> A worthless man devises mischief. His
speech is like a scorching fire.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> A perverse man stirs up strife. A
whisperer separates close friends.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> A man of violence entices his neighbor,
and leads him in a way that is not good.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> One who winks his eyes to plot
perversities, one who compresses his lips, is bent on evil.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> Gray hair is a crown of glory. It is
attained by a life of righteousness.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> One who is slow to anger is better than
the mighty; one who rules his spirit, than he who takes a city.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> The lot is cast into the lap, but its
every decision is from Yahweh.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Better is a dry morsel with quietness,
than a house full of feasting with strife.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> A servant who deals wisely will rule over
a son who causes shame, and shall have a part in the inheritance among
the brothers.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The refining pot is for silver, and the
furnace for gold, but Yahweh tests the hearts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> An evildoer heeds wicked lips. A liar
gives ear to a mischievous tongue.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Whoever mocks the poor reproaches his
Maker. He who is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Children's children are the crown of old
men; the glory of children are their parents.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Arrogant speech isn't fitting for a fool,
much less do lying lips fit a prince.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> A bribe is a precious stone in the eyes
of him who gives it; wherever he turns, he prospers.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> He who covers an offense promotes love;
but he who repeats a matter separates best friends.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> A rebuke enters deeper into one who has
understanding than a hundred lashes into a fool.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> An evil man seeks only rebellion;
therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Let a bear robbed of her cubs meet a
man, rather than a fool in his folly.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Whoever rewards evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> The beginning of strife is like
breaching a dam, therefore stop contention before quarreling breaks out.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> He who justifies the wicked, and he who
condemns the righteous, both of them alike are an abomination to Yahweh.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Why is there money in the hand of a
fool to buy wisdom, since he has no understanding?

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> A friend loves at all times; and a
brother is born for adversity.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> A man void of understanding strikes
hands, and becomes collateral in the presence of his neighbor.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> He who loves disobedience loves strife.
One who builds a high gate seeks destruction.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> One who has a perverse heart doesn't
find prosperity, and one who has a deceitful tongue falls into trouble.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> He who becomes the father of a fool
grieves. The father of a fool has no joy.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> A cheerful heart makes good medicine,
but a crushed spirit dries up the bones.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> A wicked man receives a bribe in
secret, to pervert the ways of justice.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Wisdom is before the face of one who
has understanding, but the eyes of a fool wander to the ends of the
earth.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> A foolish son brings grief to his
father, and bitterness to her who bore him.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Also to punish the righteous is not
good, nor to flog officials for their integrity.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> He who spares his words has knowledge.
He who is even tempered is a man of understanding.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Even a fool, when he keeps silent, is
counted wise. When he shuts his lips, he is thought to be discerning.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> An unfriendly man pursues selfishness,
and defies all sound judgment.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> A fool has no delight in understanding,
but only in revealing his own opinion.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> When wickedness comes, contempt also
comes, and with shame comes disgrace.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The words of a man's mouth are like deep
waters. The fountain of wisdom is like a flowing brook.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> To be partial to the faces of the wicked
is not good, nor to deprive the innocent of justice.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> A fool's lips come into strife, and his
mouth invites beatings.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> A fool's mouth is his destruction, and
his lips are a snare to his soul.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The words of a gossip are like dainty
morsels: they go down into a person's innermost parts.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> One who is slack in his work is brother
to him who is a master of destruction.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The name of Yahweh is a strong tower:
the righteous run to him, and are safe.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The rich man's wealth is his strong
city, like an unscalable wall in his own imagination.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Before destruction the heart of man is
proud, but before honor is humility.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> He who gives answer before he hears,
that is folly and shame to him.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> A man's spirit will sustain him in
sickness, but a crushed spirit, who can bear?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> The heart of the discerning gets
knowledge. The ear of the wise seeks knowledge.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> A man's gift makes room for him, and
brings him before great men.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> He who pleads his cause first seems
right; until another comes and questions him.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> The lot settles disputes, and keeps
strong ones apart.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> A brother offended is more difficult
than a fortified city; and disputes are like the bars of a castle.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> A man's stomach is filled with the
fruit of his mouth. With the harvest of his lips he is satisfied.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Death and life are in the power of the
tongue; those who love it will eat its fruit.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Whoever finds a wife finds a good
thing, and obtains favor of Yahweh.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> The poor plead for mercy, but the rich
answer harshly.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> A man of many companions may be ruined,
but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Better is the poor who walks in his
integrity than he who is perverse in his lips and is a fool.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> It isn't good to have zeal without
knowledge; nor being hasty with one's feet and missing the way.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> The foolishness of man subverts his way;
his heart rages against Yahweh.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Wealth adds many friends, but the poor is
separated from his friend.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished.
He who pours out lies shall not go free.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Many will entreat the favor of a ruler,
and everyone is a friend to a man who gives gifts.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> All the relatives of the poor shun him:
how much more do his friends avoid him! He pursues them with pleas, but
they are gone.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He who gets wisdom loves his own soul. He
who keeps understanding shall find good.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished.
He who utters lies shall perish.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Delicate living is not appropriate for
a fool, much less for a servant to have rule over princes.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> The discretion of a man makes him slow
to anger. It is his glory to overlook an offense.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> The king's wrath is like the roaring of
a lion, but his favor is like dew on the grass.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> A foolish son is the calamity of his
father. A wife's quarrels are a continual dripping.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> House and riches are an inheritance
from fathers, but a prudent wife is from Yahweh.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep.
The idle soul shall suffer hunger.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> He who keeps the commandment keeps his
soul, but he who is contemptuous in his ways shall die.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He who has pity on the poor lends to
Yahweh; he will reward him.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Discipline your son, for there is hope;
don't be a willing party to his death.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> A hot-tempered man must pay the
penalty, for if you rescue him, you must do it again.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Listen to counsel and receive
instruction, that you may be wise in your latter end.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> There are many plans in a man's heart,
but Yahweh's counsel will prevail.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> That which makes a man to be desired is
his kindness. A poor man is better than a liar.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The fear of Yahweh leads to life, then
contentment; he rests and will not be touched by trouble.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> The sluggard buries his hand in the
dish; he will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Flog a scoffer, and the simple will
learn prudence; rebuke one who has understanding, and he will gain
knowledge.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> He who robs his father and drives away
his mother, is a son who causes shame and brings reproach.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> If you stop listening to instruction,
my son, you will stray from the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> A corrupt witness mocks justice, and
the mouth of the wicked gulps down iniquity.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Penalties are prepared for scoffers,
and beatings for the backs of fools.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Wine is a mocker, and beer is a brawler.
Whoever is led astray by them is not wise.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> The terror of a king is like the roaring
of a lion. He who provokes him to anger forfeits his own life.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> It is an honor for a man to keep aloof
from strife; but every fool will be quarreling.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> The sluggard will not plow by reason of
the winter; therefore he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Counsel in the heart of man is like deep
water; but a man of understanding will draw it out.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Many men claim to be men of unfailing
love, but who can find a faithful man?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> A righteous man walks in integrity.
Blessed are his children after him.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> A king who sits on the throne of judgment
scatters away all evil with his eyes.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Who can say, "I have made my heart pure.
I am clean and without sin?"

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Differing weights and differing
measures, both of them alike are an abomination to Yahweh.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Even a child makes himself known by his
doings, whether his work is pure, and whether it is right.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> The hearing ear, and the seeing eye,
Yahweh has made even both of them.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Don't love sleep, lest you come to
poverty. Open your eyes, and you shall be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> "It's no good, it's no good," says the
buyer; but when he is gone his way, then he boasts.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> There is gold and abundance of rubies;
but the lips of knowledge are a rare jewel.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Take the garment of one who puts up
collateral for a stranger; and hold him in pledge for a wayward woman.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Fraudulent food is sweet to a man, but
afterwards his mouth is filled with gravel.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Plans are established by advice; by
wise guidance you wage war!

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> He who goes about as a tale-bearer
reveals secrets; therefore don't keep company with him who opens wide
his lips.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Whoever curses his father or his
mother, his lamp shall be put out in blackness of darkness.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> An inheritance quickly gained at the
beginning, won't be blessed in the end.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Don't say, "I will pay back evil." Wait
for Yahweh, and he will save you.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Yahweh detests differing weights, and
dishonest scales are not pleasing.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> A man's steps are from Yahweh; how then
can man understand his way?

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> It is a snare to a man to make a rash
dedication, then later to consider his vows.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A wise king winnows out the wicked, and
drives the threshing wheel over them.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The spirit of man is Yahweh's lamp,
searching all his innermost parts.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Love and faithfulness keep the king
safe. His throne is sustained by love.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> The glory of young men is their
strength. The splendor of old men is their gray hair.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Wounding blows cleanse away evil, and
beatings purge the innermost parts.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> The king's heart is in Yahweh's hand like
the watercourses. He turns it wherever he desires.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Every way of a man is right in his own
eyes, but Yahweh weighs the hearts.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> To do righteousness and justice is more
acceptable to Yahweh than sacrifice.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> A high look, and a proud heart, the lamp
of the wicked, is sin.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The plans of the diligent surely lead to
profit; and everyone who is hasty surely rushes to poverty.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> Getting treasures by a lying tongue is a
fleeting vapor for those who seek death.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> The violence of the wicked will drive
them away, because they refuse to do what is right.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> The way of the guilty is devious, but the
conduct of the innocent is upright.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> It is better to dwell in the corner of
the housetop, than to share a house with a contentious woman.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The soul of the wicked desires evil;
his neighbor finds no mercy in his eyes.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> When the mocker is punished, the simple
gains wisdom. When the wise is instructed, he receives knowledge.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The Righteous One considers the house
of the wicked, and brings the wicked to ruin.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Whoever stops his ears at the cry of
the poor, he will also cry out, but shall not be heard.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> A gift in secret pacifies anger; and a
bribe in the cloak, strong wrath.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> It is joy to the righteous to do
justice; but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> The man who wanders out of the way of
understanding shall rest in the assembly of the dead.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He who loves pleasure shall be a poor
man. He who loves wine and oil shall not be rich.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The wicked is a ransom for the
righteous; the treacherous for the upright.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> It is better to dwell in a desert land,
than with a contentious and fretful woman.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> There is precious treasure and oil in
the dwelling of the wise; but a foolish man swallows it up.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> He who follows after righteousness and
kindness finds life, righteousness, and honor.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> A wise man scales the city of the
mighty, and brings down the strength of its confidence.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Whoever guards his mouth and his tongue
keeps his soul from troubles.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> The proud and haughty man, "scoffer" is
his name; he works in the arrogance of pride.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The desire of the sluggard kills him,
for his hands refuse to labor.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> There are those who covet greedily all
day long; but the righteous give and don't withhold.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination: how much more, when he brings it with a wicked mind!

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> A false witness will perish, and a man
who listens speaks to eternity.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> A wicked man hardens his face; but as
for the upright, he establishes his ways.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> There is no wisdom nor understanding
nor counsel against Yahweh.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> The horse is prepared for the day of
battle; but victory is with Yahweh.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A good name is more desirable than great
riches, and loving favor is better than silver and gold.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The rich and the poor have this in
common: Yahweh is the maker of them all.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> A prudent man sees danger, and hides
himself; but the simple pass on, and suffer for it.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> The result of humility and the fear of
Yahweh is wealth, honor, and life.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Thorns and snares are in the path of the
wicked: whoever guards his soul stays from them.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Train up a child in the way he should go,
and when he is old he will not depart from it.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> The rich rule over the poor. The borrower
is servant to the lender.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He who sows wickedness reaps trouble, and
the rod of his fury will be destroyed.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He who has a generous eye will be
blessed; for he shares his food with the poor.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Drive out the mocker, and strife will
go out; yes, quarrels and insults will stop.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He who loves purity of heart and speaks
gracefully is the king's friend.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> The eyes of Yahweh watch over
knowledge; but he frustrates the words of the unfaithful.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The sluggard says, "There is a lion
outside! I will be killed in the streets!"

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The mouth of an adulteress is a deep
pit: he who is under Yahweh's wrath will fall into it.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Folly is bound up in the heart of a
child: the rod of discipline drives it far from him.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Whoever oppresses the poor for his own
increase and whoever gives to the rich, both come to poverty.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Turn your ear, and listen to the words
of the wise. Apply your heart to my teaching.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> For it is a pleasant thing if you keep
them within you, if all of them are ready on your lips.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> That your trust may be in Yahweh, I
teach you today, even you.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Haven't I written to you thirty
excellent things of counsel and knowledge,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> To teach you truth, reliable words, to
give sound answers to the ones who sent you?

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Don't exploit the poor, because he is
poor; and don't crush the needy in court;

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> for Yahweh will plead their case, and
plunder the life of those who plunder them.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Don't befriend a hot-tempered man, and
don't associate with one who harbors anger:

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> lest you learn his ways, and ensnare
your soul.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Don't you be one of those who strike
hands, of those who are collateral for debts.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> If you don't have means to pay, why
should he take away your bed from under you?

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Don't move the ancient boundary stone,
which your fathers have set up.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Do you see a man skilled in his work?
He will serve kings. He won't serve obscure men.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> When you sit to eat with a ruler,
consider diligently what is before you;

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> put a knife to your throat, if you are a
man given to appetite.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Don't be desirous of his dainties, since
they are deceitful food.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Don't weary yourself to be rich. In your
wisdom, show restraint.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Why do you set your eyes on that which is
not? For it certainly sprouts wings like an eagle and flies in the sky.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Don't eat the food of him who has a
stingy eye, and don't crave his delicacies:

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> for as he thinks about the cost, so he
is. "Eat and drink!" he says to you, but his heart is not with you.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The morsel which you have eaten you shall
vomit up, and lose your good words.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Don't speak in the ears of a fool, for he
will despise the wisdom of your words.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Don't move the ancient boundary stone.
Don't encroach on the fields of the fatherless:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> for their Defender is strong. He will
plead their case against you.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Apply your heart to instruction, and
your ears to the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Don't withhold correction from a child.
If you punish him with the rod, he will not die.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Punish him with the rod, and save his
soul from Sheol.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My son, if your heart is wise, then my
heart will be glad, even mine:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> yes, my heart will rejoice, when your
lips speak what is right.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Don't let your heart envy sinners; but
rather fear Yahweh all the day long.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Indeed surely there is a future hope,
and your hope will not be cut off.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Listen, my son, and be wise, and keep
your heart on the right path!

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Don't be among ones drinking too much
wine, or those who gorge themselves on meat:

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> for the drunkard and the glutton shall
become poor; and drowsiness clothes them in rags.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Listen to your father who gave you
life, and don't despise your mother when she is old.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Buy the truth, and don't sell it. Get
wisdom, discipline, and understanding.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> The father of the righteous has great
joy. Whoever fathers a wise child delights in him.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Let your father and your mother be
glad! Let her who bore you rejoice!

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> My son, give me your heart; and let
your eyes keep in my ways.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> For a prostitute is a deep pit; and a
wayward wife is a narrow well.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Yes, she lies in wait like a robber,
and increases the unfaithful among men.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has
strife? Who has complaints? Who has needless bruises? Who has bloodshot
eyes?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Those who stay long at the wine; those
who go to seek out mixed wine.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Don't look at the wine when it is red,
when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down smoothly.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> In the end, it bites like a snake, and
poisons like a viper.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Your eyes will see strange things, and
your mind will imagine confusing things.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Yes, you will be as he who lies down in
the midst of the sea, or as he who lies on top of the rigging:

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> "They hit me, and I was not hurt! They
beat me, and I don't feel it! When will I wake up? I can do it again. I
can find another."

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Don't be envious of evil men; neither
desire to be with them:

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> for their hearts plot violence, and their
lips talk about mischief.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Through wisdom a house is built; by
understanding it is established;

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> by knowledge the rooms are filled with
all rare and beautiful treasure.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> A wise man has great power; and a
knowledgeable man increases strength;

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> for by wise guidance you wage your war;
and victory is in many advisors.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Wisdom is too high for a fool: he doesn't
open his mouth in the gate.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> One who plots to do evil will be called a
schemer.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The schemes of folly are sin. The mocker
is detested by men.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> If you falter in the time of trouble,
your strength is small.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Rescue those who are being led away to
death! Indeed, hold back those who are staggering to the slaughter!

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If you say, "Behold, we didn't know
this;" doesn't he who weighs the hearts consider it? He who keeps your
soul, doesn't he know it? Shall he not render to every man according to
his work?

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> My son, eat honey, for it is good; the
droppings of the honeycomb, which are sweet to your taste:

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> so you shall know wisdom to be to your
soul; if you have found it, then there will be a reward, your hope will
not be cut off.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Don't lay in wait, wicked man, against
the habitation of the righteous. Don't destroy his resting place:

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> for a righteous man falls seven times,
and rises up again; but the wicked are overthrown by calamity.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Don't rejoice when your enemy falls.
Don't let your heart be glad when he is overthrown;

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> lest Yahweh see it, and it displease
him, and he turn away his wrath from him.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Don't fret yourself because of
evildoers; neither be envious of the wicked:

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> for there will be no reward to the evil
man; and the lamp of the wicked shall be snuffed out.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> My son, fear Yahweh and the king. Don't
join those who are rebellious:

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> for their calamity will rise suddenly;
the destruction from them both--who knows?

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> These also are sayings of the wise. To
show partiality in judgment is not good.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> He who says to the wicked, "You are
righteous;" peoples shall curse him, and nations shall abhor him--

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> but it will go well with those who
convict the guilty, and a rich blessing will come on them.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> An honest answer is like a kiss on the
lips.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Prepare your work outside, and get your
fields ready. Afterwards, build your house.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Don't be a witness against your
neighbor without cause. Don't deceive with your lips.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Don't say, "I will do to him as he has
done to me; I will render to the man according to his work."

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> I went by the field of the sluggard, by
the vineyard of the man void of understanding;

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> Behold, it was all grown over with
thorns. Its surface was covered with nettles, and its stone wall was
broken down.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Then I saw, and considered well. I saw,
and received instruction:

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> a little sleep, a little slumber, a
little folding of the hands to sleep;

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> so your poverty will come as a robber,
and your want as an armed man.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> These also are proverbs of Solomon, which
the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> It is the glory of God to conceal a
thing, but the glory of kings is to search out a matter.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> As the heavens for height, and the earth
for depth, so the hearts of kings are unsearchable.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Take away the dross from the silver, and
material comes out for the refiner;

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Take away the wicked from the king's
presence, and his throne will be established in righteousness.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Don't exalt yourself in the presence of
the king, or claim a place among great men;

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> for it is better that it be said to you,
"Come up here," than that you should be put lower in the presence of the
prince, whom your eyes have seen.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Don't be hasty in bringing charges to
court. What will you do in the end when your neighbor shames you?

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Debate your case with your neighbor, and
don't betray the confidence of another;

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> lest one who hears it put you to shame,
and your bad reputation never depart.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> A word fitly spoken is like apples of
gold in settings of silver.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> As an earring of gold, and an ornament
of fine gold, so is a wise reprover to an obedient ear.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, so is a faithful messenger to those who send him; for he
refreshes the soul of his masters.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> As clouds and wind without rain, so is
he who boasts of gifts deceptively.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> By patience a ruler is persuaded. A
soft tongue breaks the bone.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Have you found honey? Eat as much as is
sufficient for you, lest you eat too much, and vomit it.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Let your foot be seldom in your
neighbor's house, lest he be weary of you, and hate you.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> A man who gives false testimony against
his neighbor is like a club, a sword, or a sharp arrow.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Confidence in someone unfaithful in
time of trouble is like a bad tooth, or a lame foot.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> As one who takes away a garment in cold
weather, or vinegar on soda, so is one who sings songs to a heavy heart.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> If your enemy is hungry, give him food
to eat. If he is thirsty, give him water to drink:

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> for you will heap coals of fire on his
head, and Yahweh will reward you.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> The north wind brings forth rain: so a
backbiting tongue brings an angry face.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> It is better to dwell in the corner of
the housetop, than to share a house with a contentious woman.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> Like cold water to a thirsty soul, so
is good news from a far country.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Like a muddied spring, and a polluted
well, so is a righteous man who gives way before the wicked.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> It is not good to eat much honey; nor
is it honorable to seek one's own honor.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Like a city that is broken down and
without walls is a man whose spirit is without restraint.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Like snow in summer, and as rain in
harvest, so honor is not fitting for a fool.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Like a fluttering sparrow, like a darting
swallow, so the undeserved curse doesn't come to rest.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> A whip is for the horse, a bridle for the
donkey, and a rod for the back of fools!

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Don't answer a fool according to his
folly, lest you also be like him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he be wise in his own eyes.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> One who sends a message by the hand of a
fool is cutting off feet and drinking violence.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> Like the legs of the lame that hang
loose: so is a parable in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> As one who binds a stone in a sling, so
is he who gives honor to a fool.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Like a thornbush that goes into the hand
of a drunkard, so is a parable in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> As an archer who wounds all, so is he
who hires a fool or he who hires those who pass by.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> As a dog that returns to his vomit, so
is a fool who repeats his folly.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Do you see a man wise in his own eyes?
There is more hope for a fool than for him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> The sluggard says, "There is a lion in
the road! A fierce lion roams the streets!"

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> As the door turns on its hinges, so
does the sluggard on his bed.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The sluggard buries his hand in the
dish. He is too lazy to bring it back to his mouth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> The sluggard is wiser in his own eyes
than seven men who answer with discretion.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Like one who grabs a dog's ears is one
who passes by and meddles in a quarrel not his own.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Like a madman who shoots torches,
arrows, and death,

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> is the man who deceives his neighbor
and says, "Am I not joking?"

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> For lack of wood a fire goes out.
Without gossip, a quarrel dies down.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> As coals are to hot embers, and wood to
fire, so is a contentious man to kindling strife.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> The words of a whisperer are as dainty
morsels, they go down into the innermost parts.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> Like silver dross on an earthen vessel
are the lips of a fervent one with an evil heart.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> A malicious man disguises himself with
his lips, but he harbors evil in his heart.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> When his speech is charming, don't
believe him; for there are seven abominations in his heart.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> His malice may be concealed by
deception, but his wickedness will be exposed in the assembly.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> Whoever digs a pit shall fall into it.
Whoever rolls a stone, it will come back on him.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> A lying tongue hates those it hurts;
and a flattering mouth works ruin.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Don't boast about tomorrow; for you don't
know what a day may bring forth.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Let another man praise you, and not your
own mouth; a stranger, and not your own lips.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> A stone is heavy, and sand is a burden;
but a fool's provocation is heavier than both.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Wrath is cruel, and anger is
overwhelming; but who is able to stand before jealousy?

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Better is open rebuke than hidden love.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Faithful are the wounds of a friend;
although the kisses of an enemy are profuse.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> A full soul loathes a honeycomb; but to a
hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> As a bird that wanders from her nest, so
is a man who wanders from his home.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Perfume and incense bring joy to the
heart; so does earnest counsel from a man's friend.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Don't forsake your friend and your
father's friend. Don't go to your brother's house in the day of your
disaster: better is a neighbor who is near than a distant brother.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Be wise, my son, and bring joy to my
heart, then I can answer my tormentor.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> A prudent man sees danger and takes
refuge; but the simple pass on, and suffer for it.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Take his garment when he puts up
collateral for a stranger. Hold it for a wayward woman!

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He who blesses his neighbor with a loud
voice early in the morning, it will be taken as a curse by him.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> A continual dropping on a rainy day and
a contentious wife are alike:

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> restraining her is like restraining the
wind, or like grasping oil in his right hand.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Iron sharpens iron; so a man sharpens
his friend's countenance.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> Whoever tends the fig tree shall eat
its fruit. He who looks after his master shall be honored.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> As water reflects a face, so a man's
heart reflects the man.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied;
and a man's eyes are never satisfied.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> The crucible is for silver, and the
furnace for gold; but man is refined by his praise.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Though you grind a fool in a mortar
with a pestle along with grain, yet his foolishness will not be removed
from him.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Know well the state of your flocks, and
pay attention to your herds:

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> for riches are not forever, nor does
even the crown endure to all generations.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The hay is removed, and the new growth
appears, the grasses of the hills are gathered in.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> The lambs are for your clothing, and
the goats are the price of a field.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> There will be plenty of goats' milk for
your food, for your family's food, and for the nourishment of your
servant girls.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The wicked flee when no one pursues; but
the righteous are as bold as a lion.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> In rebellion, a land has many rulers, but
order is maintained by a man of understanding and knowledge.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> A needy man who oppresses the poor is
like a driving rain which leaves no crops.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> Those who forsake the law praise the
wicked; but those who keep the law contend with them.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Evil men don't understand justice; but
those who seek Yahweh understand it fully.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Better is the poor who walks in his
integrity, than he who is perverse in his ways, and he is rich.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Whoever keeps the law is a wise son; but
he who is a companion of gluttons shames his father.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> He who increases his wealth by excessive
interest gathers it for one who has pity on the poor.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He who turns away his ear from hearing
the law, even his prayer is an abomination.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Whoever causes the upright to go astray
in an evil way, he will fall into his own trap; but the blameless will
inherit good.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> The rich man is wise in his own eyes;
but the poor who has understanding sees through him.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> When the righteous triumph, there is
great glory; but when the wicked rise, men hide themselves.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> He who conceals his sins doesn't
prosper, but whoever confesses and renounces them finds mercy.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Blessed is the man who always fears;
but one who hardens his heart falls into trouble.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> As a roaring lion or a charging bear,
so is a wicked ruler over helpless people.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> A tyrannical ruler lacks judgment. One
who hates ill-gotten gain will have long days.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> A man who is tormented by life blood
will be a fugitive until death; no one will support him.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Whoever walks blamelessly is kept safe;
but one with perverse ways will fall suddenly.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> One who works his land will have an
abundance of food; but one who chases fantasies will have his fill of
poverty.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> A faithful man is rich with blessings;
but one who is eager to be rich will not go unpunished.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> To show partiality is not good; yet a
man will do wrong for a piece of bread.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> A stingy man hurries after riches, and
doesn't know that poverty waits for him.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> One who rebukes a man will afterward
find more favor than one who flatters with the tongue.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Whoever robs his father or his mother,
and says, "It's not wrong." He is a partner with a destroyer.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> One who is greedy stirs up strife; but
one who trusts in Yahweh will prosper.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> One who trusts in himself is a fool;
but one who walks in wisdom is kept safe.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> One who gives to the poor has no lack;
but one who closes his eyes will have many curses.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> When the wicked rise, men hide
themselves; but when they perish, the righteous thrive.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> He who is often rebuked and stiffens his
neck will be destroyed suddenly, with no remedy.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> When the righteous thrive, the people
rejoice; but when the wicked rule, the people groan.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Whoever loves wisdom brings joy to his
father; but a companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> The king by justice makes the land
stable, but he who takes bribes tears it down.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a
net for his feet.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> An evil man is snared by his sin, but the
righteous can sing and be glad.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> The righteous care about justice for the
poor. The wicked aren't concerned about knowledge.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Mockers stir up a city, but wise men turn
away anger.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> If a wise man goes to court with a
foolish man, the fool rages or scoffs, and there is no peace.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The bloodthirsty hate a man of
integrity; and they seek the life of the upright.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> A fool vents all of his anger, but a
wise man brings himself under control.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> If a ruler listens to lies, all of his
officials are wicked.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The poor man and the oppressor have
this in common: Yahweh gives sight to the eyes of both.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> The king who fairly judges the poor,
his throne shall be established forever.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> The rod of correction gives wisdom, but
a child left to himself causes shame to his mother.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> When the wicked increase, sin
increases; but the righteous will see their downfall.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Correct your son, and he will give you
peace; yes, he will bring delight to your soul.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> Where there is no revelation, the
people cast off restraint; but one who keeps the law is blessed.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> A servant can't be corrected by words.
Though he understands, yet he will not respond.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Do you see a man who is hasty in his
words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> He who pampers his servant from youth
will have him become a son in the end.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> An angry man stirs up strife, and a
wrathful man abounds in sin.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> A man's pride brings him low, but one
of lowly spirit gains honor.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> Whoever is an accomplice of a thief is
an enemy of his own soul. He takes an oath, but dares not testify.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> The fear of man proves to be a snare,
but whoever puts his trust in Yahweh is kept safe.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Many seek the ruler's favor, but a
man's justice comes from Yahweh.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> A dishonest man detests the righteous,
and the upright in their ways detest the wicked.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, the
oracle: the man says to Ithiel, to Ithiel and Ucal:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> "Surely I am the most ignorant man, and
don't have a man's understanding.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> I have not learned wisdom, neither do I
have the knowledge of the Holy One.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Who has ascended up into heaven, and
descended? Who has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has bound the
waters in his garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth?
What is his name, and what is his son's name, if you know?

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> "Every word of God is flawless. He is a
shield to those who take refuge in him.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Don't you add to his words, lest he
reprove you, and you be found a liar.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> "Two things I have asked of you; don't
deny me before I die:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Remove far from me falsehood and lies.
Give me neither poverty nor riches. Feed me with the food that is
needful for me;

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> lest I be full, deny you, and say, 'Who
is Yahweh?' or lest I be poor, and steal, and so dishonor the name of my
God.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> "Don't slander a servant to his master,
lest he curse you, and you be held guilty.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> There is a generation that curses their
father, and doesn't bless their mother.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> There is a generation that is pure in
their own eyes, yet are not washed from their filthiness.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> There is a generation, oh how lofty are
their eyes! Their eyelids are lifted up.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> There is a generation whose teeth are
like swords, and their jaws like knives, to devour the poor from the
earth, and the needy from among men.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> "The leach has two daughters: 'Give,
give.' "There are three things that are never satisfied; four that don't
say, 'Enough:'

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Sheol, the barren womb; the earth that
is not satisfied with water; and the fire that doesn't say, 'Enough.'

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> "The eye that mocks at his father, and
scorns obedience to his mother: the ravens of the valley shall pick it
out, the young eagles shall eat it.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> "There are three things which are too
amazing for me, four which I don't understand:

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> The way of an eagle in the air; the way
of a serpent on a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and
the way of a man with a maiden.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> "So is the way of an adulterous woman:
she eats and wipes her mouth, and says, 'I have done nothing wrong.'

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> "For three things the earth tremble,
and under four, it can't bear up:

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> For a servant when he is king; a fool
when he is filled with food;

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> for an unloved woman when she is
married; and a handmaid who is heir to her mistress.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> "There are four things which are little
on the earth, but they are exceedingly wise:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> the ants are not a strong people, yet
they provide their food in the summer.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> The conies are but a feeble folk, yet
make they their houses in the rocks.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> The locusts have no king, yet they
advance in ranks.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> You can catch a lizard with your hands,
yet it is in kings' palaces.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> "There are three things which are
stately in their march, four which are stately in going:

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> The lion, which is mightiest among
animals, and doesn't turn away for any;

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> the greyhound, the male goat also; and
the king against whom there is no rising up.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> "If you have done foolishly in lifting
up yourself, or if you have thought evil, put your hand over your mouth.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> For as the churning of milk brings
forth butter, and the wringing of the nose brings forth blood; so the
forcing of wrath brings forth strife."

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> The words of king Lemuel; the oracle
which his mother taught him.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> "Oh, my son! Oh, son of my womb! Oh, son
of my vows!

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Don't give your strength to women, nor
your ways to that which destroys kings.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> It is not for kings, Lemuel; it is not
for kings to drink wine; nor for princes to say, 'Where is strong
drink?'

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> lest they drink, and forget the law, and
pervert the justice due to anyone who is afflicted.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Give strong drink to him who is ready to
perish; and wine to the bitter in soul:

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Let him drink, and forget his poverty,
and remember his misery no more.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Open your mouth for the mute, in the
cause of all who are left desolate.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Open your mouth, judge righteously, and
serve justice to the poor and needy."

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Who can find a worthy woman? For her
price is far above rubies.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> The heart of her husband trusts in her.
He shall have no lack of gain.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> She does him good, and not harm, all
the days of her life.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> She seeks wool and flax, and works
eagerly with her hands.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> She is like the merchant ships. She
brings her bread from afar.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> She rises also while it is yet night,
gives food to her household, and portions for her servant girls.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> She considers a field, and buys it.
With the fruit of her hands, she plants a vineyard.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> She arms her waist with strength, and
makes her arms strong.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> She perceives that her merchandise is
profitable. Her lamp doesn't go out by night.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> She lays her hands to the distaff, and
her hands hold the spindle.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> She opens her arms to the poor; yes,
she extends her hands to the needy.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> She is not afraid of the snow for her
household; for all her household are clothed with scarlet.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> She makes for herself carpets of
tapestry. Her clothing is fine linen and purple.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Her husband is respected in the gates,
when he sits among the elders of the land.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> She makes linen garments and sells
them, and delivers sashes to the merchant.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Strength and dignity are her clothing.
She laughs at the time to come.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> She opens her mouth with wisdom.
Faithful instruction is on her tongue.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> She looks well to the ways of her
household, and doesn't eat the bread of idleness.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Her children rise up and call her
blessed. Her husband also praises her:

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> "Many women do noble things, but you
excel them all."

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain;
but a woman who fears Yahweh, she shall be praised.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Give her of the fruit of her hands! Let
her works praise her in the gates!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes](ecc.md)
