[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rut)  [Next](sa2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 1 Samuel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim
Zophim, of the hill country of Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the
son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an
Ephraimite:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> and he had two wives; the name of the one
was Hannah, and the name of other Peninnah: and Peninnah had children,
but Hannah had no children.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> This man went up out of his city from year
to year to worship and to sacrifice to Yahweh of Armies in Shiloh. The
two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, priests to Yahweh, were there.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> When the day came that Elkanah sacrificed,
he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters,
portions:

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> but to Hannah he gave a double portion; for
he loved Hannah, but Yahweh had shut up her womb.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Her rival provoked her severely, to make
her fret, because Yahweh had shut up her womb.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> \[as\] he did so year by year, when she
went up to the house of Yahweh, so she provoked her; therefore she wept,
and did not eat.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Elkanah her husband said to her, "Hannah,
why do you weep? Why don't you eat? Why is your heart grieved? Am I not
better to you than ten sons?"

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in
Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest was sitting on his
seat by the doorpost of the temple of Yahweh.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> She was in bitterness of soul, and prayed
to Yahweh, and wept bitterly.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> She vowed a vow, and said, "Yahweh of
Armies, if you will indeed look on the affliction of your handmaid, and
remember me, and not forget your handmaid, but will give to your
handmaid a boy, then I will give him to Yahweh all the days of his life,
and no razor shall come on his head."

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> It happened, as she continued praying
before Yahweh, that Eli saw her mouth.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Now Hannah spoke in her heart. Only her
lips moved, but her voice was not heard. Therefore Eli thought she had
been drunken.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Eli said to her, "How long will you be
drunken? Put away your wine from you."

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Hannah answered, "No, my lord, I am a
woman of a sorrowful spirit. I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink,
but I poured out my soul before Yahweh.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Don't count your handmaid for a wicked
woman; for I have been speaking out of the abundance of my complaint and
my provocation."

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Then Eli answered, "Go in peace; and may
the God of Israel grant your petition that you have asked of him."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> She said, "Let your handmaid find favor
in your sight." So the woman went her way, and ate; and her facial
expression wasn't sad any more.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> They rose up in the morning early, and
worshiped before Yahweh, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah:
and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and Yahweh remembered her.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> It happened, when the time had come, that
Hannah conceived, and bore a son; and she named him Samuel, \[saying\],
"Because I have asked him of Yahweh."

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> The man Elkanah, and all his house, went
up to offer to Yahweh the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But Hannah didn't go up; for she said to
her husband, "Not until the child is weaned; then I will bring him, that
he may appear before Yahweh, and stay there forever."

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Elkanah her husband said to her, "Do what
seems good to you. Wait until you have weaned him; only may Yahweh
establish his word." So the woman waited and nursed her son, until she
weaned him.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> When she had weaned him, she took him up
with her, with three bulls, and one ephah of meal, and a bottle of wine,
and brought him to Yahweh's house in Shiloh. The child was young.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> They killed the bull, and brought the
child to Eli.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> She said, "Oh, my lord, as your soul
lives, my lord, I am the woman who stood by you here, praying to Yahweh.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> For this child I prayed; and Yahweh has
given me my petition which I asked of him.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Therefore also I have granted him to
Yahweh. As long as he lives he is granted to Yahweh." He worshiped
Yahweh there.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Hannah prayed, and said: "My heart exults
in Yahweh! My horn is exalted in Yahweh. My mouth is enlarged over my
enemies, because I rejoice in your salvation.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> There is no one as holy as Yahweh, For
there is no one besides you, nor is there any rock like our God.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> "Talk no more so exceeding proudly. Don't
let arrogance come out of your mouth, For Yahweh is a God of knowledge.
By him actions are weighed.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> "The bows of the mighty men are broken.
Those who stumbled are armed with strength.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Those who were full have hired themselves
out for bread. Those who were hungry have ceased \[to hunger\]. Yes, the
barren has borne seven. She who has many children languishes.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> "Yahweh kills, and makes alive. He brings
down to Sheol, and brings up.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Yahweh makes poor, and makes rich. He
brings low, he also lifts up.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> He raises up the poor out of the dust. He
lifts up the needy from the dunghill, To make them sit with princes, and
inherit the throne of glory. For the pillars of the earth are Yahweh's.
He has set the world on them.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> He will keep the feet of his holy ones, but
the wicked shall be put to silence in darkness; for no man shall prevail
by strength.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Those who strive with Yahweh shall be
broken to pieces. He will thunder against them in the sky. "Yahweh will
judge the ends of the earth. He will give strength to his king, and
exalt the horn of his anointed."

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. The
child did minister to Yahweh before Eli the priest.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now the sons of Eli were base men; they
didn't know Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The custom of the priests with the people
was that when any man offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came,
while the flesh was boiling, with a fork of three teeth in his hand;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> and he struck it into the pan, or kettle,
or caldron, or pot; all that the fork brought up the priest took
therewith. So they did in Shiloh to all the Israelites who came there.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Yes, before they burnt the fat, the
priest's servant came, and said to the man who sacrificed, "Give meat to
roast for the priest; for he will not accept boiled meat from you, but
raw."

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> If the man said to him, "Let the fat be
burned first, and then take as much as your soul desires;" then he would
say, "No, but you shall give it to me now; and if not, I will take it by
force."

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The sin of the young men was very great
before Yahweh; for the men despised the offering of Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> But Samuel ministered before Yahweh,
being a child, clothed with a linen ephod.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Moreover his mother made him a little
robe, and brought it to him from year to year, when she came up with her
husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and
said, "Yahweh give you seed of this woman for the petition which was
asked of Yahweh." They went to their own home.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Yahweh visited Hannah, and she conceived,
and bore three sons and two daughters. The child Samuel grew before
Yahweh.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Now Eli was very old; and he heard all
that his sons did to all Israel, and how that they lay with the women
who served at the door of the Tent of Meeting.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> He said to them, "Why do you do such
things? for I hear of your evil dealings from all this people.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> No, my sons; for it is no good report
that I hear: you make Yahweh's people disobey.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> If one man sin against another, God shall
judge him; but if a man sin against Yahweh, who shall entreat for him?"
Notwithstanding, they didn't listen to the voice of their father,
because Yahweh was minded to kill them.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> The child Samuel grew on, and increased
in favor both with Yahweh, and also with men.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> A man of God came to Eli, and said to
him, "Thus says Yahweh, 'Did I reveal myself to the house of your
father, when they were in Egypt \[in bondage\] to Pharaoh's house?

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Did I choose him out of all the tribes of
Israel to be my priest, to go up to my altar, to burn incense, to wear
an ephod before me? Did I give to the house of your father all the
offerings of the children of Israel made by fire?

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Why do you kick at my sacrifice and at my
offering, which I have commanded in \[my\] habitation, and honor your
sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the best of all the offerings
of Israel my people?'

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> "Therefore Yahweh, the God of Israel,
says, 'I said indeed that your house, and the house of your father,
should walk before me forever.' But now Yahweh says, 'Be it far from me;
for those who honor me I will honor, and those who despise me shall be
lightly esteemed.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> Behold, the days come, that I will cut
off your arm, and the arm of your father's house, that there shall not
be an old man in your house.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> You shall see the affliction of \[my\]
habitation, in all the wealth which \[God\] shall give Israel; and there
shall not be an old man in your house forever.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> The man of yours, \[whom\] I shall not
cut off from my altar, \[shall be\] to consume your eyes, and to grieve
your heart; and all the increase of your house shall die in the flower
of their age.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> "'This shall be the sign to you, that
shall come on your two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas: in one day they
shall both die.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> I will raise me up a faithful priest,
that shall do according to that which is in my heart and in my mind. I
will build him a sure house; and he shall walk before my anointed
forever.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> It shall happen, that everyone who is
left in your house shall come and bow down to him for a piece of silver
and a loaf of bread, and shall say, "Please put me into one of the
priests' offices, that I may eat a morsel of bread."'"

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> The child Samuel ministered to Yahweh
before Eli. The word of Yahweh was precious in those days; there was no
frequent vision.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> It happened at that time, when Eli was laid
down in his place (now his eyes had begun to grow dim, so that he could
not see),

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and the lamp of God hadn't yet gone out,
and Samuel had laid down \[to sleep\], in the temple of Yahweh, where
the ark of God was;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> that Yahweh called Samuel; and he said,
"Here I am."

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> He ran to Eli, and said, "Here I am; for
you called me." He said, "I didn't call; lie down again." He went and
lay down.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Yahweh called yet again, "Samuel!" Samuel
arose and went to Eli, and said, "Here I am; for you called me." He
answered, "I didn't call, my son; lie down again."

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Now Samuel didn't yet know Yahweh, neither
was the word of Yahweh yet revealed to him.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Yahweh called Samuel again the third time.
He arose and went to Eli, and said, "Here I am; for you called me." Eli
perceived that Yahweh had called the child.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Therefore Eli said to Samuel, "Go, lie
down: and it shall be, if he calls you, that you shall say, 'Speak,
Yahweh; for your servant hears.'" So Samuel went and lay down in his
place.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Yahweh came, and stood, and called as at
other times, "Samuel! Samuel!" Then Samuel said, "Speak; for your
servant hears."

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Yahweh said to Samuel, "Behold, I will do
a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of everyone who hears it shall
tingle.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> In that day I will perform against Eli
all that I have spoken concerning his house, from the beginning even to
the end.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For I have told him that I will judge his
house forever, for the iniquity which he knew, because his sons brought
a curse on themselves, and he didn't restrain them.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Therefore I have sworn to the house of
Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be removed with
sacrifice nor offering forever."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Samuel lay until the morning, and opened
the doors of the house of Yahweh. Samuel feared to show Eli the vision.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Then Eli called Samuel, and said,
"Samuel, my son!" He said, "Here I am."

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> He said, "What is the thing that
\[Yahweh\] has spoken to you? Please don't hide it from me. God do so to
you, and more also, if you hide anything from me of all the things that
he spoke to you."

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Samuel told him every bit, and hid
nothing from him. He said, "It is Yahweh. Let him do what seems good to
him."

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Samuel grew, and Yahweh was with him, and
let none of his words fall to the ground.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> All Israel from Dan even to Beersheba
knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of Yahweh.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Yahweh appeared again in Shiloh; for
Yahweh revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of Yahweh.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> The word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now
Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and encamped beside
Ebenezer: and the Philistines encamped in Aphek.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> The Philistines put themselves in array
against Israel: and when they joined battle, Israel was struck before
the Philistines; and they killed of the army in the field about four
thousand men.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> When the people were come into the camp,
the elders of Israel said, "Why has Yahweh struck us today before the
Philistines? Let us get the ark of the covenant of Yahweh out of Shiloh
to us, that it may come among us, and save us out of the hand of our
enemies."

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> So the people sent to Shiloh; and they
brought from there the ark of the covenant of Yahweh of Armies, who sits
\[above\] the cherubim: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas,
were there with the ark of the covenant of God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> When the ark of the covenant of Yahweh came
into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth
rang again.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> When the Philistines heard the noise of the
shout, they said, "What does the noise of this great shout in the camp
of the Hebrews mean?" They understood that the ark of Yahweh had come
into the camp.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The Philistines were afraid, for they said,
"God has come into the camp." They said, "Woe to us! For there has not
been such a thing before.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Woe to us! Who shall deliver us out of the
hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods that struck the Egyptians
with all kinds of plagues in the wilderness.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Be strong, and behave like men, O you
Philistines, that you not be servants to the Hebrews, as they have been
to you. Strengthen yourselves like men, and fight!"

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The Philistines fought, and Israel was
struck, and they fled every man to his tent: and there was a very great
slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The ark of God was taken; and the two
sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> There ran a man of Benjamin out of the
army, and came to Shiloh the same day, with his clothes torn, and with
earth on his head.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> When he came, behold, Eli was sitting on
his seat by the road watching; for his heart trembled for the ark of
God. When the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried
out.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> When Eli heard the noise of the crying,
he said, "What does the noise of this tumult mean?" The man hurried, and
came and told Eli.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Now Eli was ninety-eight years old; and
his eyes were set, so that he could not see.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The man said to Eli, "I am he who came
out of the army, and I fled today out of the army." He said, "How did
the matter go, my son?"

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> He who brought the news answered, "Israel
has fled before the Philistines, and there has been also a great
slaughter among the people. Your two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are
dead, and the ark of God has been captured."

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> It happened, when he made mention of the
ark of God, that Eli fell from off his seat backward by the side of the
gate; and his neck broke, and he died; for he was an old man, and heavy.
He had judged Israel forty years.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> His daughter-in-law, Phinehas' wife, was
with child, near to be delivered. When she heard the news that the ark
of God was taken, and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead,
she bowed herself and brought forth; for her pains came on her.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> About the time of her death the women who
stood by her said to her, "Don't be afraid; for you have brought forth a
son." But she didn't answer, neither did she regard it.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> She named the child Ichabod, saying, "The
glory has departed from Israel;" because the ark of God was taken, and
because of her father-in-law and her husband.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> She said, "The glory has departed from
Israel; for the ark of God is taken."

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now the Philistines had taken the ark of
God, and they brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> The Philistines took the ark of God, and
brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> When they of Ashdod arose early on the next
day, behold, Dagon was fallen on his face to the ground before the ark
of Yahweh. They took Dagon, and set him in his place again.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> When they arose early on the next day
morning, behold, Dagon was fallen on his face to the ground before the
ark of Yahweh; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands
\[lay\] cut off on the threshold; only \[the stump of\] Dagon was left
to him.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor
any who come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in
Ashdod, to this day.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But the hand of Yahweh was heavy on them of
Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and struck them with tumors, even Ashdod
and its borders.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> When the men of Ashdod saw that it was so,
they said, "The ark of the God of Israel shall not stay with us; for his
hand is severe on us, and on Dagon our god."

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> They sent therefore and gathered all the
lords of the Philistines to them, and said, "What shall we do with the
ark of the God of Israel?" They answered, "Let the ark of the God of
Israel be carried over to Gath." They carried the ark of the God of
Israel \[there\].

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> It was so, that after they had carried it
about, the hand of Yahweh was against the city with a very great
confusion: and he struck the men of the city, both small and great; and
tumors broke out on them.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. It
happened, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out,
saying, "They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to
kill us and our people."

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> They sent therefore and gathered together
all the lords of the Philistines, and they said, "Send away the ark of
the God of Israel, and let it go again to its own place, that it not
kill us and our people." For there was a deadly confusion throughout all
the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> The men who didn't die were struck with
the tumors; and the cry of the city went up to heaven.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> The ark of Yahweh was in the country of the
Philistines seven months.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> The Philistines called for the priests and
the diviners, saying, "What shall we do with the ark of Yahweh? Show us
with which we shall send it to its place."

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> They said, "If you send away the ark of the
God of Israel, don't send it empty; but by all means return him a
trespass offering: then you shall be healed, and it shall be known to
you why his hand is not removed from you."

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Then they said, "What shall be the trespass
offering which we shall return to him?" They said, "Five golden tumors,
and five golden mice, \[according to\] the number of the lords of the
Philistines; for one plague was on you all, and on your lords.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Therefore you shall make images of your
tumors, and images of your mice that mar the land; and you shall give
glory to the God of Israel: perhaps he will lighten his hand from off
you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Why then do you harden your hearts, as the
Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? When he had worked
wonderfully among them, didn't they let the people go, and they
departed?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> "Now therefore take and prepare yourselves
a new cart, and two milk cows, on which there has come no yoke; and tie
the cows to the cart, and bring their calves home from them;

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> and take the ark of Yahweh, and lay it on
the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which you return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by its side; and send it away, that it
may go.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Behold; if it goes up by the way of its own
border to Beth Shemesh, then he has done us this great evil: but if not,
then we shall know that it is not his hand that struck us; it was a
chance that happened to us."

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> The men did so, and took two milk cows,
and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home;

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> and they put the ark of Yahweh on the
cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their
tumors.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> The cows took the straight way by the way
to Beth Shemesh; they went along the highway, lowing as they went, and
didn't turn aside to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the
Philistines went after them to the border of Beth Shemesh.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> They of Beth Shemesh were reaping their
wheat harvest in the valley; and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the
ark, and rejoiced to see it.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> The cart came into the field of Joshua of
Beth Shemesh, and stood there, where there was a great stone: and they
split the wood of the cart, and offered up the cows for a burnt offering
to Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> The Levites took down the ark of Yahweh,
and the coffer that was with it, in which the jewels of gold were, and
put them on the great stone: and the men of Beth Shemesh offered burnt
offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day to Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> When the five lords of the Philistines
had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> These are the golden tumors which the
Philistines returned for a trespass offering to Yahweh: for Ashdod one,
for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> and the golden mice, according to the
number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords,
both of fortified cities and of country villages, even to the great
stone, whereon they set down the ark of Yahweh, \[which stone remains\]
to this day in the field of Joshua of Beth Shemesh.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> He struck of the men of Beth Shemesh,
because they had looked into the ark of Yahweh, he struck of the people
fifty thousand seventy men; and the people mourned, because Yahweh had
struck the people with a great slaughter.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> The men of Beth Shemesh said, "Who is
able to stand before Yahweh, this holy God? To whom shall he go up from
us?"

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> They sent messengers to the inhabitants
of Kiriath Jearim, saying, "The Philistines have brought back the ark of
Yahweh; come down, and bring it up to yourselves."

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The men of Kiriath Jearim came, and fetched
up the ark of Yahweh, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the
hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> It happened, from the day that the ark
stayed in Kiriath Jearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty
years: and all the house of Israel lamented after Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel,
saying, "If you do return to Yahweh with all your heart, then put away
the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth from among you, and direct your
hearts to Yahweh, and serve him only; and he will deliver you out of the
hand of the Philistines."

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then the children of Israel did put away
the Baals and the Ashtaroth, and served Yahweh only.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Samuel said, "Gather all Israel to Mizpah,
and I will pray for you to Yahweh."

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> They gathered together to Mizpah, and drew
water, and poured it out before Yahweh, and fasted on that day, and said
there, "We have sinned against Yahweh." Samuel judged the children of
Israel in Mizpah.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> When the Philistines heard that the
children of Israel were gathered together at Mizpah, the lords of the
Philistines went up against Israel. When the children of Israel heard
it, they were afraid of the Philistines.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> The children of Israel said to Samuel,
"Don't cease to cry to Yahweh our God for us, that he will save us out
of the hand of the Philistines."

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Samuel took a suckling lamb, and offered it
for a whole burnt offering to Yahweh: and Samuel cried to Yahweh for
Israel; and Yahweh answered him.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> As Samuel was offering up the burnt
offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel; but Yahweh
thundered with a great thunder on that day on the Philistines, and
confused them; and they were struck down before Israel.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> The men of Israel went out of Mizpah, and
pursued the Philistines, and struck them, until they came under Beth
Kar.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Then Samuel took a stone, and set it
between Mizpah and Shen, and called its name Ebenezer, saying, "Yahweh
helped us until now."

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> So the Philistines were subdued, and they
came no more within the border of Israel. The hand of Yahweh was against
the Philistines all the days of Samuel.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> The cities which the Philistines had
taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even to Gath; and
its border did Israel deliver out of the hand of the Philistines. There
was peace between Israel and the Amorites.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Samuel judged Israel all the days of his
life.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> He went from year to year in circuit to
Bethel and Gilgal, and Mizpah; and he judged Israel in all those places.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> His return was to Ramah, for there was
his house; and there he judged Israel: and he built there an altar to
Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> It happened, when Samuel was old, that he
made his sons judges over Israel.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and
the name of his second, Abijah: they were judges in Beersheba.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> His sons didn't walk in his ways, but
turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted justice.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Then all the elders of Israel gathered
themselves together, and came to Samuel to Ramah;

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> and they said to him, "Behold, you are old,
and your sons don't walk in your ways: now make us a king to judge us
like all the nations."

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> But the thing displeased Samuel, when they
said, "Give us a king to judge us." Samuel prayed to Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Yahweh said to Samuel, "Listen to the voice
of the people in all that they tell you; for they have not rejected you,
but they have rejected me, that I should not be king over them.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> According to all the works which they have
done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even to this day,
in that they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also to
you.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Now therefore listen to their voice:
however you shall protest solemnly to them, and shall show them the way
of the king who shall reign over them."

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Samuel told all the words of Yahweh to
the people who asked of him a king.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> He said, "This will be the way of the
king who shall reign over you: he will take your sons, and appoint them
to him, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and they shall run
before his chariots;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> and he will appoint them to him for
captains of thousands, and captains of fifties; and \[he will set some\]
to plow his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments
of war, and the instruments of his chariots.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> He will take your daughters to be
perfumers, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> He will take your fields, and your
vineyards, and your olive groves, even the best of them, and give them
to his servants.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He will take the tenth of your seed, and
of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> He will take your male servants, and your
female servants, and your best young men, and your donkeys, and put them
to his work.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> He will take the tenth of your flocks:
and you shall be his servants.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> You shall cry out in that day because of
your king whom you shall have chosen you; and Yahweh will not answer you
in that day."

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> But the people refused to listen to the
voice of Samuel; and they said, "No; but we will have a king over us,

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> that we also may be like all the nations,
and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our
battles."

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Samuel heard all the words of the people,
and he rehearsed them in the ears of Yahweh.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Yahweh said to Samuel, "Listen to their
voice, and make them a king." Samuel said to the men of Israel, "Every
man go to his city."

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name
was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the
son of Aphiah, the son of a Benjamite, a mighty man of valor.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> He had a son, whose name was Saul, an
impressive young man; and there was not among the children of Israel a
better person than he. From his shoulders and upward he was higher than
any of the people.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> The donkeys of Kish, Saul's father, were
lost. Kish said to Saul his son, "Take now one of the servants with you,
and arise, go seek the donkeys."

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> He passed through the hill country of
Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalishah, but they didn't find
them: then they passed through the land of Shaalim, and there they
weren't there: and he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but
they didn't find them.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> When they had come to the land of Zuph,
Saul said to his servant who was with him, "Come, and let us return,
lest my father stop caring about the donkeys, and be anxious for us."

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> He said to him, "See now, there is in this
city a man of God, and he is a man who is held in honor. All that he
says comes surely to pass. Now let us go there. Perhaps he can tell us
concerning our journey whereon we go."

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Then Saul said to his servant, "But,
behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man? For the bread is spent in
our vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God. What
do we have?"

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The servant answered Saul again, and said,
"Behold, I have in my hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver. I will
give that to the man of God, to tell us our way."

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> (In earlier times in Israel, when a man
went to inquire of God, thus he said, "Come, and let us go to the seer;"
for he who is now called a prophet was before called a Seer.)

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Then Saul said to his servant, "Well
said. Come, let us go." So they went to the city where the man of God
was.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> As they went up the ascent to the city,
they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said to them, "Is
the seer here?"

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> They answered them, and said, "He is.
Behold, he is before you. Hurry now, for he has come today into the
city; for the people have a sacrifice today in the high place.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> As soon as you have come into the city,
you shall immediately find him, before he goes up to the high place to
eat; for the people will not eat until he come, because he blesses the
sacrifice. Afterwards those who are invited eat. Now therefore go up;
for at this time you shall find him."

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> They went up to the city; \[and\] as they
came within the city, behold, Samuel came out toward them, to go up to
the high place.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Now Yahweh had revealed to Samuel a day
before Saul came, saying,

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> "Tomorrow about this time I will send you
a man out of the land of Benjamin, and you shall anoint him to be prince
over my people Israel; and he shall save my people out of the hand of
the Philistines: for I have looked on my people, because their cry has
come to me."

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> When Samuel saw Saul, Yahweh said to him,
"Behold, the man of whom I spoke to you! this same shall have authority
over my people."

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the
gate, and said, "Please tell me where the seer's house is."

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Samuel answered Saul, and said, "I am the
seer. Go up before me to the high place, for you shall eat with me
today. In the morning I will let you go, and will tell you all that is
in your heart.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> As for your donkeys who were lost three
days ago, don't set your mind on them; for they are found. For whom is
all that is desirable in Israel? Is it not for you, and for all your
father's house?"

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Saul answered, "Am I not a Benjamite, of
the smallest of the tribes of Israel? And my family the least of all the
families of the tribe of Benjamin? Why then do you speak to me like
this?"

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Samuel took Saul and his servant, and
brought them into the guest room, and made them sit in the best place
among those who were invited, who were about thirty persons.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Samuel said to the cook, "Bring the
portion which I gave you, of which I said to you, 'Set it aside.'"

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> The cook took up the thigh, and that
which was on it, and set it before Saul. Samuel said, "Behold, that
which has been reserved! Set it before yourself and eat; because for the
appointed time has it been kept for you, for I said, 'I have invited the
people.'" So Saul ate with Samuel that day.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> When they had come down from the high
place into the city, he talked with Saul on the housetop.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> They arose early: and it happened about
the spring of the day, that Samuel called to Saul on the housetop,
saying, "Get up, that I may send you away." Saul arose, and they went
out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> As they were going down at the end of the
city, Samuel said to Saul, "Tell the servant pass on before us" (and he
passed on), "but stand still first, that I may cause you to hear the
word of God."

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Then Samuel took the vial of oil, and
poured it on his head, and kissed him, and said, "Isn't it that Yahweh
has anointed you to be prince over his inheritance?

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> When you have departed from me today,
then you shall find two men by Rachel's tomb, in the border of Benjamin
at Zelzah; and they will tell you, 'The donkeys which you went to seek
have been found; and behold, your father has stopped caring about the
donkeys, and is anxious for you, saying, "What shall I do for my son?"'

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> "Then you shall go on forward from there,
and you shall come to the oak of Tabor; and three men shall meet you
there going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three young goats, and
another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of
wine:

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> and they will greet you, and give you two
loaves of bread, which you shall receive of their hand.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> "After that you shall come to the hill of
God, where is the garrison of the Philistines: and it shall happen, when
you have come there to the city, that you shall meet a band of prophets
coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tambourine, and a
pipe, and a harp, before them; and they will be prophesying:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> and the Spirit of Yahweh will come
mightily on you, and you shall prophesy with them, and shall be turned
into another man.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Let it be, when these signs have come to
you, that you do as occasion shall serve you; for God is with you.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> "You shall go down before me to Gilgal;
and behold, I will come down to you, to offer burnt offerings, and to
sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings: you shall wait seven days,
until I come to you, and show you what you shall do."

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> It was so, that when he had turned his
back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart: and all those signs
happened that day.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> When they came there to the hill,
behold, a band of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came mightily
on him, and he prophesied among them.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> It happened, when all who knew him
before saw that, behold, he prophesied with the prophets, then the
people said one to another, "What is this that is come to the son of
Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?"

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> One of the same place answered, "Who is
their father?" Therefore it became a proverb, "Is Saul also among the
prophets?"

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> When he had made an end of prophesying,
he came to the high place.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Saul's uncle said to him and to his
servant, "Where did you go?" He said, "To seek the donkeys. When we saw
that they were not found, we came to Samuel."

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Saul's uncle said, "Please tell me what
Samuel said to you."

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Saul said to his uncle, "He told us
plainly that the donkeys were found." But concerning the matter of the
kingdom, of which Samuel spoke, he didn't tell him.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Samuel called the people together to
Yahweh to Mizpah;

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> and he said to the children of Israel,
"Thus says Yahweh, the God of Israel, 'I brought up Israel out of Egypt,
and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the
hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed you:'

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> but you have this day rejected your
God, who himself saves you out of all your calamities and your
distresses; and you have said to him, '\[No\], but set a king over us.'
Now therefore present yourselves before Yahweh by your tribes, and by
your thousands."

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> So Samuel brought all the tribes of
Israel near, and the tribe of Benjamin was taken.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> He brought the tribe of Benjamin near
by their families; and the family of the Matrites was taken; and Saul
the son of Kish was taken: but when they sought him, he could not be
found.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Therefore they asked of Yahweh further,
"Is there yet a man to come here?" Yahweh answered, "Behold, he has
hidden himself among the baggage."

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> They ran and fetched him there; and
when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people
from his shoulders and upward.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Samuel said to all the people, "You see
him whom Yahweh has chosen, that there is none like him among all the
people?" All the people shouted, and said, "\[Long\] live the king!"

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Then Samuel told the people the
regulations of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up
before Yahweh. Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Saul also went to his house to Gibeah;
and there went with him the army, whose hearts God had touched.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But certain worthless fellows said,
"How shall this man save us?" They despised him, and brought him no
present. But he held his peace.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and
encamped against Jabesh Gilead: and all the men of Jabesh said to
Nahash, "Make a covenant with us, and we will serve you."

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Nahash the Ammonite said to them, "On
this condition I will make it with you, that all your right eyes be put
out; and I will lay it for a reproach on all Israel."

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The elders of Jabesh said to him, "Give
us seven day, that we may send messengers to all the borders of Israel;
and then, if there is no one to save us, we will come out to you."

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Then the messengers came to Gibeah of
Saul, and spoke these words in the ears of the people: and all the
people lifted up their voice, and wept.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Behold, Saul came following the oxen out
of the field; and Saul said, "What ails the people that they weep?" They
told him the words of the men of Jabesh.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The Spirit of God came mightily on Saul
when he heard those words, and his anger was kindled greatly.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> He took a yoke of oxen, and cut them in
pieces, and sent them throughout all the borders of Israel by the hand
of messengers, saying, "Whoever doesn't come forth after Saul and after
Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen." The dread of Yahweh fell on
the people, and they came out as one man.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> He numbered them in Bezek; and the
children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah
thirty thousand.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> They said to the messengers who came,
"Thus you shall tell the men of Jabesh Gilead, 'Tomorrow, by the time
the sun is hot, you shall have deliverance.'" The messengers came and
told the men of Jabesh; and they were glad.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Therefore the men of Jabesh said,
"Tomorrow we will come out to you, and you shall do with us all that
seems good to you."

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> It was so on the next day, that Saul
put the people in three companies; and they came into the midst of the
camp in the morning watch, and struck the Ammonites until the heat of
the day: and it happened, that those who remained were scattered, so
that no two of them were left together.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> The people said to Samuel, "Who is he
who said, 'Shall Saul reign over us?' Bring those men, that we may put
them to death!"

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Saul said, "There shall not a man be
put to death this day; for today Yahweh has worked deliverance in
Israel."

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Then Samuel said to the people, "Come,
and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there."

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> All the people went to Gilgal; and
there they made Saul king before Yahweh in Gilgal; and there they
offered sacrifices of peace offerings before Yahweh; and there Saul and
all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Samuel said to all Israel, "Behold, I
have listened to your voice in all that you said to me, and have made a
king over you.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Now, behold, the king walks before you;
and I am old and gray-headed; and behold, my sons are with you: and I
have walked before you from my youth to this day.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Here I am. Witness against me before
Yahweh, and before his anointed. Whose ox have I taken? Whose donkey
have I taken? Whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Of whose
hand have I taken a ransom to blind my eyes therewith? I will restore it
to you."

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> They said, "You have not defrauded us,
nor oppressed us, neither have you taken anything of any man's hand."

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> He said to them, "Yahweh is witness
against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that you have not
found anything in my hand." They said, "He is witness."

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Samuel said to the people, "It is Yahweh
who appointed Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Now therefore stand still, that I may
plead with you before Yahweh concerning all the righteous acts of
Yahweh, which he did to you and to your fathers.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> "When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your
fathers cried to Yahweh, then Yahweh sent Moses and Aaron, who brought
forth your fathers out of Egypt, and made them to dwell in this place.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> "But they forgot Yahweh their God; and he
sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the army of Hazor, and
into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab;
and they fought against them.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> They cried to Yahweh, and said, 'We
have sinned, because we have forsaken Yahweh, and have served the Baals
and the Ashtaroth: but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies,
and we will serve you.'

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Yahweh sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and
Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies
on every side; and you lived in safety.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> "When you saw that Nahash the king of
the children of Ammon came against you, you said to me, 'No, but a king
shall reign over us;' when Yahweh your God was your king.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Now therefore see the king whom you
have chosen, and whom you have asked for: and behold, Yahweh has set a
king over you.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> If you will fear Yahweh, and serve him,
and listen to his voice, and not rebel against the commandment of
Yahweh, and both you and also the king who reigns over you are followers
of Yahweh your God, \[well\]:

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> but if you will not listen to the voice
of Yahweh, but rebel against the commandment of Yahweh, then will the
hand of Yahweh be against you, as it was against your fathers.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> "Now therefore stand still and see this
great thing, which Yahweh will do before your eyes.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> Isn't it wheat harvest today? I will
call to Yahweh, that he may send thunder and rain; and you shall know
and see that your wickedness is great, which you have done in the sight
of Yahweh, in asking for a king."

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> So Samuel called to Yahweh; and Yahweh
sent thunder and rain that day: and all the people greatly feared Yahweh
and Samuel.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> All the people said to Samuel, "Pray
for your servants to Yahweh your God, that we not die; for we have added
to all our sins \[this\] evil, to ask us a king."

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Samuel said to the people, "Don't be
afraid. You have indeed done all this evil; yet don't turn aside from
following Yahweh, but serve Yahweh with all your heart.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Don't turn aside; for \[then you would
go\] after vain things which can't profit nor deliver, for they are
vain.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> For Yahweh will not forsake his people
for his great name's sake, because it has pleased Yahweh to make you a
people to himself.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> Moreover as for me, far be it from me
that I should sin against Yahweh in ceasing to pray for you: but I will
instruct you in the good and the right way.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Only fear Yahweh, and serve him in
truth with all your heart; for consider how great things he has done for
you.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> But if you shall still do wickedly, you
shall be consumed, both you and your king."

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Saul was \[forty\] years old when he
began to reign; and when he had reigned two years over Israel,

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Saul chose him three thousand men of
Israel, of which two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in the
Mount of Bethel, and one thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of
Benjamin: and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Jonathan struck the garrison of the
Philistines that was in Geba: and the Philistines heard of it. Saul blew
the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, "Let the Hebrews hear!"

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> All Israel heard that Saul had struck the
garrison of the Philistines, and also that Israel was had in abomination
with the Philistines. The people were gathered together after Saul to
Gilgal.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> The Philistines assembled themselves
together to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six
thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the seashore in
multitude: and they came up, and encamped in Michmash, eastward of Beth
Aven.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> When the men of Israel saw that they were
in a strait (for the people were distressed), then the people did hide
themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in coverts, and
in pits.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Now some of the Hebrews had gone over the
Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead; but as for Saul, he was yet in
Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> He stayed seven days, according to the
set time that Samuel \[had appointed\]: but Samuel didn't come to
Gilgal; and the people were scattered from him.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Saul said, "Bring here the burnt offering
to me, and the peace offerings." He offered the burnt offering.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> It came to pass that as soon as he had
made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and
Saul went out to meet him, that he might greet him.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Samuel said, "What have you done?" Saul
said, "Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that
you didn't come within the days appointed, and that the Philistines
assembled themselves together at Michmash;

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> therefore I said, 'Now the Philistines
will come down on me to Gilgal, and I haven't entreated the favor of
Yahweh.' I forced myself therefore, and offered the burnt offering."

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Samuel said to Saul, "You have done
foolishly. You have not kept the commandment of Yahweh your God, which
he commanded you; for now Yahweh would have established your kingdom on
Israel forever.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But now your kingdom shall not
continue. Yahweh has sought for himself a man after his own heart, and
Yahweh has appointed him to be prince over his people, because you have
not kept that which Yahweh commanded you."

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Samuel arose, and went from Gilgal to
Gibeah of Benjamin. Saul numbered the people who were present with him,
about six hundred men.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the
people who were present with them, stayed in Geba of Benjamin: but the
Philistines encamped in Michmash.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The spoilers came out of the camp of
the Philistines in three companies: one company turned to the way that
leads to Ophrah, to the land of Shual;

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> and another company turned the way to
Beth Horon; and another company turned the way of the border that looks
down on the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Now there was no smith found throughout
all the land of Israel; for the Philistines said, "Lest the Hebrews make
them swords or spears;"

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> but all the Israelites went down to the
Philistines, to sharpen every man his plowshare, mattock, axe, and
sickle;

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> yet they had a file for the mattocks,
and for the plowshares, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to set
the goads.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> So it came to pass in the day of
battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any
of the people who were with Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with
Jonathan his son was there found.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> The garrison of the Philistines went
out to the pass of Michmash.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now it fell on a day, that Jonathan the
son of Saul said to the young man who bore his armor, "Come, and let us
go over to the Philistines' garrison, that is on the other side." But he
didn't tell his father.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Saul stayed in the uttermost part of
Gibeah under the pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the people who
were with him were about six hundred men;

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> and Ahijah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's
brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the priest of Yahweh in
Shiloh, wearing an ephod. The people didn't know that Jonathan was gone.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Between the passes, by which Jonathan
sought to go over to the Philistines' garrison, there was a rocky crag
on the one side, and a rocky crag on the other side: and the name of the
one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The one crag rose up on the north in
front of Michmash, and the other on the south in front of Geba.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Jonathan said to the young man who bore
his armor, "Come, and let us go over to the garrison of these
uncircumcised. It may be that Yahweh will work for us; for there is no
restraint on Yahweh to save by many or by few."

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> His armor bearer said to him, "Do all
that is in your heart. Turn and, behold, I am with you according to your
heart."

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> Then Jonathan said, "Behold, we will pass
over to the men, and we will reveal ourselves to them.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> If they say thus to us, 'Wait until we
come to you!' then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up
to them.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But if they say this, 'Come up to us!'
then we will go up; for Yahweh has delivered them into our hand. This
shall be the sign to us."

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Both of them revealed themselves to the
garrison of the Philistines: and the Philistines said, "Behold, the
Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they had hidden themselves!"

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> The men of the garrison answered
Jonathan and his armor bearer, and said, "Come up to us, and we will
show you something!" Jonathan said to his armor bearer, "Come up after
me; for Yahweh has delivered them into the hand of Israel."

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Jonathan climbed up on his hands and on
his feet, and his armor bearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan;
and his armor bearer killed them after him.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> That first slaughter, which Jonathan
and his armor bearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were half
a furrow's length in an acre of land.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> There was a trembling in the camp, in
the field, and among all the people; the garrison, and the spoilers,
they also trembled; and the earth quaked: so there was an exceeding
great trembling.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> The watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of
Benjamin looked; and behold, the multitude melted away, and they went
\[here\] and there.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Then Saul said to the people who were
with him, "Count now, and see who is missing from us." When they had
counted, behold, Jonathan and his armor bearer were not there.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Saul said to Ahijah, "Bring the ark of
God here." For the ark of God was \[there\] at that time with the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> It happened, while Saul talked to the
priest, that the tumult that was in the camp of the Philistines went on
and increased: and Saul said to the priest, "Withdraw your hand!"

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Saul and all the people who were with
him were gathered together, and came to the battle: and behold, every
man's sword was against his fellow, \[and there was\] a very great
confusion.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Now the Hebrews who were with the
Philistines as before, and who went up with them into the camp, \[from
the country\] all around, even they also \[turned\] to be with the
Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Likewise all the men of Israel who had
hidden themselves in the hill country of Ephraim, when they heard that
the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the
battle.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> So Yahweh saved Israel that day: and
the battle passed over by Beth Aven.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The men of Israel were distressed that
day; for Saul had adjured the people, saying, "Cursed is the man who
eats any food until it is evening, and I am avenged of my enemies." So
none of the people tasted food.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> All the people came into the forest;
and there was honey on the ground.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> When the people were come to the
forest, behold, the honey dropped: but no man put his hand to his mouth;
for the people feared the oath.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> But Jonathan didn't hear when his
father commanded the people with the oath: therefore he put forth the
end of the rod who was in his hand, and dipped it in the honeycomb, and
put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Then one of the people answered, and
said, "Your father directly commanded the people with an oath, saying,
'Cursed is the man who eats food this day.'" The people were faint.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Then Jonathan said, "My father has
troubled the land. Please look how my eyes have been enlightened,
because I tasted a little of this honey.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> How much more, if perhaps the people
had eaten freely today of the spoil of their enemies which they found?
For now has there been no great slaughter among the Philistines."

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> They struck of the Philistines that day
from Michmash to Aijalon. The people were very faint;

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> and the people flew on the spoil, and
took sheep, and cattle, and calves, and killed them on the ground; and
the people ate them with the blood.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> Then they told Saul, saying, "Behold,
the people are sinning against Yahweh, in that they eat meat with the
blood." He said, "You have dealt treacherously. Roll a large stone to me
this day!"

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Saul said, "Disperse yourselves among
the people, and tell them, 'Bring me here every man his ox, and every
man his sheep, and kill them here, and eat; and don't sin against Yahweh
in eating meat with the blood.'" All the people brought every man his ox
with him that night, and killed them there.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> Saul built an altar to Yahweh. This was
the first altar that he built to Yahweh.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> Saul said, "Let us go down after the
Philistines by night, and take spoil among them until the morning light,
and let us not leave a man of them." They said, "Do whatever seems good
to you." Then the priest said, "Let us draw near here to God."

<span id="an_14:37">14:37</span> Saul asked counsel of God, "Shall I go
down after the Philistines? Will you deliver them into the hand of
Israel?" But he didn't answer him that day.

<span id="an_14:38">14:38</span> Saul said, "Draw near here, all you
chiefs of the people; and know and see in which this sin has been this
day.

<span id="an_14:39">14:39</span> For, as Yahweh lives, who saves Israel,
though it is in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die." But there was not
a man among all the people who answered him.

<span id="an_14:40">14:40</span> Then he said to all Israel, "You be on
one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side." The
people said to Saul, "Do what seems good to you."

<span id="an_14:41">14:41</span> Therefore Saul said to Yahweh, the God
of Israel, "Show the right." Jonathan and Saul were chosen; but the
people escaped.

<span id="an_14:42">14:42</span> Saul said, "Cast lots between me and
Jonathan my son." Jonathan was selected.

<span id="an_14:43">14:43</span> Then Saul said to Jonathan, "Tell me
what you have done!" Jonathan told him, and said, "I certainly did taste
a little honey with the end of the rod that was in my hand; and behold,
I must die."

<span id="an_14:44">14:44</span> Saul said, "God do so and more also;
for you shall surely die, Jonathan."

<span id="an_14:45">14:45</span> The people said to Saul, "Shall
Jonathan die, who has worked this great salvation in Israel? Far from
it! As Yahweh lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the
ground; for he has worked with God this day!" So the people rescued
Jonathan, that he didn't die.

<span id="an_14:46">14:46</span> Then Saul went up from following the
Philistines; and the Philistines went to their own place.

<span id="an_14:47">14:47</span> Now when Saul had taken the kingdom
over Israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side, against
Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against
the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines: and wherever he turned
himself, he put \[them\] to the worse.

<span id="an_14:48">14:48</span> He did valiantly, and struck the
Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of those who despoiled
them.

<span id="an_14:49">14:49</span> Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and
Ishvi, and Malchishua; and the names of his two daughters were these:
the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal:

<span id="an_14:50">14:50</span> and the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam
the daughter of Ahimaaz. The name of the captain of his army was Abner
the son of Ner, Saul's uncle.

<span id="an_14:51">14:51</span> Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner
the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.

<span id="an_14:52">14:52</span> There was severe war against the
Philistines all the days of Saul: and when Saul saw any mighty man, or
any valiant man, he took him to him.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Samuel said to Saul, "Yahweh sent me to
anoint you to be king over his people, over Israel. Now therefore listen
to the voice of the words of Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Thus says Yahweh of Armies, 'I have
marked that which Amalek did to Israel, how he set himself against him
in the way, when he came up out of Egypt.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Now go and strike Amalek, and utterly
destroy all that they have, and don't spare them; but kill both man and
woman, infant and nursing baby, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.'"

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Saul summoned the people, and numbered
them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of
Judah.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Saul came to the city of Amalek, and laid
wait in the valley.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Saul said to the Kenites, "Go, depart, go
down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them; for you
showed kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of
Egypt." So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Saul struck the Amalekites, from Havilah
as you go to Shur, that is before Egypt.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> He took Agag the king of the Amalekites
alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> But Saul and the people spared Agag, and
the best of the sheep, and of the cattle, and of the fatlings, and the
lambs, and all that was good, and wouldn't utterly destroy them: but
everything that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Then the word of Yahweh came to Samuel,
saying,

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> "It grieves me that I have set up Saul
to be king; for he is turned back from following me, and has not
performed my commandments." Samuel was angry; and he cried to Yahweh all
night.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the
morning; and it was told Samuel, saying, "Saul came to Carmel, and
behold, he set up a monument for himself, and turned, and passed on, and
went down to Gilgal."

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Samuel came to Saul; and Saul said to
him, "You are blessed by Yahweh! I have performed the commandment of
Yahweh."

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Samuel said, "Then what does this
bleating of the sheep in my ears, and the lowing of the cattle which I
hear mean?"

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Saul said, "They have brought them from
the Amalekites; for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the
cattle, to sacrifice to Yahweh your God. We have utterly destroyed the
rest."

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Then Samuel said to Saul, "Stay, and I
will tell you what Yahweh has said to me last night." He said to him,
"Say on."

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Samuel said, "Though you were little in
your own sight, weren't you made the head of the tribes of Israel?
Yahweh anointed you king over Israel;

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> and Yahweh sent you on a journey, and
said, 'Go, and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight
against them until they are consumed.'

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Why then didn't you obey the voice of
Yahweh, but took the spoils, and did that which was evil in the sight of
Yahweh?"

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Saul said to Samuel, "But I have obeyed
the voice of Yahweh, and have gone the way which Yahweh sent me, and
have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the
Amalekites.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But the people took of the spoil, sheep
and cattle, the chief of the devoted things, to sacrifice to Yahweh your
God in Gilgal."

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Samuel said, "Has Yahweh as great
delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of
Yahweh? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to listen than the
fat of rams.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> For rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and stubbornness is as idolatry and teraphim. Because you
have rejected the word of Yahweh, he has also rejected you from being
king."

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Saul said to Samuel, "I have sinned;
for I have transgressed the commandment of Yahweh, and your words,
because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> Now therefore, please pardon my sin,
and turn again with me, that I may worship Yahweh."

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Samuel said to Saul, "I will not return
with you; for you have rejected the word of Yahweh, and Yahweh has
rejected you from being king over Israel."

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> As Samuel turned about to go away, Saul
grabbed the skirt of his robe, and it tore.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Samuel said to him, "Yahweh has torn
the kingdom of Israel from you this day, and has given it to a neighbor
of yours who is better than you.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Also the Strength of Israel will not
lie nor repent; for he is not a man, that he should repent."

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> Then he said, "I have sinned: yet
please honor me now before the elders of my people, and before Israel,
and come back with me, that I may worship Yahweh your God."

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> So Samuel went back with Saul; and Saul
worshiped Yahweh.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Then Samuel said, "Bring here to me
Agag the king of the Amalekites!" Agag came to him cheerfully. Agag
said, "Surely the bitterness of death is past."

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Samuel said, "As your sword has made
women childless, so your mother will be childless among women!" Samuel
cut Agag in pieces before Yahweh in Gilgal.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul
went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Samuel came no more to see Saul until
the day of his death; for Samuel mourned for Saul: and Yahweh grieved
that he had made Saul king over Israel.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Yahweh said to Samuel, "How long will you
mourn for Saul, since I have rejected him from being king over Israel?
Fill your horn with oil, and go. I will send you to Jesse the
Bethlehemite; for I have provided a king for myself among his sons."

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> Samuel said, "How can I go? If Saul hears
it, he will kill me." Yahweh said, "Take a heifer with you, and say, I
have come to sacrifice to Yahweh.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will
show you what you shall do. You shall anoint to me him whom I name to
you."

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Samuel did that which Yahweh spoke, and
came to Bethlehem. The elders of the city came to meet him trembling,
and said, "Do you come peaceably?"

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> He said, "Peaceably; I have come to
sacrifice to Yahweh. Sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the
sacrifice." He sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> It happened, when they had come, that he
looked at Eliab, and said, "Surely Yahweh's anointed is before him."

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But Yahweh said to Samuel, "Don't look on
his face, or on the height of his stature; because I have rejected him:
for \[Yahweh sees\] not as man sees; for man looks at the outward
appearance, but Yahweh looks at the heart."

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him
pass before Samuel. He said, "Neither has Yahweh chosen this one."

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. He
said, "Neither has Yahweh chosen this one."

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Jesse made seven of his sons to pass
before Samuel. Samuel said to Jesse, "Yahweh has not chosen these."

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Samuel said to Jesse, "Are all your
children here?" He said, "There remains yet the youngest, and behold, he
is keeping the sheep." Samuel said to Jesse, "Send and get him; for we
will not sit down until he comes here."

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> He sent, and brought him in. Now he was
ruddy, and withal of a beautiful face, and goodly to look on. Yahweh
said, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he."

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and
anointed him in the midst of his brothers: and the Spirit of Yahweh came
mightily on David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to
Ramah.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Now the Spirit of Yahweh departed from
Saul, and an evil spirit from Yahweh troubled him.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Saul's servants said to him, "See now,
an evil spirit from God troubles you.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Let our lord now command your servants
who are before you, to seek out a man who is a skillful player on the
harp. It shall happen, when the evil spirit from God is on you, that he
shall play with his hand, and you shall be well."

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Saul said to his servants, "Provide me
now a man who can play well, and bring him to me."

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Then one of the young men answered, and
said, "Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, who is
skillful in playing, a mighty man of valor, a man of war, prudent in
speech, and a comely person; and Yahweh is with him."

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Therefore Saul sent messengers to
Jesse, and said, "Send me David your son, who is with the sheep."

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Jesse took a donkey loaded with bread,
and a bottle of wine, and a young goat, and sent them by David his son
to Saul.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> David came to Saul, and stood before
him. He loved him greatly; and he became his armor bearer.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Saul sent to Jesse, saying, "Please let
David stand before me; for he has found favor in my sight."

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> It happened, when the \[evil\] spirit
from God was on Saul, that David took the harp, and played with his
hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed
from him.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Now the Philistines gathered together
their armies to battle; and they were gathered together at Socoh, which
belongs to Judah, and encamped between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Saul and the men of Israel were gathered
together, and encamped in the valley of Elah, and set the battle in
array against the Philistines.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> The Philistines stood on the mountain on
the one side, and Israel stood on the mountain on the other side: and
there was a valley between them.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> There went out a champion out of the camp
of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits
and a span.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He had a helmet of brass on his head, and
he was clad with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five
thousand shekels of brass.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> He had brass shin armor on his legs, and
a javelin of brass between his shoulders.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> The staff of his spear was like a
weaver's beam; and his spear's head \[weighed\] six hundred shekels of
iron: and his shield bearer went before him.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> He stood and cried to the armies of
Israel, and said to them, "Why have you come out to set your battle in
array? Am I not a Philistine, and you servants to Saul? Choose a man for
yourselves, and let him come down to me.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> If he be able to fight with me, and kill
me, then will we be your servants; but if I prevail against him, and
kill him, then you will be our servants, and serve us."

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> The Philistine said, "I defy the armies
of Israel this day! Give me a man, that we may fight together!"

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> When Saul and all Israel heard those
words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Now David was the son of that
Ephrathite of Bethlehem Judah, whose name was Jesse; and he had eight
sons: and the man was an old man in the days of Saul, stricken \[in
years\] among men.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> The three eldest sons of Jesse had gone
after Saul to the battle: and the names of his three sons who went to
the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next to him Abinadab, and the
third Shammah.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> David was the youngest; and the three
eldest followed Saul.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Now David went back and forth from Saul
to feed his father's sheep at Bethlehem.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> The Philistine drew near morning and
evening, and presented himself forty days.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Jesse said to David his son, "Now take
for your brothers an ephah of this parched grain, and these ten loaves,
and carry \[them\] quickly to the camp to your brothers;

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> and bring these ten cheeses to the
captain of their thousand, and see how your brothers are doing, and
bring back news."

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Now Saul, and they, and all the men of
Israel, were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> David rose up early in the morning, and
left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded
him; and he came to the place of the wagons, as the army which was going
forth to the fight shouted for the battle.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> Israel and the Philistines put the
battle in array, army against army.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> David left his baggage in the hand of
the keeper of the baggage, and ran to the army, and came and greeted his
brothers.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> As he talked with them, behold, there
came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of
the ranks of the Philistines, and spoke according to the same words: and
David heard them.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> All the men of Israel, when they saw
the man, fled from him, and were terrified.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> The men of Israel said, "Have you seen
this man who is come up? He has surely come up to defy Israel. It shall
be, that the man who kills him, the king will enrich him with great
riches, and will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free
in Israel."

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> David spoke to the men who stood by
him, saying, "What shall be done to the man who kills this Philistine,
and takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised
Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?"

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> The people answered him in this way,
saying, "So shall it be done to the man who kills him."

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Eliab his eldest brother heard when he
spoke to the men; and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he
said, "Why have you come down? With whom have you left those few sheep
in the wilderness? I know your pride, and the naughtiness of your heart;
for you have come down that you might see the battle."

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> David said, "What have I now done? Is
there not a cause?"

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> He turned away from him toward another,
and spoke like that again; and the people answered him again the same
way.

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> When the words were heard which David
spoke, they rehearsed them before Saul; and he sent for him.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> David said to Saul, "Let no man's heart
fail because of him. Your servant will go and fight with this
Philistine."

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> Saul said to David, "You are not able
to go against this Philistine to fight with him; for you are but a
youth, and he a man of war from his youth."

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> David said to Saul, "Your servant was
keeping his father's sheep; and when a lion or a bear came, and took a
lamb out of the flock,

<span id="an_17:35">17:35</span> I went out after him, and struck him,
and rescued it out of his mouth. When he arose against me, I caught him
by his beard, and struck him, and killed him.

<span id="an_17:36">17:36</span> Your servant struck both the lion and
the bear. This uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, since
he has defied the armies of the living God."

<span id="an_17:37">17:37</span> David said, "Yahweh who delivered me
out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will
deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine." Saul said to David, "Go;
and Yahweh shall be with you."

<span id="an_17:38">17:38</span> Saul dressed David with his clothing.
He put a helmet of brass on his head, and he clad him with a coat of
mail.

<span id="an_17:39">17:39</span> David strapped his sword on his
clothing, and he tried to move; for he had not tested it. David said to
Saul, "I can't go with these; for I have not tested them." David took
them off.

<span id="an_17:40">17:40</span> He took his staff in his hand, and
chose for himself five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in
the shepherd's bag which he had, even in his wallet. His sling was in
his hand; and he drew near to the Philistine.

<span id="an_17:41">17:41</span> The Philistine came on and drew near to
David; and the man who bore the shield went before him.

<span id="an_17:42">17:42</span> When the Philistine looked about, and
saw David, he disdained him; for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and
withal of a fair face.

<span id="an_17:43">17:43</span> The Philistine said to David, "Am I a
dog, that you come to me with sticks?" The Philistine cursed David by
his gods.

<span id="an_17:44">17:44</span> The Philistine said to David, "Come to
me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the sky, and to the
animals of the field."

<span id="an_17:45">17:45</span> Then David said to the Philistine, "You
come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a javelin: but I
come to you in the name of Yahweh of Armies, the God of the armies of
Israel, whom you have defied.

<span id="an_17:46">17:46</span> Today, Yahweh will deliver you into my
hand. I will strike you, and take your head from off you. I will give
the dead bodies of the army of the Philistines this day to the birds of
the sky, and to the wild animals of the earth; that all the earth may
know that there is a God in Israel,

<span id="an_17:47">17:47</span> and that all this assembly may know
that Yahweh doesn't save with sword and spear: for the battle is
Yahweh's, and he will give you into our hand."

<span id="an_17:48">17:48</span> It happened, when the Philistine arose,
and came and drew near to meet David, that David hurried, and ran toward
the army to meet the Philistine.

<span id="an_17:49">17:49</span> David put his hand in his bag, took a
stone, and slung it, and struck the Philistine in his forehead; and the
stone sank into his forehead, and he fell on his face to the earth.

<span id="an_17:50">17:50</span> So David prevailed over the Philistine
with a sling and with a stone, and struck the Philistine, and killed
him; but there was no sword in the hand of David.

<span id="an_17:51">17:51</span> Then David ran, and stood over the
Philistine, and took his sword, and drew it out of its sheath, and
killed him, and cut off his head therewith. When the Philistines saw
that their champion was dead, they fled.

<span id="an_17:52">17:52</span> The men of Israel and of Judah arose,
and shouted, and pursued the Philistines, until you come to Gai, and to
the gates of Ekron. The wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way
to Shaaraim, even to Gath, and to Ekron.

<span id="an_17:53">17:53</span> The children of Israel returned from
chasing after the Philistines, and they plundered their camp.

<span id="an_17:54">17:54</span> David took the head of the Philistine,
and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armor in his tent.

<span id="an_17:55">17:55</span> When Saul saw David go forth against
the Philistine, he said to Abner, the captain of the army, "Abner, whose
son is this youth?" Abner said, "As your soul lives, O king, I can't
tell."

<span id="an_17:56">17:56</span> The king said, "Inquire whose son the
young man is!"

<span id="an_17:57">17:57</span> As David returned from the slaughter of
the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the
head of the Philistine in his hand.

<span id="an_17:58">17:58</span> Saul said to him, "Whose son are you,
you young man?" David answered, "I am the son of your servant Jesse the
Bethlehemite."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> It happened, when he had made an end of
speaking to Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of
David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> Saul took him that day, and would let him
go no more home to his father's house.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Then Jonathan and David made a covenant,
because he loved him as his own soul.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Jonathan stripped himself of the robe
that was on him, and gave it to David, and his clothing, even to his
sword, and to his bow, and to his sash.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> David went out wherever Saul sent him,
\[and\] behaved himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war,
and it was good in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of
Saul's servants.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> It happened as they came, when David
returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out
of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul,
with tambourines, with joy, and with instruments of music.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The women sang one to another as they
played, and said, "Saul has slain his thousands, David his ten
thousands."

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Saul was very angry, and this saying
displeased him; and he said, "They have ascribed to David ten thousands,
and to me they have ascribed but thousands. What can he have more but
the kingdom?"

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Saul eyed David from that day and
forward.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> It happened on the next day, that an
evil spirit from God came mightily on Saul, and he prophesied in the
midst of the house. David played with his hand, as he did day by day.
Saul had his spear in his hand;

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> and Saul threw the spear; for he said,
"I will pin David even to the wall!" David escaped from his presence
twice.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Saul was afraid of David, because
Yahweh was with him, and was departed from Saul.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Therefore Saul removed him from him,
and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in
before the people.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> David behaved himself wisely in all his
ways; and Yahweh was with him.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> When Saul saw that he behaved himself
very wisely, he stood in awe of him.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> But all Israel and Judah loved David;
for he went out and came in before them.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Saul said to David, "Behold, my elder
daughter Merab, I will give her to you as wife. Only be valiant for me,
and fight Yahweh's battles." For Saul said, "Don't let my hand be on
him, but let the hand of the Philistines be on him."

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> David said to Saul, "Who am I, and what
is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law
to the king?"

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> But it happened at the time when Merab,
Saul's daughter, should have been given to David, that she was given to
Adriel the Meholathite as wife.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Michal, Saul's daughter, loved David;
and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Saul said, I will give her to him, that
she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be
against him. Therefore Saul said to David, "You shall this day be my
son-in-law a second time."

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Saul commanded his servants, "Talk with
David secretly, and say, 'Behold, the king has delight in you, and all
his servants love you: now therefore be the king's son-in-law.'"

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Saul's servants spoke those words in
the ears of David. David said, "Does it seems to you a light thing to be
the king's son-in-law, since I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?"

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> The servants of Saul told him, saying,
"David spoke like this."

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Saul said, "You shall tell David, 'The
king desires no dowry except one hundred foreskins of the Philistines,
to be avenged of the king's enemies.'" Now Saul thought to make David
fall by the hand of the Philistines.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> When his servants told David these
words, it pleased David well to be the king's son-in-law. The days were
not expired;

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> and David arose and went, he and his
men, and killed of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought
their foreskins, and they gave them in full number to the king, that he
might be the king's son-in-law. Saul gave him Michal his daughter as
wife.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Saul saw and knew that Yahweh was with
David; and Michal, Saul's daughter, loved him.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Saul was yet the more afraid of David;
and Saul was David's enemy continually.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> Then the princes of the Philistines
went forth: and it happened, as often as they went forth, that David
behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that his
name was highly esteemed.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Saul spoke to Jonathan his son, and to
all his servants, that they should kill David. But Jonathan, Saul's son,
delighted much in David.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Jonathan told David, saying, "Saul my
father seeks to kill you. Now therefore, please take care of yourself in
the morning, and live in a secret place, and hide yourself.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> I will go out and stand beside my father
in the field where you are, and I will talk with my father about you;
and if I see anything, I will tell you."

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Jonathan spoke good of David to Saul his
father, and said to him, "Don't let the king sin against his servant,
against David; because he has not sinned against you, and because his
works have been very good toward you;

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> for he put his life in his hand, and
struck the Philistine, and Yahweh worked a great victory for all Israel.
You saw it, and rejoiced. Why then will you sin against innocent blood,
to kill David without a cause?"

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Saul listened to the voice of Jonathan:
and Saul swore, "As Yahweh lives, he shall not be put to death."

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Jonathan called David, and Jonathan
showed him all those things. Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was
in his presence, as before.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> There was war again. David went out, and
fought with the Philistines, and killed them with a great slaughter; and
they fled before him.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> An evil spirit from Yahweh was on Saul,
as he sat in his house with his spear in his hand; and David was playing
with his hand.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Saul sought to pin David even to the
wall with the spear; but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he
stuck the spear into the wall. David fled, and escaped that night.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Saul sent messengers to David's house,
to watch him, and to kill him in the morning. Michal, David's wife, told
him, saying, "If you don't save your life tonight, tomorrow you will be
killed."

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> So Michal let David down through the
window. He went, fled, and escaped.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Michal took the teraphim, and laid it
in the bed, and put a pillow of goats' \[hair\] at its head, and covered
it with the clothes.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> When Saul sent messengers to take
David, she said, "He is sick."

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Saul sent the messengers to see David,
saying, "Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may kill him."

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> When the messengers came in, behold,
the teraphim was in the bed, with the pillow of goats' hair at its head.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> Saul said to Michal, "Why have you
deceived me thus, and let my enemy go, so that he is escaped?" Michal
answered Saul, "He said to me, 'Let me go! Why should I kill you?'"

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Now David fled, and escaped, and came
to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. He and
Samuel went and lived in Naioth.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> It was told Saul, saying, "Behold,
David is at Naioth in Ramah."

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Saul sent messengers to take David: and
when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel
standing as head over them, the Spirit of God came on the messengers of
Saul, and they also prophesied.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> When it was told Saul, he sent other
messengers, and they also prophesied. Saul sent messengers again the
third time, and they also prophesied.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Then went he also to Ramah, and came to
the great well that is in Secu: and he asked, "Where are Samuel and
David?" One said, "Behold, they are at Naioth in Ramah."

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> He went there to Naioth in Ramah. Then
the Spirit of God came on him also, and he went on, and prophesied,
until he came to Naioth in Ramah.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> He also stripped off his clothes, and
he also prophesied before Samuel, and lay down naked all that day and
all that night. Therefore they say, "Is Saul also among the prophets?"

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came
and said before Jonathan, "What have I done? What is my iniquity? What
is my sin before your father, that he seeks my life?"

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> He said to him, "Far from it; you shall
not die. Behold, my father does nothing either great or small, but that
he discloses it to me; and why should my father hide this thing from me?
It is not so."

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> David swore moreover, and said, "Your
father knows well that I have found favor in your eyes; and he says,
'Don't let Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved:' but truly as Yahweh
lives, and as your soul lives, there is but a step between me and
death."

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Then Jonathan said to David, "Whatever
your soul desires, I will even do it for you."

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> David said to Jonathan, "Behold, tomorrow
is the new moon, and I should not fail to dine with the king; but let me
go, that I may hide myself in the field to the third day at evening.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> If your father miss me at all, then say,
'David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his
city; for it is the yearly sacrifice there for all the family.'

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> If he says, 'It is well;' your servant
shall have peace: but if he be angry, then know that evil is determined
by him.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Therefore deal kindly with your servant;
for you have brought your servant into a covenant of Yahweh with you:
but if there be in me iniquity, kill me yourself; for why should you
bring me to your father?"

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Jonathan said, "Far be it from you; for
if I should at all know that evil were determined by my father to come
on you, then wouldn't I tell you that?"

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Then David said to Jonathan, "Who shall
tell me if perchance your father answers you roughly?"

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Jonathan said to David, "Come, and let
us go out into the field." They both went out into the field.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Jonathan said to David, "Yahweh, the
God of Israel, \[be witness\]: when I have sounded my father about this
time tomorrow, \[or\] the third day, behold, if there be good toward
David, shall I not then send to you, and disclose it to you?

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Yahweh do so to Jonathan, and more
also, should it please my father to do you evil, if I don't disclose it
to you, and send you away, that you may go in peace: and Yahweh be with
you, as he has been with my father.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> You shall not only while yet I live
show me the loving kindness of Yahweh, that I not die;

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> but also you shall not cut off your
kindness from my house forever; no, not when Yahweh has cut off the
enemies of David everyone from the surface of the earth."

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> So Jonathan made a covenant with the
house of David, saying, "Yahweh will require it at the hand of David's
enemies."

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Jonathan caused David to swear again,
for the love that he had to him; for he loved him as he loved his own
soul.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Then Jonathan said to him, "Tomorrow is
the new moon: and you will be missed, because your seat will be empty.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> When you have stayed three days, you
shall go down quickly, and come to the place where you did hide yourself
when the business was in hand, and shall remain by the stone Ezel.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> I will shoot three arrows on its side,
as though I shot at a mark.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Behold, I will send the boy, saying,
'Go, find the arrows!' If I tell the boy, 'Behold, the arrows are on
this side of you. Take them;' then come; for there is peace to you and
no hurt, as Yahweh lives.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> But if I say this to the boy, 'Behold,
the arrows are beyond you;' then go your way; for Yahweh has sent you
away.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Concerning the matter which you and I
have spoken of, behold, Yahweh is between you and me forever."

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> So David hid himself in the field: and
when the new moon was come, the king sat him down to eat food.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> The king sat on his seat, as at other
times, even on the seat by the wall; and Jonathan stood up, and Abner
sat by Saul's side: but David's place was empty.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Nevertheless Saul didn't say anything
that day: for he thought, "Something has happened to him. He is not
clean. Surely he is not clean."

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> It happened on the next day after the
new moon, the second day, that David's place was empty. Saul said to
Jonathan his son, "Why doesn't the son of Jesse come to eat, neither
yesterday, nor today?"

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Jonathan answered Saul, "David
earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> He said, 'Please let me go, for our
family has a sacrifice in the city. My brother has commanded me to be
there. Now, if I have found favor in your eyes, please let me go away
and see my brothers.' Therefore he has not come to the king's table."

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> Then Saul's anger was kindled against
Jonathan, and he said to him, "You son of a perverse rebellious woman,
don't I know that you have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame,
and to the shame of your mother's nakedness?

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> For as long as the son of Jesse lives
on the earth, you shall not be established, nor your kingdom. Therefore
now send and bring him to me, for he shall surely die!"

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> Jonathan answered Saul his father, and
said to him, "Why should he be put to death? What has he done?"

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> Saul cast his spear at him to strike
him. By this Jonathan knew that his father was determined to put David
to death.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> So Jonathan arose from the table in
fierce anger, and ate no food the second day of the month; for he was
grieved for David, because his father had done him shame.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> It happened in the morning, that
Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a
little boy with him.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> He said to his boy, "Run, find now the
arrows which I shoot." As the boy ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> When the boy was come to the place of
the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the boy, and
said, "Isn't the arrow beyond you?"

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Jonathan cried after the boy, "Go fast!
Hurry! Don't delay!" Jonathan's boy gathered up the arrows, and came to
his master.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> But the boy didn't know anything. Only
Jonathan and David knew the matter.

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> Jonathan gave his weapons to his boy,
and said to him, "Go, carry them to the city."

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> As soon as the boy was gone, David
arose out of \[a place\] toward the South, and fell on his face to the
ground, and bowed himself three times. They kissed one another, and wept
one with another, and David wept the most.

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> Jonathan said to David, "Go in peace,
because we have both sworn in the name of Yahweh, saying, 'Yahweh shall
be between me and you, and between my seed and your seed, forever.'" He
arose and departed; and Jonathan went into the city.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the
priest. Ahimelech came to meet David trembling, and said to him, "Why
are you alone, and no man with you?"

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> David said to Ahimelech the priest, "The
king has commanded me a business, and has said to me, 'Let no man know
anything of the business about which I send you, and what I have
commanded you; and I have appointed the young men to such and such a
place.'

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Now therefore what is under your hand?
Give me five loaves of bread in my hand, or whatever there is present."

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> The priest answered David, and said,
"There is no common bread under my hand, but there is holy bread; if
only the young men have kept themselves from women."

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> David answered the priest, and said to
him, "Truly, women have been kept from us about these three days. When I
came out, the vessels of the young men were holy, though it was but a
common journey. How much more then today shall their vessels be holy?"

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> So the priest gave him holy \[bread\];
for there was no bread there but the show bread, that was taken from
before Yahweh, to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Now a certain man of the servants of Saul
was there that day, detained before Yahweh; and his name was Doeg the
Edomite, the best of the herdsmen who belonged to Saul.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> David said to Ahimelech, "Isn't there
here under your hand spear or sword? For I have neither brought my sword
nor my weapons with me, because the king's business required haste."

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> The priest said, "The sword of Goliath
the Philistine, whom you killed in the valley of Elah, behold, it is
here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod. If you will take that, take
it; for there is no other except that here." David said, "There is none
like that. Give it to me."

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> David arose, and fled that day for fear
of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The servants of Achish said to him,
"Isn't this David the king of the land? Didn't they sing one to another
about him in dances, saying, 'Saul has slain his thousands, David his
ten thousands?'"

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> David laid up these words in his heart,
and was very afraid of Achish the king of Gath.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> He changed his behavior before them,
and pretended to be mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of
the gate, and let his spittle fall down on his beard.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Then Achish said to his servants,
"Look, you see the man is mad. Why then have you brought him to me?

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Do I lack madmen, that you have brought
this fellow to play the madman in my presence? Shall this fellow come
into my house?"

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> David therefore departed there, and
escaped to the cave of Adullam. When his brothers and all his father's
house heard it, they went down there to him.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Everyone who was in distress, and
everyone who was in debt, and everyone who was discontented, gathered
themselves to him; and he became captain over them: and there were with
him about four hundred men.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> David went there to Mizpeh of Moab, and
he said to the king of Moab, "Please let my father and my mother come
out with you, until I know what God will do for me."

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> He brought them before the king of Moab;
and they lived with him all the while that David was in the stronghold.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> The prophet Gad said to David, "Don't
stay in the stronghold. Depart, and go into the land of Judah." Then
David departed, and came into the forest of Hereth.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> Saul heard that David was discovered, and
the men who were with him. Now Saul was sitting in Gibeah, under the
tamarisk tree in Ramah, with his spear in his hand, and all his servants
were standing about him.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Saul said to his servants who stood about
him, "Hear now, you Benjamites! Will the son of Jesse give everyone of
you fields and vineyards, will he make you all captains of thousands and
captains of hundreds,

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> that all of you have conspired against
me, and there is none who discloses to me when my son makes a treaty
with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you who is sorry for me, or
discloses to me that my son has stirred up my servant against me, to lie
in wait, as at this day?"

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Then Doeg the Edomite, who stood by the
servants of Saul, answered and said, "I saw the son of Jesse coming to
Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> He inquired of Yahweh for him, gave him
food, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine."

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> Then the king sent to call Ahimelech
the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests
who were in Nob: and they came all of them to the king.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Saul said, "Hear now, you son of
Ahitub." He answered, "Here I am, my lord."

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Saul said to him, "Why have you
conspired against me, you and the son of Jesse, in that you have given
him bread, and a sword, and have inquired of God for him, that he should
rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day?"

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Then Ahimelech answered the king, and
said, "Who among all your servants is so faithful as David, who is the
king's son-in-law, and is taken into your council, and is honorable in
your house?

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Have I today begun to inquire of God
for him? Be it far from me! Don't let the king impute anything to his
servant, nor to all the house of my father; for your servant knows
nothing of all this, less or more."

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> The king said, "You shall surely die,
Ahimelech, you, and all your father's house."

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> The king said to the guard who stood
about him, "Turn, and kill the priests of Yahweh; because their hand
also is with David, and because they knew that he fled, and didn't
disclose it to me." But the servants of the king wouldn't put forth
their hand to fall on the priests of Yahweh.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> The king said to Doeg, "Turn and attack
the priests!" Doeg the Edomite turned, and he attacked the priests, and
he killed on that day eighty-five people who wore a linen ephod.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> He struck Nob, the city of the priests,
with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and nursing
babies, and cattle and donkeys and sheep, with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> One of the sons of Ahimelech, the son
of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Abiathar told David that Saul had slain
Yahweh's priests.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> David said to Abiathar, "I knew on that
day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul. I
am responsible for the death of all the persons of your father's house.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Stay with me, don't be afraid; for he
who seeks my life seeks your life. For with me you shall be in
safeguard."

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> David was told, "Behold, the Philistines
are fighting against Keilah, and are robbing the threshing floors."

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Therefore David inquired of Yahweh,
saying, "Shall I go and strike these Philistines?" Yahweh said to David,
"Go strike the Philistines, and save Keilah."

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> David's men said to him, "Behold, we are
afraid here in Judah: how much more then if we go to Keilah against the
armies of the Philistines?"

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Then David inquired of Yahweh yet again.
Yahweh answered him, and said, "Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will
deliver the Philistines into your hand."

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> David and his men went to Keilah, and
fought with the Philistines, and brought away their livestock, and
killed them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of
Keilah.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> It happened, when Abiathar the son of
Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in
his hand.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> It was told Saul that David had come to
Keilah. Saul said, "God has delivered him into my hand; for he is shut
in, by entering into a town that has gates and bars."

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Saul summoned all the people to war, to
go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> David knew that Saul was devising
mischief against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest, "Bring the
ephod here."

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Then David said, "O Yahweh, the God of
Israel, your servant has surely heard that Saul seeks to come to Keilah,
to destroy the city for my sake.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> Will the men of Keilah deliver me up
into his hand? Will Saul come down, as your servant has heard? Yahweh,
the God of Israel, I beg you, tell your servant." Yahweh said, "He will
come down."

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Then David said, "Will the men of
Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul?" Yahweh said, "They
will deliver you up."

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Then David and his men, who were about
six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went wherever they
could go. It was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he
gave up going there.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> David stayed in the wilderness in the
strongholds, and remained in the hill country in the wilderness of Ziph.
Saul sought him every day, but God didn't deliver him into his hand.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> David saw that Saul had come out to
seek his life. David was in the wilderness of Ziph in the wood.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Jonathan, Saul's son, arose, and went
to David into the woods, and strengthened his hand in God.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> He said to him, "Don't be afraid; for
the hand of Saul my father shall not find you; and you shall be king
over Israel, and I shall be next to you; and that also Saul my father
knows."

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> They both made a covenant before
Yahweh: and David stayed in the woods, and Jonathan went to his house.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Then the Ziphites came up to Saul to
Gibeah, saying, "Doesn't David hide himself with us in the strongholds
in the wood, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of the
desert?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Now therefore, O king, come down,
according to all the desire of your soul to come down; and our part
shall be to deliver him up into the king's hand."

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Saul said, "You are blessed by Yahweh;
for you have had compassion on me.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Please go make yet more sure, and know
and see his place where his haunt is, \[and\] who has seen him there;
for it is told me that he deals very subtly.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> See therefore, and take knowledge of
all the lurking places where he hides himself, and come again to me with
certainty, and I will go with you: and it shall happen, if he is in the
land, that I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah."

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> They arose, and went to Ziph before
Saul: but David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the
Arabah on the south of the desert.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Saul and his men went to seek him. When
David was told, he went down to the rock, and stayed in the wilderness
of Maon. When Saul heard \[that\], he pursued after David in the
wilderness of Maon.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Saul went on this side of the mountain,
and David and his men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste
to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men surrounded David and
his men to take them.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> But a messenger came to Saul, saying,
"Hurry and come; for the Philistines have made a raid on the land!"

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> So Saul returned from pursuing after
David, and went against the Philistines: therefore they called that
place Sela Hammahlekoth.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> David went up from there, and lived in
the strongholds of En Gedi.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> It happened, when Saul was returned from
following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, "Behold, David
is in the wilderness of En Gedi."

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Then Saul took three thousand chosen men
out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men on the rocks of
the wild goats.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> He came to the sheep pens by the way,
where there was a cave; and Saul went in to relieve himself. Now David
and his men were abiding in the innermost parts of the cave.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> The men of David said to him, "Behold,
the day of which Yahweh said to you, 'Behold, I will deliver your enemy
into your hand, and you shall do to him as it shall seem good to you.'"
Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe secretly.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> It happened afterward, that David's heart
struck him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> He said to his men, "Yahweh forbid that I
should do this thing to my lord, Yahweh's anointed, to put forth my hand
against him, since he is Yahweh's anointed."

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> So David checked his men with these
words, and didn't allow them to rise against Saul. Saul rose up out of
the cave, and went on his way.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> David also arose afterward, and went out
of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying, "My lord the king!" When Saul
looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the earth, and did
obeisance.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> David said to Saul, "Why do you listen to
men's words, saying, 'Behold, David seeks your hurt?'

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Behold, this day your eyes have seen
how that Yahweh had delivered you today into my hand in the cave. Some
urged me to kill you; but I spared you; and I said, I will not put forth
my hand against my lord; for he is Yahweh's anointed.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Moreover, my father, behold, yes, see
the skirt of your robe in my hand; for in that I cut off the skirt of
your robe, and didn't kill you, know and see that there is neither evil
nor disobedience in my hand, and I have not sinned against you, though
you hunt for my life to take it.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> May Yahweh judge between me and you,
and may Yahweh avenge me of you; but my hand shall not be on you.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> As the proverb of the ancients says,
'Out of the wicked comes forth wickedness;' but my hand shall not be on
you.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Against whom has the king of Israel
come out? Whom do you pursue? A dead dog? A flea?

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> May Yahweh therefore be judge, and give
sentence between me and you, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me
out of your hand."

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> It came to pass, when David had made an
end of speaking these words to Saul, that Saul said, "Is this your
voice, my son David?" Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> He said to David, "You are more
righteous than I; for you have done good to me, whereas I have done evil
to you.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> You have declared this day how you have
dealt well with me, because when Yahweh had delivered me up into your
hand, you didn't kill me.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> For if a man finds his enemy, will he
let him go away unharmed? Therefore may Yahweh reward you good for that
which you have done to me this day.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Now, behold, I know that you shall
surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in
your hand.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Swear now therefore to me by Yahweh,
that you will not cut off my seed after me, and that you will not
destroy my name out of my father's house."

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> David swore to Saul. Saul went home;
but David and his men went up to the stronghold.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Samuel died; and all Israel gathered
themselves together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at
Ramah. David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> There was a man in Maon, whose
possessions were in Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had three
thousand sheep, and a thousand goats: and he was shearing his sheep in
Carmel.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Now the name of the man was Nabal; and
the name of his wife Abigail; and the woman was of good understanding,
and of a beautiful face: but the man was churlish and evil in his
doings; and he was of the house of Caleb.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> David heard in the wilderness that Nabal
was shearing his sheep.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> David sent ten young men, and David said
to the young men, "Go up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my
name.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> You shall tell him, 'Long life to you!
Peace be to you, and peace be to your house, and peace be to all that
you have.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Now I have heard that you have shearers.
Your shepherds have now been with us, and we did them no hurt, neither
was there anything missing to them, all the while they were in Carmel.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Ask your young men, and they will tell
you. Therefore, let the young men find favor in your eyes; for we come
in a good day. Please give whatever comes to your hand, to your
servants, and to your son David.'"

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> When David's young men came, they spoke
to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Nabal answered David's servants, and
said, "Who is David? Who is the son of Jesse? There are many servants
who break away from their masters these days.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> Shall I then take my bread, and my
water, and my meat that I have killed for my shearers, and give it to
men who I don't know where they come from?"

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> So David's young men turned on their
way, and went back, and came and told him according to all these words.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> David said to his men, "Every man put
on his sword!" Every man put on his sword. David also put on his sword.
About four hundred men followed David; and two hundred stayed by the
baggage.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> But one of the young men told Abigail,
Nabal's wife, saying, "Behold, David sent messengers out of the
wilderness to Greet our master; and he railed at them.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> But the men were very good to us, and
we were not hurt, neither missed we anything, as long as we went with
them, when we were in the fields.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> They were a wall to us both by night
and by day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Now therefore know and consider what
you will do; for evil is determined against our master, and against all
his house; for he is such a worthless fellow that one can't speak to
him."

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Then Abigail hurried and took two
hundred loaves of bread, two bottles of wine, five sheep ready dressed,
five measures of parched grain, one hundred clusters of raisins, and two
hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on donkeys.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> She said to her young men, "Go on
before me. Behold, I come after you." But she didn't tell her husband,
Nabal.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> It was so, as she rode on her donkey,
and came down by the covert of the mountain, that behold, David and his
men came down toward her; and she met them.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> Now David had said, "Surely in vain
have I kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness, so that nothing
was missed of all that pertained to him. He has returned me evil for
good.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> God do so to the enemies of David, and
more also, if I leave of all that belongs to him by the morning light so
much as one who urinates on a wall."

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> When Abigail saw David, she hurried,
and alighted from her donkey, and fell before David on her face, and
bowed herself to the ground.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> She fell at his feet, and said, "On me,
my lord, on me be the iniquity; and please let your handmaid speak in
your ears. Hear the words of your handmaid.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> Please don't let my lord regard this
worthless fellow, even Nabal; for as his name is, so is he. Nabal is his
name, and folly is with him; but I, your handmaid, didn't see the young
men of my lord, whom you sent.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Now therefore, my lord, as Yahweh
lives, and as your soul lives, since Yahweh has withheld you from blood
guiltiness, and from avenging yourself with your own hand, now therefore
let your enemies, and those who seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Now this present which your servant has
brought to my lord, let it be given to the young men who follow my lord.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Please forgive the trespass of your
handmaid. For Yahweh will certainly make my lord a sure house, because
my lord fights the battles of Yahweh; and evil shall not be found in you
all your days.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> Though men may rise up to pursue you,
and to seek your soul, yet the soul of my lord shall be bound in the
bundle of life with Yahweh your God. He will sling out the souls of your
enemies, as from the hollow of a sling.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> It shall come to pass, when Yahweh has
done to my lord according to all the good that he has spoken concerning
you, and shall have appointed you prince over Israel,

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> that this shall be no grief to you, nor
offense of heart to my lord, either that you have shed blood without
cause, or that my lord has avenged himself. When Yahweh has dealt well
with my lord, then remember your handmaid."

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> David said to Abigail, "Blessed is
Yahweh, the God of Israel, who sent you this day to meet me!

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> Blessed is your discretion, and blessed
are you, that have kept me this day from blood guiltiness, and from
avenging myself with my own hand.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> For indeed, as Yahweh, the God of
Israel, lives, who has withheld me from hurting you, unless you had
hurried and come to meet me, surely there wouldn't have been left to
Nabal by the morning light so much as one who urinates on a wall."

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> So David received of her hand that
which she had brought him: and he said to her, "Go up in peace to your
house. Behold, I have listened to your voice, and have granted your
request."

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> Abigail came to Nabal; and behold, he
held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king. Nabal's heart was
merry within him, for he was very drunken. Therefore she told him
nothing, less or more, until the morning light.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> It happened in the morning, when the
wine was gone out of Nabal, that his wife told him these things, and his
heart died within him, and he became as a stone.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> It happened about ten days after, that
Yahweh struck Nabal, so that he died.

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> When David heard that Nabal was dead,
he said, "Blessed is Yahweh, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach
from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil. Yahweh
has returned the evildoing of Nabal on his own head." David sent and
spoke concerning Abigail, to take her to him as wife.

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> When the servants of David had come to
Abigail to Carmel, they spoke to her, saying, "David has sent us to you,
to take you to him as wife."

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> She arose, and bowed herself with her
face to the earth, and said, "Behold, your handmaid is a servant to wash
the feet of the servants of my lord."

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> Abigail hurried, and arose, and rode on
a donkey, with five ladies of hers who followed her; and she went after
the messengers of David, and became his wife.

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and
they both became his wives.

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> Now Saul had given Michal his daughter,
David's wife, to Palti the son of Laish, who was of Gallim.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> The Ziphites came to Saul to Gibeah,
saying, "Doesn't David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is
before the desert?"

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Then Saul arose, and went down to the
wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him,
to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Saul encamped in the hill of Hachilah,
which is before the desert, by the way. But David stayed in the
wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> David therefore sent out spies, and
understood that Saul had certainly come.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> David arose, and came to the place where
Saul had encamped; and David saw the place where Saul lay, and Abner the
son of Ner, the captain of his army: and Saul lay within the place of
the wagons, and the people were encamped around him.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Then answered David and said to Ahimelech
the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying,
"Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp?" Abishai said, "I will go
down with you."

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> So David and Abishai came to the people
by night: and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the place of the wagons,
with his spear stuck in the ground at his head; and Abner and the people
lay around him.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Then Abishai said to David, "God has
delivered up your enemy into your hand this day. Now therefore please
let me strike him with the spear to the earth at one stroke, and I will
not strike him the second time."

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> David said to Abishai, "Don't destroy
him; for who can put forth his hand against Yahweh's anointed, and be
guiltless?"

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> David said, "As Yahweh lives, Yahweh
will strike him; or his day shall come to die; or he shall go down into
battle and perish.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Yahweh forbid that I should put forth
my hand against Yahweh's anointed; but now please take the spear that is
at his head, and the jar of water, and let us go."

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> So David took the spear and the jar of
water from Saul's head; and they went away: and no man saw it, nor knew
it, neither did any awake; for they were all asleep, because a deep
sleep from Yahweh was fallen on them.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Then David went over to the other side,
and stood on the top of the mountain afar off; a great space being
between them;

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> and David cried to the people, and to
Abner the son of Ner, saying, "Don't you answer, Abner?" Then Abner
answered, "Who are you who cries to the king?"

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> David said to Abner, "Aren't you a man?
Who is like you in Israel? Why then have you not kept watch over your
lord, the king? For one of the people came in to destroy the king your
lord.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> This thing isn't good that you have
done. As Yahweh lives, you are worthy to die, because you have not kept
watch over your lord, Yahweh's anointed. Now see where the king's spear
is, and the jar of water that was at his head."

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Saul knew David's voice, and said, "Is
this your voice, my son David?" David said, "It is my voice, my lord, O
king."

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> He said, "Why does my lord pursue after
his servant? For what have I done? Or what evil is in my hand?

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Now therefore, please let my lord the
king hear the words of his servant. If it is so that Yahweh has stirred
you up against me, let him accept an offering. But if it is the children
of men, they are cursed before Yahweh; for they have driven me out this
day that I shouldn't cling to Yahweh's inheritance, saying, 'Go, serve
other gods!'

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Now therefore, don't let my blood fall
to the earth away from the presence of Yahweh; for the king of Israel
has come out to seek a flea, as when one hunts a partridge in the
mountains."

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> Then Saul said, "I have sinned. Return,
my son David; for I will no more do you harm, because my life was
precious in your eyes this day. Behold, I have played the fool, and have
erred exceedingly."

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> David answered, "Behold the spear, O
king! Then let one of the young men come over and get it.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> Yahweh will render to every man his
righteousness and his faithfulness; because Yahweh delivered you into my
hand today, and I wouldn't put forth my hand against Yahweh's anointed.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> Behold, as your life was respected this
day in my eyes, so let my life be respected in the eyes of Yahweh, and
let him deliver me out of all oppression."

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> Then Saul said to David, "You are
blessed, my son David. You shall both do mightily, and shall surely
prevail." So David went his way, and Saul returned to his place.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> David said in his heart, "I shall now
perish one day by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than
that I should escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul will
despair of me, to seek me any more in all the borders of Israel. So
shall I escape out of his hand."

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> David arose, and passed over, he and the
six hundred men who were with him, to Achish the son of Maoch, king of
Gath.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> David lived with Achish at Gath, he and
his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives,
Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> It was told Saul that David was fled to
Gath: and he sought no more again for him.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> David said to Achish, "If now I have
found favor in your eyes, let them give me a place in one of the cities
in the country, that I may dwell there. For why should your servant
dwell in the royal city with you?"

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: why
Ziklag pertains to the kings of Judah to this day.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> The number of the days that David lived
in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> David and his men went up, and made a
raid on the Geshurites, and the Girzites, and the Amalekites; for those
\[nations\] were the inhabitants of the land, who were of old, as you go
to Shur, even to the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> David struck the land, and saved neither
man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the cattle, and the
donkeys, and the camels, and the clothing; and he returned, and came to
Achish.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Achish said, "Against whom have you
made a raid today?" David said, "Against the South of Judah, against the
South of the Jerahmeelites, and against the South of the Kenites."

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> David saved neither man nor woman
alive, to bring them to Gath, saying, "Lest they should tell of us,
saying, 'So did David, and so has been his way all the while he has
lived in the country of the Philistines.'"

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Achish believed David, saying, "He has
made his people Israel utterly to abhor him. Therefore he shall be my
servant forever."

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> It happened in those days, that the
Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with
Israel. Achish said to David, "Know assuredly that you shall go out with
me in the army, you and your men."

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> David said to Achish, "Therefore you
shall know what your servant will do." Achish said to David, "Therefore
will I make you my bodyguard for ever."

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had
lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. Saul had
put away those who had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the
land.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> The Philistines gathered themselves
together, and came and encamped in Shunem: and Saul gathered all Israel
together, and they encamped in Gilboa.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> When Saul saw the army of the
Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> When Saul inquired of Yahweh, Yahweh
didn't answer him, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Then Saul said to his servants, "Seek me
a woman who has a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and inquire of
her." His servants said to him, "Behold, there is a woman who has a
familiar spirit at Endor."

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> Saul disguised himself, and put on other
clothing, and went, he and two men with him, and they came to the woman
by night: and he said, "Please divine to me by the familiar spirit, and
bring me up whoever I shall name to you."

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> The woman said to him, "Behold, you know
what Saul has done, how he has cut off those who have familiar spirits,
and the wizards, out of the land. Why then do you lay a snare for my
life, to cause me to die?"

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Saul swore to her by Yahweh, saying,
"As Yahweh lives, no punishment shall happen to you for this thing."

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Then the woman said, "Whom shall I
bring up to you?" He said, "Bring Samuel up for me."

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> When the woman saw Samuel, she cried
with a loud voice; and the woman spoke to Saul, saying, "Why have you
deceived me? For you are Saul!"

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> The king said to her, "Don't be afraid.
For what do you see?" The woman said to Saul, "I see a god coming up out
of the earth."

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> He said to her, "What does he look
like?" She said, "An old man comes up. He is covered with a robe." Saul
perceived that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground,
and did obeisance.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> Samuel said to Saul, "Why have you
disturbed me, to bring me up?" Saul answered, "I am very distressed; for
the Philistines make war against me, and God has departed from me, and
answers me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams. Therefore I have
called you, that you may make known to me what I shall do."

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Samuel said, "Why then do you ask of
me, since Yahweh has departed from you and has become your adversary?

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Yahweh has done to you as he spoke by
me. Yahweh has torn the kingdom out of your hand, and given it to your
neighbor, even to David.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Because you didn't obey the voice of
Yahweh, and didn't execute his fierce wrath on Amalek, therefore Yahweh
has done this thing to you this day.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Moreover Yahweh will deliver Israel
also with you into the hand of the Philistines; and tomorrow you and
your sons will be with me. Yahweh will deliver the army of Israel also
into the hand of the Philistines."

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Then Saul fell immediately his full
length on the earth, and was terrified, because of the words of Samuel.
There was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor
all the night.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> The woman came to Saul, and saw that he
was very troubled, and said to him, "Behold, your handmaid has listened
to your voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have listened to
your words which you spoke to me.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Now therefore, please listen also to
the voice of your handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before you;
and eat, that you may have strength, when you go on your way."

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> But he refused, and said, I will not
eat. But his servants, together with the woman, constrained him; and he
listened to their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat on the bed.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> The woman had a fattened calf in the
house. She hurried and killed it; and she took flour, and kneaded it,
and baked unleavened bread of it.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> She brought it before Saul, and before
his servants; and they ate. Then they rose up, and went away that night.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Now the Philistines gathered together all
their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites encamped by the spring which
is in Jezreel.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> The lords of the Philistines passed on by
hundreds, and by thousands; and David and his men passed on in the rear
with Achish.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> Then the princes of the Philistines said,
"What about these Hebrews?" Achish said to the princes of the
Philistines, "Isn't this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel,
who has been with me these days, or rather these years, and I have found
no fault in him since he fell away to this day?"

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> But the princes of the Philistines were
angry with him; and the princes of the Philistines said to him, "Make
the man return, that he may go back to his place where you have
appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the
battle he become an adversary to us. For with what should this fellow
reconcile himself to his lord? Should it not be with the heads of these
men?

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Is not this David, of whom they sang one
to another in dances, saying, 'Saul has slain his thousands, David his
ten thousands?'"

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> Then Achish called David, and said to
him, "As Yahweh lives, you have been upright, and your going out and
your coming in with me in the army is good in my sight; for I have not
found evil in you since the day of your coming to me to this day.
Nevertheless, the lords don't favor you.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> Therefore now return, and go in peace,
that you not displease the lords of the Philistines."

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> David said to Achish, "But what have I
done? What have you found in your servant so long as I have been before
you to this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my
lord the king?"

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Achish answered David, "I know that you
are good in my sight, as an angel of God. Notwithstanding the princes of
the Philistines have said, 'He shall not go up with us to the battle.'

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Therefore now rise up early in the
morning with the servants of your lord who have come with you; and as
soon as you are up early in the morning, and have light, depart."

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> So David rose up early, he and his men,
to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines.
The Philistines went up to Jezreel.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> It happened, when David and his men were
come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had made a raid on
the South, and on Ziklag, and had struck Ziklag, and burned it with
fire,

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> and had taken captive the women and all
who were therein, both small and great. They didn't kill any, but
carried them off, and went their way.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> When David and his men came to the city,
behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and
their daughters, were taken captive.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Then David and the people who were with
him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to
weep.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> David's two wives were taken captive,
Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> David was greatly distressed; for the
people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was
grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David
strengthened himself in Yahweh his God.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> David said to Abiathar the priest, the
son of Ahimelech, "Please bring me here the ephod." Abiathar brought the
ephod to David.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> David inquired of Yahweh, saying, "If I
pursue after this troop, shall I overtake them?" He answered him,
"Pursue; for you shall surely overtake them, and shall without fail
recover all."

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> So David went, he and the six hundred men
who were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those who were
left behind stayed.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> But David pursued, he and four hundred
men; for two hundred stayed behind, who were so faint that they couldn't
go over the brook Besor.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> They found an Egyptian in the field,
and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he ate; and they gave
him water to drink.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> They gave him a piece of a cake of
figs, and two clusters of raisins. when he had eaten, his spirit came
again to him; for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days
and three nights.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> David asked him, "To whom do you
belong? Where are you from?" He said, "I am a young man of Egypt,
servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days ago I
fell sick.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> We made a raid on the South of the
Cherethites, and on that which belongs to Judah, and on the South of
Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire."

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> David said to him, "Will you bring me
down to this troop?" He said, "Swear to me by God that you will neither
kill me, nor deliver me up into the hands of my master, and I will bring
you down to this troop."

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> When he had brought him down, behold,
they were spread around over all the ground, eating, drinking, and
dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the
land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> David struck them from the twilight
even to the evening of the next day. Not a man of them escaped from
there, except four hundred young men, who rode on camels and fled.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> David recovered all that the Amalekites
had taken; and David rescued his two wives.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> There was nothing lacking to them,
neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor
anything that they had taken to them. David brought back all.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> David took all the flocks and the
herds, \[which\] they drove before those \[other\] livestock, and said,
"This is David's spoil."

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> David came to the two hundred men, who
were so faint that they could not follow David, whom also they had made
to stay at the brook Besor; and they went forth to meet David, and to
meet the people who were with him. When David came near to the people,
he greeted them.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Then all the wicked men and base
fellows, of those who went with David, answered and said, "Because they
didn't go with us, we will not give them anything of the spoil that we
have recovered, except to every man his wife and his children, that he
may lead them away, and depart."

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Then David said, "You shall not do so,
my brothers, with that which Yahweh has given to us, who has preserved
us, and delivered the troop that came against us into our hand.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> Who will listen to you in this matter?
For as his share is who goes down to the battle, so shall his share be
who tarries by the baggage: they shall share alike."

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> It was so from that day forward, that
he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel to this day.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> When David came to Ziklag, he sent of
the spoil to the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, "Behold,
a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of Yahweh."

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> He sent it to those who were in Bethel,
and to those who were in Ramoth of the South, and to those who were in
Jattir,

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> and to those who were in Aroer, and to
those who were in Siphmoth, and to those who were in Eshtemoa,

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> and to those who were in Racal, and to
those who were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to those who were
in the cities of the Kenites,

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> and to those who were in Hormah, and to
those who were in Borashan, and to those who were in Athach,

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> and to those who were in Hebron, and to
all the places where David himself and his men used to stay.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> Now the Philistines fought against
Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell
down slain on Mount Gilboa.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> The Philistines followed hard on Saul and
on his sons; and the Philistines killed Jonathan, and Abinadab, and
Malchishua, the sons of Saul.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> The battle went hard against Saul, and
the archers overtook him; and he was greatly distressed by reason of the
archers.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Then Saul said to his armor bearer, "Draw
your sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised come
and thrust me through, and abuse me!" But his armor bearer would not;
for he was terrified. Therefore Saul took his sword, and fell on it.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> When his armor bearer saw that Saul was
dead, he likewise fell on his sword, and died with him.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> So Saul died, and his three sons, and his
armor bearer, and all his men, that same day together.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> When the men of Israel who were on the
other side of the valley, and those who were beyond the Jordan, saw that
the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they
forsook the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and lived in
them.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> It happened on the next day, when the
Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three
sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> They cut off his head, and stripped off
his armor, and sent into the land of the Philistines all around, to
carry the news to the house of their idols, and to the people.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> They put his armor in the house of the
Ashtaroth; and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth Shan.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> When the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead
heard concerning him that which the Philistines had done to Saul,

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> all the valiant men arose, and went all
night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the
wall of Beth Shan; and they came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> They took their bones, and buried them
under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Samuel](sa2.md)
