[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sa1)  [Next](kg1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 2 Samuel

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> It happened after the death of Saul, when
David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had
stayed two days in Ziklag;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> it happened on the third day, that behold,
a man came out of the camp from Saul, with his clothes torn, and earth
on his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the
earth, and did obeisance.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> David said to him, "Where do you come
from?" He said to him, "I have escaped out of the camp of Israel."

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> David said to him, "How did it go? Please
tell me." He answered, "The people have fled from the battle, and many
of the people also have fallen and are dead; and Saul and Jonathan his
son are dead also."

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> David said to the young man who told him,
"How do you know that Saul and Jonathan his son are dead?"

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> The young man who told him said, "As I
happened by chance on Mount Gilboa, behold, Saul was leaning on his
spear; and behold, the chariots and the horsemen followed hard after
him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> When he looked behind him, he saw me, and
called to me. I answered, 'Here I am.'

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> He said to me, 'Who are you?' I answered
him, 'I am an Amalekite.'

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> He said to me, 'Please stand beside me, and
kill me; for anguish has taken hold of me, because my life is yet whole
in me.'

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> So I stood beside him, and killed him,
because I was sure that he could not live after that he had fallen. I
took the crown that was on his head, and the bracelet that was on his
arm, and have brought them here to my lord."

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then David took hold on his clothes, and
tore them; and likewise all the men who were with him.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> They mourned, and wept, and fasted until
evening, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of
Yahweh, and for the house of Israel; because they were fallen by the
sword.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> David said to the young man who told him,
"Where are you from?" He answered, "I am the son of a foreigner, an
Amalekite."

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> David said to him, "How were you not
afraid to put forth your hand to destroy Yahweh's anointed?"

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> David called one of the young men, and
said, "Go near, and fall on him." He struck him, so that he died.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> David said to him, "Your blood be on your
head; for your mouth has testified against you, saying, 'I have slain
Yahweh's anointed.'"

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> David lamented with this lamentation over
Saul and over Jonathan his son

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> (and he commanded them to teach the
children of Judah \[the song of\] the bow: behold, it is written in the
book of Jashar):

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> "Your glory, Israel, is slain on your
high places! How the mighty have fallen!

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Don't tell it in Gath. Don't publish it
in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> You mountains of Gilboa, let there be no
dew nor rain on you, neither fields of offerings; For there the shield
of the mighty was vilely cast away, The shield of Saul was not anointed
with oil.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> From the blood of the slain, from the fat
of the mighty, Jonathan's bow didn't turn back. Saul's sword didn't
return empty.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Saul and Jonathan were lovely and
pleasant in their lives. In their death, they were not divided. They
were swifter than eagles. They were stronger than lions.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> You daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
who clothed you in scarlet delicately, who put ornaments of gold on your
clothing.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> How are the mighty fallen in the midst of
the battle! Jonathan is slain on your high places.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> I am distressed for you, my brother
Jonathan. You have been very pleasant to me. Your love to me was
wonderful, passing the love of women.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> How are the mighty fallen, and the
weapons of war perished!"

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> It happened after this, that David inquired
of Yahweh, saying, "Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah?"
Yahweh said to him, "Go up." David said, "Where shall I go up?" He said,
"To Hebron."

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> So David went up there, and his two wives
also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the
Carmelite.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> David brought up his men who were with him,
every man with his household. They lived in the cities of Hebron.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> The men of Judah came, and there they
anointed David king over the house of Judah. They told David, saying,
"The men of Jabesh Gilead were those who buried Saul."

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh
Gilead, and said to them, "Blessed are you by Yahweh, that you have
shown this kindness to your lord, even to Saul, and have buried him.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Now may Yahweh show loving kindness and
truth to you. I also will reward you for this kindness, because you have
done this thing.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Now therefore let your hands be strong, and
be valiant; for Saul your lord is dead, and also the house of Judah have
anointed me king over them."

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Now Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's
army, had taken Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to
Mahanaim;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> and he made him king over Gilead, and over
the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin,
and over all Israel.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Ishbosheth, Saul's son, was forty years
old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years. But
the house of Judah followed David.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The time that David was king in Hebron
over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of
Ishbosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants
of David, went out, and met them by the pool of Gibeon; and they sat
down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other
side of the pool.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Abner said to Joab, "Please let the young
men arise and play before us!" Joab said, "Let them arise!"

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then they arose and went over by number:
twelve for Benjamin, and for Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of
the servants of David.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> They caught everyone his fellow by the
head, and \[thrust\] his sword in his fellow's side; so they fell down
together: therefore that place was called Helkath Hazzurim, which is in
Gibeon.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> The battle was very severe that day: and
Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> The three sons of Zeruiah were there,
Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of foot as a wild
gazelle.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going
he didn't turn to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Then Abner looked behind him, and said,
"Is it you, Asahel?" He answered, "It is I."

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Abner said to him, "Turn aside to your
right hand or to your left, and grab one of the young men, and take his
armor." But Asahel would not turn aside from following him.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Abner said again to Asahel, "Turn aside
from following me. Why should I strike you to the ground? How then
should I hold up my face to Joab your brother?"

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> However he refused to turn aside.
Therefore Abner with the back end of the spear struck him in the body,
so that the spear came out behind him; and he fell down there, and died
in the same place. It happened, that as many as came to the place where
Asahel fell down and died stood still.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But Joab and Abishai pursued after Abner:
and the sun went down when they were come to the hill of Ammah, that
lies before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> The children of Benjamin gathered
themselves together after Abner, and became one band, and stood on the
top of a hill.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> Then Abner called to Joab, and said,
"Shall the sword devour forever? Don't you know that it will be
bitterness in the latter end? How long shall it be then, before you ask
the people to return from following their brothers?"

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Joab said, "As God lives, if you had not
spoken, surely then in the morning the people would have gone away, and
not each followed his brother."

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> So Joab blew the trumpet; and all the
people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought
they any more.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Abner and his men went all that night
through the Arabah; and they passed over the Jordan, and went through
all Bithron, and came to Mahanaim.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Joab returned from following Abner: and
when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David's
servants nineteen men and Asahel.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> But the servants of David had struck of
Benjamin, and of Abner's men, \[so that\] three hundred sixty men died.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> They took up Asahel, and buried him in
the tomb of his father, which was in Bethlehem. Joab and his men went
all night, and the day broke on them at Hebron.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now there was long war between the house of
Saul and the house of David: and David grew stronger and stronger, but
the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> To David were sons born in Hebron: and his
firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> and his second, Chileab, of Abigail the
wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah
the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> and the fourth, Adonijah the son of
Haggith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> and the sixth, Ithream, of Eglah, David's
wife. These were born to David in Hebron.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> It happened, while there was war between
the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong
in the house of Saul.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Now Saul had a concubine, whose name was
Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and \[Ishbosheth\] said to Abner, "Why
have you gone in to my father's concubine?"

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Then was Abner very angry for the words of
Ishbosheth, and said, "Am I a dog's head that belongs to Judah? Today I
show kindness to the house of Saul your father, to his brothers, and to
his friends, and have not delivered you into the hand of David; and yet
you charge me this day with a fault concerning this woman!

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> God do so to Abner, and more also, if, as
Yahweh has sworn to David, I don't do even so to him;

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> to transfer the kingdom from the house of
Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from
Dan even to Beersheba."

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> He could not answer Abner another word,
because he feared him.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Abner sent messengers to David on his
behalf, saying, "Whose is the land?" and saying, "Make your alliance
with me, and behold, my hand shall be with you, to bring all Israel
around to you."

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> He said, "Good; I will make a treaty with
you; but one thing I require of you. That is, you shall not see my face,
unless you first bring Michal, Saul's daughter, when you come to see my
face."

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> David sent messengers to Ishbosheth,
Saul's son, saying, "Deliver me my wife Michal, whom I pledged to be
married to me for one hundred foreskins of the Philistines."

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Ishbosheth sent, and took her from her
husband, even from Paltiel the son of Laish.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Her husband went with her, weeping as he
went, and followed her to Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, "Go! Return!"
and he returned.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Abner had communication with the elders
of Israel, saying, "In times past, you sought for David to be king over
you.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Now then do it; for Yahweh has spoken of
David, saying, 'By the hand of my servant David, I will save my people
Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all
their enemies.'"

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Abner also spoke in the ears of Benjamin:
and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that
seemed good to Israel, and to the whole house of Benjamin.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> So Abner came to David to Hebron, and
twenty men with him. David made Abner and the men who were with him a
feast.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Abner said to David, "I will arise and
go, and will gather all Israel to my lord the king, that they may make a
covenant with you, and that you may reign over all that your soul
desires." David sent Abner away; and he went in peace.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Behold, the servants of David and Joab
came from a foray, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was
not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in
peace.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> When Joab and all the army who was with
him had come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the
king, and he has sent him away, and he is gone in peace.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Then Joab came to the king, and said,
"What have you done? Behold, Abner came to you. Why is it that you have
sent him away, and he is quite gone?

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> You know Abner the son of Ner, that he
came to deceive you, and to know your going out and your coming in, and
to know all that you do."

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> When Joab had come out from David, he
sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from the well of
Sirah; but David didn't know it.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> When Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab
took him aside into the midst of the gate to speak with him quietly, and
struck him there in the body, so that he died, for the blood of Asahel
his brother.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Afterward, when David heard it, he said,
"I and my kingdom are guiltless before Yahweh forever of the blood of
Abner the son of Ner.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Let it fall on the head of Joab, and on
all his father's house. Let there not fail from the house of Joab one
who has an issue, or who is a leper, or who leans on a staff, or who
falls by the sword, or who lacks bread."

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> So Joab and Abishai his brother killed
Abner, because he had killed their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the
battle.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> David said to Joab, and to all the people
who were with him, Tear your clothes, and clothe yourselves with
sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. King David followed the bier.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> They buried Abner in Hebron: and the king
lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and all the people
wept.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> The king lamented for Abner, and said,
"Should Abner die as a fool dies?

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Your hands were not bound, nor your feet
put into fetters. As a man falls before the children of iniquity, so you
fell." All the people wept again over him.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> All the people came to cause David to eat
bread while it was yet day; but David swore, saying, "God do so to me,
and more also, if I taste bread, or anything else, until the sun goes
down."

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> All the people took notice of it, and it
pleased them; as whatever the king did pleased all the people.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> So all the people and all Israel
understood that day that it was not of the king to kill Abner the son of
Ner.

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> The king said to his servants, "Don't you
know that there a prince and a great man has fallen this day in Israel?

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> I am this day weak, though anointed king;
and these men the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me. May Yahweh reward
the evildoer according to his wickedness."

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> When \[Ishbosheth\], Saul's son, heard that
Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands became feeble, and all the
Israelites were troubled.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> \[Ishbosheth\], Saul's son, \[had\] two men
who were captains of bands: the name of the one was Baanah, and the name
of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the children
of Benjamin (for Beeroth also is reckoned to Benjamin:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> and the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and
have lived as foreigners there until this day).

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Now Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son who was
lame of his feet. He was five years old when the news came of Saul and
Jonathan out of Jezreel; and his nurse took him up, and fled: and it
happened, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. His
name was Mephibosheth.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> The sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab
and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of
Ishbosheth, as he took his rest at noon.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> They came there into the midst of the
house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they struck him in
the body: and Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Now when they came into the house, as he
lay on his bed in his bedroom, they struck him, and killed him, and
beheaded him, and took his head, and went by the way of the Arabah all
night.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> They brought the head of Ishbosheth to
David to Hebron, and said to the king, "Behold, the head of Ishbosheth,
the son of Saul, your enemy, who sought your life! Yahweh has avenged my
lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed."

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> David answered Rechab and Baanah his
brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said to them, "As Yahweh
lives, who has redeemed my soul out of all adversity,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> when someone told me, 'Behold, Saul is
dead,' thinking to have brought good news, I took hold of him, and
killed him in Ziklag, which was the reward I gave him for his news.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> How much more, when wicked men have slain
a righteous person in his own house on his bed, shall I not now require
his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?"

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> David commanded his young men, and they
killed them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up
beside the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ishbosheth, and
buried it in the grave of Abner in Hebron.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then came all the tribes of Israel to David
to Hebron, and spoke, saying, "Behold, we are your bone and your flesh.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> In times past, when Saul was king over us,
it was you who led out and brought in Israel. Yahweh said to you, 'You
shall be shepherd of my people Israel, and you shall be prince over
Israel.'"

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> So all the elders of Israel came to the
king to Hebron; and king David made a covenant with them in Hebron
before Yahweh; and they anointed David king over Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> David was thirty years old when he began to
reign, and he reigned forty years.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years
and six months; and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all
Israel and Judah.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The king and his men went to Jerusalem
against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, who spoke to David,
saying, "Unless you take away the blind and the lame, you shall not come
in here;" thinking, "David can't come in here."

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Nevertheless David took the stronghold of
Zion; the same is the city of David.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> David said on that day, "Whoever strikes
the Jebusites, let him get up to the watercourse, and strike the lame
and the blind, who are hated by David's soul." Therefore they say, "The
blind and the lame can't come into the house."

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> David lived in the stronghold, and called
it the city of David. David built around from Millo and inward.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> David grew greater and greater; for
Yahweh, the God of Armies, was with him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to
David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons; and they built David
a house.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> David perceived that Yahweh had
established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom
for his people Israel's sake.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> David took him more concubines and wives
out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron; and there were yet sons
and daughters born to David.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> These are the names of those who were
born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and
Japhia,

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> When the Philistines heard that they had
anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek
David; and David heard of it, and went down to the stronghold.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Now the Philistines had come and spread
themselves in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> David inquired of Yahweh, saying, "Shall
I go up against the Philistines? Will you deliver them into my hand?"
Yahweh said to David, "Go up; for I will certainly deliver the
Philistines into your hand."

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> David came to Baal Perazim, and David
struck them there; and he said, "Yahweh has broken my enemies before me,
like the breach of waters." Therefore he called the name of that place
Baal Perazim.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> They left their images there; and David
and his men took them away.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The Philistines came up yet again, and
spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> When David inquired of Yahweh, he said,
"You shall not go up. Circle around behind them, and attack them over
against the mulberry trees.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> It shall be, when you hear the sound of
marching in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then you shall stir
yourself up; for then Yahweh has gone out before you to strike the army
of the Philistines."

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> David did so, as Yahweh commanded him,
and struck the Philistines from Geba until you come to Gezer.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> David again gathered together all the
chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> David arose, and went with all the people
who were with him, from Baale Judah, to bring up from there the ark of
God, which is called by the Name, even the name of Yahweh of Armies who
sits \[above\] the cherubim.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> They set the ark of God on a new cart, and
brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in the hill: and Uzzah
and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drove the new cart.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> They brought it out of the house of
Abinadab, which was in the hill, with the ark of God: and Ahio went
before the ark.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> David and all the house of Israel played
before Yahweh with all kinds of \[instruments made of\] fir wood, and
with harps, and with stringed instruments, and with tambourines, and
with castanets, and with cymbals.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> When they came to the threshing floor of
Nacon, Uzzah put forth \[his hand\] to the ark of God, and took hold of
it; for the cattle stumbled.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> The anger of Yahweh was kindled against
Uzzah; and God struck him there for his error; and there he died by the
ark of God.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> David was displeased, because Yahweh had
broken forth on Uzzah; and he called that place Perez Uzzah, to this
day.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> David was afraid of Yahweh that day; and he
said, "How shall the ark of Yahweh come to me?"

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> So David would not move the ark of Yahweh
to be with him in the city of David; but David carried it aside into the
house of Obed-Edom the Gittite.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> The ark of Yahweh remained in the house
of Obed-Edom the Gittite three months: and Yahweh blessed Obed-Edom, and
all his house.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> It was told king David, saying, "Yahweh
has blessed the house of Obed-Edom, and all that pertains to him,
because of the ark of God." David went and brought up the ark of God
from the house of Obed-Edom into the city of David with joy.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> It was so, that, when those who bore the
ark of Yahweh had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fattened
calf.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> David danced before Yahweh with all his
might; and David was clothed in a linen ephod.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> So David and all the house of Israel
brought up the ark of Yahweh with shouting, and with the sound of the
trumpet.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> It was so, as the ark of Yahweh came into
the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the
window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before Yahweh; and she
despised him in her heart.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> They brought in the ark of Yahweh, and
set it in its place, in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for
it; and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> When David had made an end of offering
the burnt offering and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the
name of Yahweh of Armies.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> He dealt among all the people, even among
the whole multitude of Israel, both to men and women, to everyone a cake
of bread, and a portion \[of flesh\], and a cake of raisins. So all the
people departed everyone to his house.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Then David returned to bless his
household. Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said,
"How glorious the king of Israel was today, who uncovered himself today
in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain fellows
shamelessly uncovers himself!"

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> David said to Michal, "It was before
Yahweh, who chose me above your father, and above all his house, to
appoint me prince over the people of Yahweh, over Israel. Therefore will
I celebrate before Yahweh.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> I will be yet more vile than this, and
will be base in my own sight. But of the handmaids of whom you have
spoken, they shall honor me."

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Michal the daughter of Saul had no child
to the day of her death.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> It happened, when the king lived in his
house, and Yahweh had given him rest from all his enemies all around,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> that the king said to Nathan the prophet,
"See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells within
curtains."

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Nathan said to the king, "Go, do all that
is in your heart; for Yahweh is with you."

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> It happened the same night, that the word
of Yahweh came to Nathan, saying,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> "Go and tell my servant David, 'Thus says
Yahweh, "Shall you build me a house for me to dwell in?

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For I have not lived in a house since the
day that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this
day, but have moved around in a tent and in a tabernacle.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> In all places in which I have walked with
all the children of Israel, did I say a word to any of the tribes of
Israel, whom I commanded to be shepherd of my people Israel, saying,
'Why have you not built me a house of cedar?'"'

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Now therefore you shall tell my servant
David this, 'Thus says Yahweh of Armies, "I took you from the sheep pen,
from following the sheep, that you should be prince over my people, over
Israel.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I have been with you wherever you went, and
have cut off all your enemies from before you. I will make you a great
name, like the name of the great ones who are in the earth.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> I will appoint a place for my people
Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and
be moved no more; neither shall the children of wickedness afflict them
any more, as at the first,

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> and as from the day that I commanded
judges to be over my people Israel. I will cause you to rest from all
your enemies. Moreover Yahweh tells you that Yahweh will make you a
house.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> When your days are fulfilled, and you
shall sleep with your fathers, I will set up your seed after you, who
shall proceed out of your bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> He shall build a house for my name, and I
will establish the throne of his kingdom forever.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I will be his father, and he shall be my
son. If he commits iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and
with the stripes of the children of men;

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> but my loving kindness shall not depart
from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before you.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Your house and your kingdom shall be made
sure forever before you. Your throne shall be established forever."'"

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> According to all these words, and
according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Then David the king went in, and sat
before Yahweh; and he said, "Who am I, Lord Yahweh, and what is my
house, that you have brought me thus far?

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> This was yet a small thing in your eyes,
Lord Yahweh; but you have spoken also of your servant's house for a
great while to come; and this after the way of men, Lord Yahweh!

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> What more can David say to you? For you
know your servant, Lord Yahweh.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For your word's sake, and according to
your own heart, you have worked all this greatness, to make your servant
know it.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Therefore you are great, Yahweh God. For
there is none like you, neither is there any God besides you, according
to all that we have heard with our ears.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> What one nation in the earth is like your
people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem to himself for a
people, and to make him a name, and to do great things for you, and
awesome things for your land, before your people, whom you redeem to you
out of Egypt, \[from\] the nations and their gods?

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> You established for yourself your people
Israel to be a people to you forever; and you, Yahweh, became their God.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Now, Yahweh God, the word that you have
spoken concerning your servant, and concerning his house, confirm it
forever, and do as you have spoken.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> Let your name be magnified forever,
saying, 'Yahweh of Armies is God over Israel; and the house of your
servant David shall be established before you.'

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> For you, Yahweh of Armies, the God of
Israel, have revealed to your servant, saying, 'I will build you a
house.' Therefore your servant has found in his heart to pray this
prayer to you.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> "Now, O Lord Yahweh, you are God, and
your words are truth, and you have promised this good thing to your
servant.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Now therefore let it please you to bless
the house of your servant, that it may continue forever before you; for
you, Lord Yahweh, have spoken it. Let the house of your servant be
blessed forever with your blessing."

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> After this it happened that David struck
the Philistines, and subdued them: and David took the bridle of the
mother city out of the hand of the Philistines.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> He struck Moab, and measured them with the
line, making them to lie down on the ground; and he measured two lines
to put to death, and one full line to keep alive. The Moabites became
servants to David, and brought tribute.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> David struck also Hadadezer the son of
Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his dominion at the River.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> David took from him one thousand seven
hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen: and David hamstrung all
the chariot horses, but reserved of them for one hundred chariots.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> When the Syrians of Damascus came to help
Hadadezer king of Zobah, David struck of the Syrians two and twenty
thousand men.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Then David put garrisons in Syria of
Damascus; and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought tribute.
Yahweh gave victory to David wherever he went.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> David took the shields of gold that were on
the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> From Betah and from Berothai, cities of
Hadadezer, king David took exceeding much brass.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> When Toi king of Hamath heard that David
had struck all the army of Hadadezer,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> then Toi sent Joram his son to king
David, to Greet him, and to bless him, because he had fought against
Hadadezer and struck him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. \[Joram\]
brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of
brass:

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> These also did king David dedicate to
Yahweh, with the silver and gold that he dedicated of all the nations
which he subdued;

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> of Syria, and of Moab, and of the
children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the
spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> David earned a reputation when he
returned from smiting the Syrians in the Valley of Salt, even eighteen
thousand men.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> He put garrisons in Edom; throughout all
Edom put he garrisons, and all the Edomites became servants to David.
Yahweh gave victory to David wherever he went.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> David reigned over all Israel; and David
executed justice and righteousness to all his people.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the
army; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder;

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and
Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests; and Seraiah was scribe;

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada \[was
over\] the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief
ministers.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> David said, "Is there yet any who is left
of the house of Saul, that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's sake?"

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> There was of the house of Saul a servant
whose name was Ziba, and they called him to David; and the king said to
him, "Are you Ziba?" He said, "Your servant is he."

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> The king said, "Is there not yet any of the
house of Saul, that I may show the kindness of God to him?" Ziba said to
the king, "Jonathan has yet a son, who is lame of his feet."

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> The king said to him, "Where is he?" Ziba
said to the king, "Behold, he is in the house of Machir the son of
Ammiel, in Lo Debar."

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Then king David sent, and fetched him out
of the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, from Lo Debar.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son
of Saul, came to David, and fell on his face, and did obeisance. David
said, "Mephibosheth." He answered, "Behold, your servant!"

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> David said to him, "Don't be afraid of him;
for I will surely show you kindness for Jonathan your father's sake, and
will restore to you all the land of Saul your father. You shall eat
bread at my table continually."

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> He did obeisance, and said, "What is your
servant, that you should look on such a dead dog as I am?"

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's
servant, and said to him, "All that pertained to Saul and to all his
house have I given to your master's son.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> You shall till the land for him, you, and
your sons, and your servants; and you shall bring in \[the fruits\],
that your master's son may have bread to eat: but Mephibosheth your
master's son shall eat bread always at my table." Now Ziba had fifteen
sons and twenty servants.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Then Ziba said to the king, "According to
all that my lord the king commands his servant, so your shall servant
do." So Mephibosheth ate at the king's table, like one of the king's
sons.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name
was Mica. All that lived in the house of Ziba were servants to
Mephibosheth.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> So Mephibosheth lived in Jerusalem; for
he ate continually at the king's table. He was lame in both his feet.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> It happened after this, that the king of
the children of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his place.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> David said, "I will show kindness to
Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father showed kindness to me." So David
sent by his servants to comfort him concerning his father. David's
servants came into the land of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> But the princes of the children of Ammon
said to Hanun their lord, "Do you think that David honors your father,
in that he has sent comforters to you? Hasn't David sent his servants to
you to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?"

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> So Hanun took David's servants, and
shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in
the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> When they told it to David, he sent to
meet them; for the men were greatly ashamed. The king said, "Wait at
Jericho until your beards have grown, and then return."

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> When the children of Ammon saw that they
were become odious to David, the children of Ammon sent and hired the
Syrians of Beth Rehob, and the Syrians of Zobah, twenty thousand
footmen, and the king of Maacah with one thousand men, and the men of
Tob twelve thousand men.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> When David heard of it, he sent Joab, and
all the army of the mighty men.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The children of Ammon came out, and put
the battle in array at the entrance of the gate: and the Syrians of
Zobah and of Rehob, and the men of Tob and Maacah, were by themselves in
the field.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Now when Joab saw that the battle was set
against him before and behind, he chose of all the choice men of Israel,
and put them in array against the Syrians:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> The rest of the people he committed
into the hand of Abishai his brother; and he put them in array against
the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> He said, "If the Syrians are too strong
for me, then you shall help me; but if the children of Ammon are too
strong for you, then I will come and help you.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Be courageous, and let us be strong for
our people, and for the cities of our God; and Yahweh do that which
seems good to him."

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> So Joab and the people who were with
him drew near to the battle against the Syrians: and they fled before
him.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> When the children of Ammon saw that the
Syrians had fled, they likewise fled before Abishai, and entered into
the city. Then Joab returned from the children of Ammon, and came to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> When the Syrians saw that they were
defeated by Israel, they gathered themselves together.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Hadadezer sent, and brought out the
Syrians who were beyond the River: and they came to Helam, with Shobach
the captain of the army of Hadadezer at their head.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> It was told David; and he gathered all
Israel together, and passed over the Jordan, and came to Helam. The
Syrians set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> The Syrians fled before Israel; and
David killed of the Syrians \[the men of\] seven hundred chariots, and
forty thousand horsemen, and struck Shobach the captain of their army,
so that he died there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> When all the kings who were servants to
Hadadezer saw that they were defeated before Israel, they made peace
with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children
of Ammon any more.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> It happened, at the return of the year,
at the time when kings go out \[to battle\], that David sent Joab, and
his servants with him, and all Israel; and they destroyed the children
of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David stayed at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> It happened at evening, that David arose
from off his bed, and walked on the roof of the king's house: and from
the roof he saw a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful to
look on.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> David sent and inquired after the woman.
One said, "Isn't this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of
Uriah the Hittite?"

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> David sent messengers, and took her; and
she came in to him, and he lay with her (for she was purified from her
uncleanness); and she returned to her house.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The woman conceived; and she sent and
told David, and said, "I am with child."

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> David sent to Joab, \[saying\], "Send me
Uriah the Hittite." Joab sent Uriah to David.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> When Uriah was come to him, David asked
of him how Joab did, and how the people fared, and how the war
prospered.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> David said to Uriah, "Go down to your
house, and wash your feet." Uriah departed out of the king's house, and
a gift from the king was sent after him.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But Uriah slept at the door of the king's
house with all the servants of his lord, and didn't go down to his
house.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> When they had told David, saying,
"Uriah didn't go down to his house," David said to Uriah, "Haven't you
come from a journey? Why didn't you go down to your house?"

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Uriah said to David, "The ark, Israel,
and Judah, are staying in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of
my lord, are encamped in the open field. Shall I then go into my house
to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As you live, and as your
soul lives, I will not do this thing!"

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> David said to Uriah, "Stay here today
also, and tomorrow I will let you depart." So Uriah stayed in Jerusalem
that day, and the next day.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> When David had called him, he ate and
drink before him; and he made him drunk. At evening, he went out to lie
on his bed with the servants of his lord, but didn't go down to his
house.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> It happened in the morning, that David
wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He wrote in the letter, saying, "Send
Uriah to the forefront of the hottest battle, and retreat from him, that
he may be struck, and die."

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> It happened, when Joab kept watch on
the city, that he assigned Uriah to the place where he knew that valiant
men were.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> The men of the city went out, and
fought with Joab. Some of the people fell, even of the servants of
David; and Uriah the Hittite died also.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Then Joab sent and told David all the
things concerning the war;

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> and he commanded the messenger, saying,
"When you have finished telling all the things concerning the war to the
king,

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> it shall be that, if the king's wrath
arise, and he asks you, 'Why did you go so near to the city to fight?
Didn't you know that they would shoot from the wall?

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> who struck Abimelech the son of
Jerubbesheth? Didn't a woman cast an upper millstone on him from the
wall, so that he died at Thebez? Why did you go so near the wall?' then
you shall say, 'Your servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.'"

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> So the messenger went, and came and
showed David all that Joab had sent him for.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The messenger said to David, "The men
prevailed against us, and came out to us into the field, and we were on
them even to the entrance of the gate.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> The shooters shot at your servants from
off the wall; and some of the king's servants are dead, and your servant
Uriah the Hittite is dead also."

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Then David said to the messenger, "Thus
you shall tell Joab, 'Don't let this thing displease you, for the sword
devours one as well as another. Make your battle stronger against the
city, and overthrow it.' Encourage him."

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> When the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah
her husband was dead, she made lamentation for her husband.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> When the mourning was past, David sent
and took her home to his house, and she became his wife, and bore him a
son. But the thing that David had done displeased Yahweh.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Yahweh sent Nathan to David. He came to
him, and said to him, "There were two men in one city; the one rich, and
the other poor.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> The rich man had very many flocks and
herds,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> but the poor man had nothing, except one
little ewe lamb, which he had bought and raised. It grew up together
with him, and with his children. It ate of his own food, drank of his
own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was to him like a daughter.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A traveler came to the rich man, and he
spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dress for the
wayfaring man who had come to him, but took the poor man's lamb, and
dressed it for the man who had come to him."

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> David's anger was greatly kindled against
the man, and he said to Nathan, "As Yahweh lives, the man who has done
this is worthy to die!

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> He shall restore the lamb fourfold,
because he did this thing, and because he had no pity!"

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Nathan said to David, "You are the man.
This is what Yahweh, the God of Israel, says: 'I anointed you king over
Israel, and I delivered you out of the hand of Saul.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> I gave you your master's house, and your
master's wives into your bosom, and gave you the house of Israel and of
Judah; and if that would have been too little, I would have added to you
many more such things.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Why have you despised the word of Yahweh,
to do that which is evil in his sight? You have struck Uriah the Hittite
with the sword, and have taken his wife to be your wife, and have slain
him with the sword of the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Now therefore the sword will never
depart from your house, because you have despised me, and have taken the
wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your wife.'

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> "This is what Yahweh says: 'Behold, I
will raise up evil against you out of your own house; and I will take
your wives before your eyes, and give them to your neighbor, and he will
lie with your wives in the sight of this sun.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> For you did it secretly, but I will do
this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.'"

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> David said to Nathan, "I have sinned
against Yahweh." Nathan said to David, "Yahweh also has put away your
sin. You will not die.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> However, because by this deed you have
given great occasion to Yahweh's enemies to blaspheme, the child also
who is born to you shall surely die."

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Nathan departed to his house. Yahweh
struck the child that Uriah's wife bore to David, and it was very sick.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> David therefore begged God for the
child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay all night on the earth.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The elders of his house arose, \[and
stood\] beside him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not,
neither did he eat bread with them.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> It happened on the seventh day, that
the child died. The servants of David feared to tell him that the child
was dead; for they said, "Behold, while the child was yet alive, we
spoke to him, and he didn't listen to our voice. How will he then harm
himself, if we tell him that the child is dead?"

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> But when David saw that his servants
were whispering together, David perceived that the child was dead; and
David said to his servants, "Is the child dead?" They said, "He is
dead."

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Then David arose from the earth, and
washed, and anointed himself, and changed his clothing; and he came into
the house of Yahweh, and worshiped: then he came to his own house; and
when he required, they set bread before him, and he ate.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Then his servants said to him, "What is
this that you have done? You fasted and wept for the child while he was
alive; but when the child was dead, you rose up and ate bread."

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> He said, "While the child was yet
alive, I fasted and wept; for I said, 'Who knows whether Yahweh will not
be gracious to me, that the child may live?'

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> But now he is dead, why should I fast?
Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he will not return to
me."

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and
went in to her, and lay with her. She bore a son, and he called his name
Solomon. Yahweh loved him;

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> and he sent by the hand of Nathan the
prophet; and he named him Jedidiah, for Yahweh's sake.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Now Joab fought against Rabbah of the
children of Ammon, and took the royal city.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> Joab sent messengers to David, and
said, "I have fought against Rabbah. Yes, I have taken the city of
waters.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Now therefore gather the rest of the
people together, and encamp against the city, and take it; lest I take
the city, and it be called after my name."

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> David gathered all the people together,
and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> He took the crown of their king from
off his head; and its weight was a talent of gold, and \[in it were\]
precious stones; and it was set on David's head. He brought forth the
spoil of the city, exceeding much.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> He brought forth the people who were
therein, and put them under saws, and under iron picks, and under axes
of iron, and made them pass through the brick kiln: and he did so to all
the cities of the children of Ammon. David and all the people returned
to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> It happened after this, that Absalom the
son of David had a beautiful sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the
son of David loved her.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Amnon was so troubled that he fell sick
because of his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and it seemed hard to
Amnon to do anything to her.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> But Amnon had a friend, whose name was
Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's brother; and Jonadab was a very
subtle man.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> He said to him, "Why, son of the king,
are you so sad from day to day? Won't you tell me?" Amnon said to him,
"I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister."

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Jonadab said to him, "Lay down on your
bed, and pretend to be sick. When your father comes to see you, tell
him, 'Please let my sister Tamar come and give me bread to eat, and
dress the food in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it from her
hand.'"

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> So Amnon lay down and faked being sick.
When the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, "Please let my
sister Tamar come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may
eat from her hand."

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Then David sent home to Tamar, saying,
"Go now to your brother Amnon's house, and prepare food for him."

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's
house; and he was laid down. She took dough, and kneaded it, and made
cakes in his sight, and baked the cakes.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> She took the pan, and poured them out
before him; but he refused to eat. Amnon said, "Have all men leave me."
Every man went out from him.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Amnon said to Tamar, "Bring the food
into the room, that I may eat from your hand." Tamar took the cakes
which she had made, and brought them into the room to Amnon her brother.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> When she had brought them near to him
to eat, he took hold of her, and said to her, "Come, lie with me, my
sister!"

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> She answered him, "No, my brother, do
not force me! For no such thing ought to be done in Israel. Don't you do
this folly.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> I, where would I carry my shame? And as
for you, you will be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore,
please speak to the king; for he will not withhold me from you."

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> However he would not listen to her
voice; but being stronger than she, he forced her, and lay with her.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Then Amnon hated her with exceeding
great hatred; for the hatred with which he hated her was greater than
the love with which he had loved her. Amnon said to her, "Arise, be
gone!"

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> She said to him, "Not so, because this
great wrong in sending me away is worse than the other that you did to
me!" But he would not listen to her.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Then he called his servant who
ministered to him, and said, "Put now this woman out from me, and bolt
the door after her."

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> She had a garment of various colors on
her; for with such robes were the king's daughters who were virgins
dressed. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after
her.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Tamar put ashes on her head, and tore
her garment of various colors that was on her; and she laid her hand on
her head, and went her way, crying aloud as she went.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Absalom her brother said to her, "Has
Amnon your brother been with you? But now hold your peace, my sister. He
is your brother. Don't take this thing to heart." So Tamar remained
desolate in her brother Absalom's house.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But when king David heard of all these
things, he was very angry.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Absalom spoke to Amnon neither good nor
bad; for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> It happened after two full years, that
Absalom had sheepshearers in Baal Hazor, which is beside Ephraim: and
Absalom invited all the king's sons.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Absalom came to the king, and said,
"See now, your servant has sheepshearers. Please let the king and his
servants go with your servant."

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The king said to Absalom, "No, my son,
let us not all go, lest we be burdensome to you." He pressed him;
however he would not go, but blessed him.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Then Absalom said, "If not, please let
my brother Amnon go with us." The king said to him, "Why should he go
with you?"

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> But Absalom pressed him, and he let
Amnon and all the king's sons go with him.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Absalom commanded his servants, saying,
"Mark now, when Amnon's heart is merry with wine; and when I tell you,
'Strike Amnon,' then kill him. Don't be afraid. Haven't I commanded you?
Be courageous, and be valiant!"

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> The servants of Absalom did to Amnon as
Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons arose, and every man got
up on his mule, and fled.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> It happened, while they were in the
way, that the news came to David, saying, "Absalom has slain all the
king's sons, and there is not one of them left!"

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Then the king arose, and tore his
garments, and lay on the earth; and all his servants stood by with their
clothes torn.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's
brother, answered, "Don't let my lord suppose that they have killed all
the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead; for by the
appointment of Absalom this has been determined from the day that he
forced his sister Tamar.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Now therefore don't let my lord the
king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are
dead; for Amnon only is dead."

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> But Absalom fled. The young man who
kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold, many people
were coming by way of the hillside behind him.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> Jonadab said to the king, "Behold, the
king's sons are coming! It is as your servant said."

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> It happened, as soon as he had finished
speaking, that behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice,
and wept. The king also and all his servants wept bitterly.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai
the son of Ammihur, king of Geshur. David mourned for his son every day.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur,
and was there three years.

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> \[the soul of\] king David longed to go
forth to Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, since he was
dead.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived
that the king's heart was toward Absalom.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Joab sent to Tekoa, and fetched there a
wise woman, and said to her, "Please act like a mourner, and put on
mourning clothing, please, and don't anoint yourself with oil, but be as
a woman who has mourned a long time for the dead.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Go in to the king, and speak like this to
him." So Joab put the words in her mouth.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> When the woman of Tekoa spoke to the
king, she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said,
"Help, O king!"

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The king said to her, "What ails you?"
She answered, "Truly I am a widow, and my husband is dead.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Your handmaid had two sons, and they both
fought together in the field, and there was no one to part them, but the
one struck the other, and killed him.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Behold, the whole family has risen
against your handmaid, and they say, 'Deliver him who struck his
brother, that we may kill him for the life of his brother whom he
killed, and so destroy the heir also.' Thus they would quench my coal
which is left, and would leave to my husband neither name nor remainder
on the surface of the earth."

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The king said to the woman, "Go to your
house, and I will give a command concerning you."

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> The woman of Tekoa said to the king, "My
lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father's house; and the
king and his throne be guiltless."

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The king said, "Whoever says anything
to you, bring him to me, and he shall not touch you any more."

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Then she said, "Please let the king
remember Yahweh your God, that the avenger of blood destroy not any
more, lest they destroy my son." He said, "As Yahweh lives, not one hair
of your son shall fall to the earth."

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Then the woman said, "Please let your
handmaid speak a word to my lord the king." He said, "Say on."

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> The woman said, "Why then have you
devised such a thing against the people of God? For in speaking this
word the king is as one who is guilty, in that the king does not bring
home again his banished one.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> For we must die, and are as water split
on the ground, which can't be gathered up again; neither does God take
away life, but devises means, that he who is banished not be an outcast
from him.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Now therefore seeing that I have come
to speak this word to my lord the king, it is because the people have
made me afraid: and your handmaid said, 'I will now speak to the king;
it may be that the king will perform the request of his servant.'

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> For the king will hear, to deliver his
servant out of the hand of the man who would destroy me and my son
together out of the inheritance of God.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Then your handmaid said, 'Please let
the word of my lord the king bring rest; for as an angel of God, so is
my lord the king to discern good and bad. May Yahweh, your God, be with
you.'"

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Then the king answered the woman,
"Please don't hide anything from me that I ask you." The woman said,
"Let my lord the king now speak."

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The king said, "Is the hand of Joab
with you in all this?" The woman answered, "As your soul lives, my lord
the king, no one can turn to the right hand or to the left from anything
that my lord the king has spoken; for your servant Joab, he urged me,
and he put all these words in the mouth of your handmaid;

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> to change the face of the matter has
your servant Joab done this thing. My lord is wise, according to the
wisdom of an angel of God, to know all things that are in the earth."

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> The king said to Joab, "Behold now, I
have done this thing. Go therefore, bring the young man Absalom back."

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Joab fell to the ground on his face,
and did obeisance, and blessed the king. Joab said, "Today your servant
knows that I have found favor in your sight, my lord, king, in that the
king has performed the request of his servant."

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and
brought Absalom to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The king said, "Let him return to his
own house, but let him not see my face." So Absalom returned to his own
house, and didn't see the king's face.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> Now in all Israel there was none to be
so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his foot
even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> When he cut the hair of his head (now
it was at every year's end that he cut it; because it was heavy on him,
therefore he cut it); he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred
shekels, after the king's weight.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> To Absalom there were born three sons,
and one daughter, whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a beautiful
face.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> Absalom lived two full years in
Jerusalem; and he didn't see the king's face.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Then Absalom sent for Joab, to send him
to the king; but he would not come to him: and he sent again a second
time, but he would not come.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> Therefore he said to his servants,
"Behold, Joab's field is near mine, and he has barley there. Go and set
it on fire." Absalom's servants set the field on fire.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom to
his house, and said to him, "Why have your servants set my field on
fire?"

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> Absalom answered Joab, "Behold, I sent
to you, saying, 'Come here, that I may send you to the king, to say,
"Why have I come from Geshur? It would be better for me to be there
still. Now therefore let me see the king's face; and if there is
iniquity in me, let him kill me."'"

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> So Joab came to the king, and told him;
and when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed
himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kissed
Absalom.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> It happened after this, that Absalom
prepared him a chariot and horses, and fifty men to run before him.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Absalom rose up early, and stood beside
the way of the gate. It was so, that when any man had a suit which
should come to the king for judgment, then Absalom called to him, and
said, "What city are you from?" He said, "Your servant is of one of the
tribes of Israel."

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Absalom said to him, "Behold, your
matters are good and right; but there is no man deputized by the king to
hear you."

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Absalom said moreover, "Oh that I were
made judge in the land, that every man who has any suit or cause might
come to me, and I would do him justice!"

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> It was so, that when any man came near to
do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took hold of him, and
kissed him.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Absalom did this sort of thing to all
Israel who came to the king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of
the men of Israel.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> It happened at the end of forty years,
that Absalom said to the king, "Please let me go and pay my vow, which I
have vowed to Yahweh, in Hebron.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For your servant vowed a vow while I
stayed at Geshur in Syria, saying, 'If Yahweh shall indeed bring me
again to Jerusalem, then I will serve Yahweh.'"

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The king said to him, "Go in peace." So
he arose, and went to Hebron.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> But Absalom sent spies throughout all
the tribes of Israel, saying, "As soon as you hear the sound of the
trumpet, then you shall say, 'Absalom is king in Hebron!'"

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Two hundred men went with Absalom out
of Jerusalem, who were invited, and went in their simplicity; and they
didn't know anything.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Absalom sent for Ahithophel the
Gilonite, David's counselor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he
was offering the sacrifices. The conspiracy was strong; for the people
increased continually with Absalom.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> A messenger came to David, saying, "The
hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom."

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> David said to all his servants who were
with him at Jerusalem, "Arise, and let us flee; for else none of us
shall escape from Absalom. Make speed to depart, lest he overtake us
quickly, and bring down evil on us, and strike the city with the edge of
the sword."

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> The king's servants said to the king,
"Behold, your servants are ready to do whatever my lord the king
chooses."

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> The king went forth, and all his
household after him. The king left ten women, who were concubines, to
keep the house.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> The king went forth, and all the people
after him; and they stayed in Beth Merhak.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> All his servants passed on beside him;
and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites,
six hundred men who came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Then the king said to Ittai the
Gittite, "Why do you also go with us? Return, and stay with the king;
for you are a foreigner, and also an exile. Return to your own place.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> Whereas you came but yesterday, should
I this day make you go up and down with us, since I go where I may?
Return, and take back your brothers. Mercy and truth be with you."

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Ittai answered the king, and said, "As
Yahweh lives, and as my lord the king lives, surely in what place my
lord the king shall is, whether for death or for life, even there also
will your servant be."

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> David said to Ittai, "Go and pass
over." Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the
little ones who were with him.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> All the country wept with a loud voice,
and all the people passed over: the king also himself passed over the
brook Kidron, and all the people passed over, toward the way of the
wilderness.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Behold, Zadok also came, and all the
Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God; and they set
down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until all the people finished
passing out of the city.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> The king said to Zadok, "Carry back the
ark of God into the city. If I find favor in the eyes of Yahweh, he will
bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation;

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> but if he say thus, 'I have no delight
in you;' behold, here am I. Let him do to me as seems good to him."

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> The king said also to Zadok the priest,
"Aren't you a seer? Return into the city in peace, and your two sons
with you, Ahimaaz your son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Behold, I will stay at the fords of the
wilderness, until word comes from you to inform me."

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> Zadok therefore and Abiathar carried
the ark of God again to Jerusalem; and they stayed there.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> David went up by the ascent of the
\[Mount of\] Olives, and wept as he went up; and he had his head
covered, and went barefoot: and all the people who were with him covered
every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Someone told David, saying, "Ahithophel
is among the conspirators with Absalom." David said, "Yahweh, please
turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness."

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> It happened that when David had come to
the top \[of the ascent\], where God was worshiped, behold, Hushai the
Archite came to meet him with his coat torn, and earth on his head.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> David said to him, "If you pass on with
me, then you will be a burden to me;

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> but if you return to the city, and tell
Absalom, 'I will be your servant, O king. As I have been your father's
servant in time past, so will I now be your servant; then will you
defeat for me the counsel of Ahithophel.'

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> Don't you have Zadok and Abiathar the
priests there with you? Therefore it shall be, that whatever thing you
shall hear out of the king's house, you shall tell it to Zadok and
Abiathar the priests.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> Behold, they have there with them their
two sons, Ahimaaz, Zadok's son, and Jonathan, Abiathar's son; and by
them you shall send to me everything that you shall hear."

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> So Hushai, David's friend, came into
the city; and Absalom came into Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> When David was a little past the top \[of
the ascent\], behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a
couple of donkeys saddled, and on them two hundred loaves of bread, and
one hundred clusters of raisins, and one hundred summer fruits, and a
bottle of wine.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> The king said to Ziba, What do you mean
by these? Ziba said, The donkeys are for the king's household to ride
on; and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat; and the
wine, that such as are faint in the wilderness may drink.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> The king said, "Where is your master's
son?" Ziba said to the king, "Behold, he is staying in Jerusalem; for he
said, 'Today the house of Israel will restore me the kingdom of my
father.'"

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> Then the king said to Ziba, "Behold, all
that pertains to Mephibosheth is yours." Ziba said, "I do obeisance. Let
me find favor in your sight, my lord, O king."

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> When king David came to Bahurim, behold,
a man of the family of the house of Saul came out, whose name was
Shimei, the son of Gera. He came out, and cursed still as he came.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> He cast stones at David, and at all the
servants of king David, and all the people and all the mighty men were
on his right hand and on his left.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Shimei said when he cursed, "Be gone, be
gone, you man of blood, and base fellow!

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Yahweh has returned on you all the blood
of the house of Saul, in whose place you have reigned! Yahweh has
delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom your son! Behold, you are
caught by your own mischief, because you are a man of blood!"

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Then Abishai the son of Zeruiah said to
the king, "Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Please let
me go over and take off his head."

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> The king said, "What have I to do with
you, you sons of Zeruiah? Because he curses, and because Yahweh has said
to him, 'Curse David;' who then shall say, 'Why have you done so?'"

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> David said to Abishai, and to all his
servants, "Behold, my son, who came forth from my bowels, seeks my life.
How much more this Benjamite, now? Leave him alone, and let him curse;
for Yahweh has invited him.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> It may be that Yahweh will look on the
wrong done to me, and that Yahweh will repay me good for the cursing of
me today."

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> So David and his men went by the way;
and Shimei went along on the hillside opposite him, and cursed as he
went, threw stones at him, and threw dust.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The king, and all the people who were
with him, came weary; and he refreshed himself there.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Absalom, and all the people, the men of
Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> It happened, when Hushai the Archite,
David's friend, had come to Absalom, that Hushai said to Absalom, "Long
live the king! Long live the king!"

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Absalom said to Hushai, "Is this your
kindness to your friend? Why didn't you go with your friend?"

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Hushai said to Absalom, "No; but
whoever Yahweh, and this people, and all the men of Israel have chosen,
his will I be, and with him I will stay.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> Again, whom should I serve? Shouldn't I
serve in the presence of his son? As I have served in your father's
presence, so will I be in your presence."

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, "Give
your counsel what we shall do."

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Ahithophel said to Absalom, "Go in to
your father's concubines, that he has left to keep the house. Then all
Israel will hear that you are abhorred by your father. Then the hands of
all who are with you will be strong."

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> So they spread Absalom a tent on the
top of the house; and Absalom went in to his father's concubines in the
sight of all Israel.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The counsel of Ahithophel, which he
gave in those days, was as if a man inquired at the oracle of God: so
was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Moreover Ahithophel said to Absalom, "Let
me now choose twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after
David tonight.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> I will come on him while he is weary and
exhausted, and will make him afraid. All the people who are with him
shall flee. I will strike the king only;

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> and I will bring back all the people to
you. The man whom you seek is as if all returned. All the people shall
be in peace."

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> The saying pleased Absalom well, and all
the elders of Israel.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> Then Absalom said, "Now call Hushai the
Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he says."

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> When Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom
spoke to him, saying, "Ahithophel has spoken like this. Shall we do what
he says? If not, speak up."

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Hushai said to Absalom, "The counsel that
Ahithophel has given this time is not good."

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Hushai said moreover, "You know your
father and his men, that they are mighty men, and they are fierce in
their minds, like a bear robbed of her cubs in the field. Your father is
a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> Behold, he is now hidden in some pit, or
in some other place. It will happen, when some of them have fallen at
the first, that whoever hears it will say, 'There is a slaughter among
the people who follow Absalom!'

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Even he who is valiant, whose heart is
as the heart of a lion, will utterly melt; for all Israel knows that
your father is a mighty man, and those who are with him are valiant men.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> But I counsel that all Israel be
gathered together to you, from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that
is by the sea for multitude; and that you go to battle in your own
person.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> So shall we come on him in some place
where he shall be found, and we will light on him as the dew falls on
the ground; and of him and of all the men who are with him we will not
leave so much as one.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Moreover, if he be gone into a city,
then shall all Israel bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into
the river, until there isn't one small stone found there."

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> Absalom and all the men of Israel said,
"The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of
Ahithophel." For Yahweh had ordained to defeat the good counsel of
Ahithophel, to the intent that Yahweh might bring evil on Absalom.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Then Hushai said to Zadok and to
Abiathar the priests, "Ahithophel counseled Absalom and the elders of
Israel that way; and I have counseled this way.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Now therefore send quickly, and tell
David, saying, 'Don't lodge this night at the fords of the wilderness,
but by all means pass over; lest the king be swallowed up, and all the
people who are with him.'"

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were staying
by En Rogel; and a female servant used to go and tell them; and they
went and told king David. For they might not be seen to come into the
city.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> But a boy saw them, and told Absalom.
Then they both went away quickly, and came to the house of a man in
Bahurim, who had a well in his court; and they went down there.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> The woman took and spread the covering
over the well's mouth, and spread out bruised grain on it; and nothing
was known.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> Absalom's servants came to the woman to
the house; and they said, "Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan?" The woman
said to them, "They have gone over the brook of water." When they had
sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> It happened, after they had departed,
that they came up out of the well, and went and told king David; and
they said to David, "Arise and pass quickly over the water; for thus has
Ahithophel counseled against you."

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> Then David arose, and all the people
who were with him, and they passed over the Jordan. By the morning light
there lacked not one of them who had not gone over the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> When Ahithophel saw that his counsel
was not followed, he saddled his donkey, and arose, and went home, to
his city, and set his house in order, and hanged himself; and he died,
and was buried in the tomb of his father.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Then David came to Mahanaim. Absalom
passed over the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Absalom set Amasa over the army instead
of Joab. Now Amasa was the son of a man, whose name was Ithra the
Israelite, who went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to
Zeruiah, Joab's mother.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> Israel and Absalom encamped in the land
of Gilead.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> It happened, when David was come to
Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the children of
Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the
Gileadite of Rogelim,

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> brought beds, and basins, and earthen
vessels, and wheat, and barley, and meal, and parched \[grain\], and
beans, and lentils, and parched \[pulse\],

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> and honey, and butter, and sheep, and
cheese of the herd, for David, and for the people who were with him, to
eat: for they said, "The people are hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in
the wilderness."

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> David numbered the people who were with
him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> David sent forth the people, a third part
under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the
son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai
the Gittite. The king said to the people, "I will surely go forth with
you myself also."

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> But the people said, "You shall not go
forth; for if we flee away, they will not care for us; neither if half
of us die, will they care for us. But you are worth ten thousand of us.
Therefore now it is better that you are ready to help us out of the
city."

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> The king said to them, "I will do what
seems best to you." The king stood beside the gate, and all the people
went out by hundreds and by thousands.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> The king commanded Joab and Abishai and
Ittai, saying, "Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with
Absalom." All the people heard when the king commanded all the captains
concerning Absalom.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> So the people went out into the field
against Israel: and the battle was in the forest of Ephraim.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The people of Israel were struck there
before the servants of David, and there was a great slaughter there that
day of twenty thousand men.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> For the battle was there spread over the
surface of all the country; and the forest devoured more people that day
than the sword devoured.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Absalom happened to meet the servants of
David. Absalom was riding on his mule, and the mule went under the thick
boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was
taken up between the sky and earth; and the mule that was under him went
on.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> A certain man saw it, and told Joab,
and said, "Behold, I saw Absalom hanging in an oak."

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Joab said to the man who told him,
"Behold, you saw it, and why didn't you strike him there to the ground?
I would have given you ten pieces of silver, and a sash."

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> The man said to Joab, "Though I should
receive a thousand pieces of silver in my hand, I still wouldn't put
forth my hand against the king's son; for in our hearing the king
commanded you and Abishai and Ittai, saying, 'Beware that none touch the
young man Absalom.'

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Otherwise if I had dealt falsely
against his life (and there is no matter hidden from the king), then you
yourself would have set yourself against me."

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Then Joab said, "I'm not going to wait
like this with you." He took three darts in his hand, and thrust them
through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the
oak.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Ten young men who bore Joab's armor
surrounded and struck Absalom, and killed him.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Joab blew the trumpet, and the people
returned from pursuing after Israel; for Joab held back the people.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> They took Absalom, and cast him into
the great pit in the forest, and raised over him a very great heap of
stones. Then all Israel fled everyone to his tent.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken
and reared up for himself the pillar, which is in the king's dale; for
he said, "I have no son to keep my name in memory." He called the pillar
after his own name; and it is called Absalom's monument, to this day.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said,
"Let me now run, and bear the king news, how that Yahweh has avenged him
of his enemies."

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Joab said to him, "You shall not be the
bearer of news this day, but you shall bear news another day. But today
you shall bear no news, because the king's son is dead."

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then Joab said to the Cushite, "Go,
tell the king what you have seen!" The Cushite bowed himself to Joab,
and ran.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said yet
again to Joab, "But come what may, please let me also run after the
Cushite." Joab said, "Why do you want to run, my son, since that you
will have no reward for the news?"

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> "But come what may," he said, "I will
run." He said to him, "Run!" Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the Plain,
and outran the Cushite.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Now David was sitting between the two
gates: and the watchman went up to the roof of the gate to the wall, and
lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, a man running alone.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> The watchman cried, and told the king.
The king said, "If he is alone, there is news in his mouth." He came
closer and closer.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> The watchman saw another man running;
and the watchman called to the porter, and said, "Behold, a man running
alone!" The king said, "He also brings news."

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> The watchman said, "I think the running
of the first one is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok." The
king said, "He is a good man, and comes with good news."

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> Ahimaaz called, and said to the king,
"All is well." He bowed himself before the king with his face to the
earth, and said, "Blessed is Yahweh your God, who has delivered up the
men who lifted up their hand against my lord the king!"

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> The king said, "Is it well with the
young man Absalom?" Ahimaaz answered, "When Joab sent the king's
servant, even me your servant, I saw a great tumult, but I don't know
what it was."

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> The king said, "Turn aside, and stand
here." He turned aside, and stood still.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Behold, the Cushite came. The Cushite
said, "News for my lord the king; for Yahweh has avenged you this day of
all those who rose up against you."

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> The king said to the Cushite, "Is it
well with the young man Absalom?" The Cushite answered, "May the enemies
of my lord the king, and all who rise up against you to do you harm, be
as that young man is."

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> The king was much moved, and went up to
the room over the gate, and wept. As he went, he said, "My son Absalom!
My son, my son Absalom! I wish I had died for you, Absalom, my son, my
son!"

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> It was told Joab, "Behold, the king weeps
and mourns for Absalom."

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> The victory that day was turned into
mourning to all the people; for the people heard it said that day, "The
king grieves for his son."

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> The people snuck into the city that day,
as people who are ashamed steal away when they flee in battle.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> The king covered his face, and the king
cried with a loud voice, "My son Absalom, Absalom, my son, my son!"

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Joab came into the house to the king, and
said, "You have shamed this day the faces of all your servants, who this
day have saved your life, and the lives of your sons and of your
daughters, and the lives of your wives, and the lives of your
concubines;

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> in that you love those who hate you, and
hate those who love you. For you have declared this day, that princes
and servants are nothing to you. For today I perceive that if Absalom
had lived, and all we had died this day, then it would have pleased you
well.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Now therefore arise, go out, and speak to
comfort your servants; for I swear by Yahweh, if you don't go out, not a
man will stay with you this night. That would be worse to you than all
the evil that has happened to you from your youth until now."

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> Then the king arose, and sat in the gate.
They told to all the people, saying, "Behold, the king is sitting in the
gate." All the people came before the king. Now Israel had fled every
man to his tent.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> All the people were at strife throughout
all the tribes of Israel, saying, "The king delivered us out of the hand
of our enemies, and he saved us out of the hand of the Philistines; and
now he has fled out of the land from Absalom.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is
dead in battle. Now therefore why don't you speak a word of bringing the
king back?"

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> King David sent to Zadok and to
Abiathar the priests, saying, "Speak to the elders of Judah, saying,
'Why are you the last to bring the king back to his house? Since the
speech of all Israel has come to the king, to return him to his house.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> You are my brothers, you are my bone
and my flesh. Why then are you the last to bring back the king?'

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Say to Amasa, 'Aren't you my bone and
my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if you aren't captain of the
army before me continually in the room of Joab.'"

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> He bowed the heart of all the men of
Judah, even as \[the heart of\] one man; so that they sent to the king,
saying, "Return, you and all your servants."

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> So the king returned, and came to the
Jordan. Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to bring the king
over the Jordan.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite,
who was of Bahurim, hurried and came down with the men of Judah to meet
king David.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> There were a thousand men of Benjamin
with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen
sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went through the Jordan
in the presence of the king.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> A ferry boat went to bring over the
king's household, and to do what he thought good. Shimei the son of Gera
fell down before the king, when he was come over the Jordan.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> He said to the king, "Don't let my lord
impute iniquity to me, neither do you remember that which your servant
did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that
the king should take it to his heart.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> For your servant knows that I have
sinned. Therefore, behold, I have come this day the first of all the
house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king."

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> But Abishai the son of Zeruiah
answered, "Shall Shimei not be put to death for this, because he cursed
Yahweh's anointed?"

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> David said, "What have I to do with
you, you sons of Zeruiah, that you should this day be adversaries to me?
Shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? For don't I know
that I am this day king over Israel?"

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The king said to Shimei, "You shall not
die." The king swore to him.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down
to meet the king; and he had neither groomed his feet, nor trimmed his
beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the
day he came home in peace.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> It happened, when he had come to
Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said to him, "Why didn't you
go with me, Mephibosheth?"

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> He answered, "My lord, O king, my
servant deceived me. For your servant said, I will saddle me a donkey,
that I may ride thereon, and go with the king; because your servant is
lame.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> He has slandered your servant to my
lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God. Do therefore
what is good in your eyes.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> For all my father's house were but dead
men before my lord the king; yet you set your servant among those who
ate at your own table. What right therefore have I yet that I should cry
any more to the king?"

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> The king said to him, "Why do you speak
any more of your matters? I say, you and Ziba divide the land."

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> Mephibosheth said to the king, "Yes,
let him take all, because my lord the king has come in peace to his own
house."

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> Barzillai the Gileadite came down from
Rogelim; and he went over the Jordan with the king, to conduct him over
the Jordan.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even
eighty years old: and he had provided the king with sustenance while he
lay at Mahanaim; for he was a very great man.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> The king said to Barzillai, "Come over
with me, and I will sustain you with me in Jerusalem."

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> Barzillai said to the king, "How many
are the days of the years of my life, that I should go up with the king
to Jerusalem?

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> I am this day eighty years old. Can I
discern between good and bad? Can your servant taste what I eat or what
I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women?
Why then should your servant be yet a burden to my lord the king?

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> Your servant would but just go over the
Jordan with the king. Why should the king repay me with such a reward?

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> Please let your servant turn back
again, that I may die in my own city, by the grave of my father and my
mother. But behold, your servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord
the king; and do to him what shall seem good to you."

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> The king answered, "Chimham shall go
over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good to you.
Whatever you require of me, that I will do for you."

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> All the people went over the Jordan,
and the king went over. Then the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him;
and he returned to his own place.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> So the king went over to Gilgal, and
Chimham went over with him. All the people of Judah brought the king
over, and also half the people of Israel.

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> Behold, all the men of Israel came to
the king, and said to the king, "Why have our brothers the men of Judah
stolen you away, and brought the king, and his household, over the
Jordan, and all David's men with him?"

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> All the men of Judah answered the men
of Israel, "Because the king is a close relative to us. Why then are you
angry about this matter? Have we eaten at all at the king's cost? Or has
he given us any gift?"

<span id="an_19:43">19:43</span> The men of Israel answered the men of
Judah, and said, "We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more
claim to David than you. Why then did you despise us, that our advice
should not be first had in bringing back our king?" The words of the men
of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> There happened to be there a base fellow,
whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew the
trumpet, and said, "We have no portion in David, neither have we
inheritance in the son of Jesse. Every man to his tents, Israel!"

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> So all the men of Israel went up from
following David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri; but the men of
Judah joined with their king, from the Jordan even to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> David came to his house at Jerusalem; and
the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the
house, and put them in custody, and provided them with sustenance, but
didn't go in to them. So they were shut up to the day of their death,
living in widowhood.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Then the king said to Amasa, "Call me the
men of Judah together within three days, and be here present."

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> So Amasa went to call \[the men of\]
Judah together; but he stayed longer than the set time which he had
appointed him.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> David said to Abishai, "Now Sheba the son
of Bichri will do us more harm than did Absalom. Take your lord's
servants, and pursue after him, lest he get himself fortified cities,
and escape out of our sight."

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> There went out after him Joab's men, and
the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men; and they
went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> When they were at the great stone which
is in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. Joab was clothed in his apparel
of war that he had put on, and on it was a sash with a sword fastened on
his waist in its sheath; and as he went forth it fell out.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Joab said to Amasa, "Is it well with you,
my brother?" Joab took Amasa by the beard with his right hand to kiss
him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But Amasa took no heed to the sword
that was in Joab's hand. So he struck him with it in the body, and shed
out his bowels to the ground, and didn't strike him again; and he died.
Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> There stood by him one of Joab's young
men, and said, "He who favors Joab, and he who is for David, let him
follow Joab!"

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Amasa lay wallowing in his blood in the
midst of the highway. When the man saw that all the people stood still,
he carried Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a garment
over him, when he saw that everyone who came by him stood still.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> When he was removed out of the highway,
all the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of
Bichri.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> He went through all the tribes of
Israel to Abel, and to Beth Maacah, and all the Berites: and they were
gathered together, and went also after him.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> They came and besieged him in Abel of
Beth Maacah, and they cast up a mound against the city, and it stood
against the rampart; and all the people who were with Joab battered the
wall, to throw it down.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Then a wise woman cried out of the
city, "Hear, hear! Please say to Joab, 'Come near here, that I may speak
with you.'"

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> He came near to her; and the woman
said, "Are you Joab?" He answered, "I am." Then she said to him, "Hear
the words of your handmaid." He answered, "I do hear."

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Then she spoke, saying, "They were used
to say in old times, 'They shall surely ask counsel at Abel;' and so
they settled it.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> I am among those who are peaceable and
faithful in Israel. You seek to destroy a city and a mother in Israel.
Why will you swallow up the inheritance of Yahweh?"

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Joab answered, "Far be it, far be it
from me, that I should swallow up or destroy.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> The matter is not so. But a man of the
hill country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, has lifted up
his hand against the king, even against David. Deliver him only, and I
will depart from the city." The woman said to Joab, "Behold, his head
shall be thrown to you over the wall."

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Then the woman went to all the people
in her wisdom. They cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and
threw it out to Joab. He blew the trumpet, and they were dispersed from
the city, every man to his tent. Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Now Joab was over all the army of
Israel; and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and
over the Pelethites;

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> and Adoram was over the men subject to
forced labor; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder;

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> and Sheva was scribe; and Zadok and
Abiathar were priests;

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> and also Ira the Jairite was chief
minister to David.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> There was a famine in the days of David
three years, year after year; and David sought the face of Yahweh.
Yahweh said, "It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he put
to death the Gibeonites."

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> The king called the Gibeonites, and said
to them (now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of
the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn to
them: and Saul sought to kill them in his zeal for the children of
Israel and Judah);

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> and David said to the Gibeonites, "What
shall I do for you? And with what shall I make atonement, that you may
bless the inheritance of Yahweh?"

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> The Gibeonites said to him, "It is no
matter of silver or gold between us and Saul, or his house; neither is
it for us to put any man to death in Israel." He said, "Whatever you
say, that will I do for you."

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> They said to the king, "The man who
consumed us, and who devised against us, that we should be destroyed
from remaining in any of the borders of Israel,

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> let seven men of his sons be delivered to
us, and we will hang them up to Yahweh in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of
Yahweh." The king said, "I will give them."

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son
of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of Yahweh's oath that was between
them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> But the king took the two sons of Rizpah
the daughter of Aiah, whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth;
and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she bore to
Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> He delivered them into the hands of the
Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the mountain before Yahweh, and all
seven of them fell together. They were put to death in the days of
harvest, in the first days, at the beginning of barley harvest.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took
sackcloth, and spread it for her on the rock, from the beginning of
harvest until water was poured on them from the sky. She allowed neither
the birds of the sky to rest on them by day, nor the animals of the
field by night.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> It was told David what Rizpah the
daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> David went and took the bones of Saul
and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh Gilead, who had
stolen them from the street of Beth Shan, where the Philistines had
hanged them, in the day that the Philistines killed Saul in Gilboa;

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> and he brought up from there the bones
of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son: and they gathered the bones
of those who were hanged.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> They buried the bones of Saul and
Jonathan his son in the country of Benjamin in Zela, in the tomb of Kish
his father: and they performed all that the king commanded. After that
God was entreated for the land.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> The Philistines had war again with
Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought
against the Philistines. David grew faint;

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> and Ishbibenob, who was of the sons of
the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred \[shekels\] of
brass in weight, he being armed with a new \[sword\], thought to have
slain David.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> But Abishai the son of Zeruiah helped
him, and struck the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David
swore to him, saying, "You shall go no more out with us to battle, that
you don't quench the lamp of Israel."

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> It came to pass after this, that there
was again war with the Philistines at Gob: then Sibbecai the Hushathite
killed Saph, who was of the sons of the giant.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> There was again war with the
Philistines at Gob; and Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim the Bethlehemite
killed Goliath the Gittite's brother, the staff of whose spear was like
a weaver's beam.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> There was again war at Gath, where
there was a man of great stature, who had on every hand six fingers, and
on every foot six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born
to the giant.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> When he defied Israel, Jonathan the son
of Shimei, David's brother, killed him.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> These four were born to the giant in
Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his
servants.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> David spoke to Yahweh the words of this
song in the day that Yahweh delivered him out of the hand of all his
enemies, and out of the hand of Saul:

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> and he said, "Yahweh is my rock, my
fortress, and my deliverer, even mine;

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> God, my rock, in him I will take refuge;
my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge.
My savior, you save me from violence.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> I will call on Yahweh, who is worthy to
be praised: So shall I be saved from my enemies.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> For the waves of death surrounded me. The
floods of ungodliness made me afraid.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> The cords of Sheol were around me. The
snares of death caught me.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> In my distress I called on Yahweh. Yes, I
called to my God. He heard my voice out of his temple. My cry \[came\]
into his ears.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Then the earth shook and trembled. The
foundations of heaven quaked and were shaken, because he was angry.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Smoke went up out of his nostrils. Fire
out of his mouth devoured. Coals were kindled by it.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> He bowed the heavens also, and came
down. Thick darkness was under his feet.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He rode on a cherub, and flew. Yes, he
was seen on the wings of the wind.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> He made darkness pavilions around
himself: gathering of waters, and thick clouds of the skies.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> At the brightness before him, coals of
fire were kindled.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> Yahweh thundered from heaven. The Most
High uttered his voice.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> He sent out arrows, and scattered them;
lightning, and confused them.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Then the channels of the sea appeared.
The foundations of the world were laid bare by the rebuke of Yahweh, At
the blast of the breath of his nostrils.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> He sent from on high and he took me. He
drew me out of many waters.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> He delivered me from my strong enemy,
from those who hated me, for they were too mighty for me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> They came on me in the day of my
calamity, but Yahweh was my support.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He also brought me out into a large
place. He delivered me, because he delighted in me.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Yahweh rewarded me according to my
righteousness. He rewarded me according to the cleanness of my hands.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> For I have kept the ways of Yahweh, and
have not wickedly departed from my God.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> For all his ordinances were before me.
As for his statutes, I did not depart from them.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> I was also perfect toward him. I kept
myself from my iniquity.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Therefore Yahweh has rewarded me
according to my righteousness, According to my cleanness in his
eyesight.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> With the merciful you will show
yourself merciful. With the perfect man you will show yourself perfect.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> With the pure you will show yourself
pure. With the crooked you will show yourself shrewd.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> You will save the afflicted people, But
your eyes are on the haughty, that you may bring them down.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> For you are my lamp, Yahweh. Yahweh
will light up my darkness.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> For by you, I run against a troop. By
my God, I leap over a wall.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> As for God, his way is perfect. The
word of Yahweh is tested. He is a shield to all those who take refuge in
him.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> For who is God, besides Yahweh? Who is
a rock, besides our God?

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> God is my strong fortress. He makes my
way perfect.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> He makes his feet like hinds' \[feet\],
and sets me on my high places.

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> He teaches my hands to war, so that my
arms bend a bow of brass.

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> You have also given me the shield of
your salvation. Your gentleness has made me great.

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> You have enlarged my steps under me. My
feet have not slipped.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> I have pursued my enemies and destroyed
them. I didn't turn again until they were consumed.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> I have consumed them, and struck them
through, so that they can't arise. Yes, they have fallen under my feet.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> For you have armed me with strength for
the battle. You have subdued under me those who rose up against me.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> You have also made my enemies turn
their backs to me, that I might cut off those who hate me.

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> They looked, but there was none to
save; even to Yahweh, but he didn't answer them.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> Then I beat them as small as the dust
of the earth. I crushed them as the mire of the streets, and spread them
abroad.

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> You also have delivered me from the
strivings of my people. You have kept me to be the head of the nations.
A people whom I have not known will serve me.

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> The foreigners will submit themselves
to me. As soon as they hear of me, they will obey me.

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> The foreigners will fade away, and will
come trembling out of their close places.

<span id="an_22:47">22:47</span> Yahweh lives! Blessed be my rock!
Exalted be God, the rock of my salvation,

<span id="an_22:48">22:48</span> even the God who executes vengeance for
me, who brings down peoples under me,

<span id="an_22:49">22:49</span> who brings me away from my enemies.
Yes, you lift me up above those who rise up against me. You deliver me
from the violent man.

<span id="an_22:50">22:50</span> Therefore I will give thanks to you,
Yahweh, among the nations. Will sing praises to your name.

<span id="an_22:51">22:51</span> He gives great deliverance to his king,
and shows loving kindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed,
forevermore."

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Now these are the last words of David.
David the son of Jesse says, the man who was raised on high says, the
anointed of the God of Jacob, the sweet psalmist of Israel:

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> "The Spirit of Yahweh spoke by me. His
word was on my tongue.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> The God of Israel said, the Rock of
Israel spoke to me, 'One who rules over men righteously, who rules in
the fear of God,

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> shall be as the light of the morning,
when the sun rises, a morning without clouds, when the tender grass
springs out of the earth, through clear shining after rain.'

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Most certainly my house is not so with
God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things, and sure, for it is all my salvation, and all \[my\] desire,
although he doesn't make it grow.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> But all of the ungodly shall be as thorns
to be thrust away, because they can't be taken with the hand,

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> But the man who touches them must be
armed with iron and the staff of a spear. They shall be utterly burned
with fire in their place."

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> These are the names of the mighty men
whom David had: Josheb Basshebeth a Tahchemonite, chief of the captains;
the same was Adino the Eznite, against eight hundred slain at one time.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> After him was Eleazar the son of Dodai
the son of an Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David, when they
defied the Philistines who were there gathered together to battle, and
the men of Israel were gone away.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> He arose, and struck the Philistines
until his hand was weary, and his hand froze to the sword; and Yahweh
worked a great victory that day; and the people returned after him only
to take spoil.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> After him was Shammah the son of Agee a
Hararite. The Philistines were gathered together into a troop, where
there was a plot of ground full of lentils; and the people fled from the
Philistines.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> But he stood in the midst of the plot,
and defended it, and killed the Philistines; and Yahweh worked a great
victory.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Three of the thirty chief men went
down, and came to David in the harvest time to the cave of Adullam; and
the troop of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Rephaim.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> David was then in the stronghold; and
the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> David longed, and said, "Oh that one
would give me water to drink of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the
gate!"

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> The three mighty men broke through the
army of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem,
that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David: but he would
not drink of it, but poured it out to Yahweh.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> He said, "Be it far from me, Yahweh,
that I should do this! Isn't it the blood of the men who went in
jeopardy of their lives?" Therefore he would not drink it. The three
mighty men did these things.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son
of Zeruiah, was chief of the three. He lifted up his spear against three
hundred and killed them, and had a name among the three.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Wasn't he most honorable of the three?
therefore he was made their captain: however he didn't attain to the
\[first\] three.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of
a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he killed the two
\[sons of\] Ariel of Moab: he went down also and killed a lion in the
midst of a pit in time of snow.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> He killed an Egyptian, a goodly man:
and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a
staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and killed him
with his own spear.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> These things did Benaiah the son of
Jehoiada, and had a name among the three mighty men.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> He was more honorable than the thirty,
but he didn't attain to the \[first\] three. David set him over his
guard.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Asahel the brother of Joab was one of
the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Shammah the Harodite, Elika the
Harodite,

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of
Ikkesh the Tekoite,

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Abiezer the Anathothite, Mebunnai the
Hushathite,

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the
Netophathite,

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Heleb the son of Baanah the
Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the children of
Benjamin,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Benaiah a Pirathonite, Hiddai of the
brooks of Gaash.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the
Barhumite,

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Eliahba the Shaalbonite, the sons of
Jashen, Jonathan,

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of
Sharar the Ararite,

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son
of the Maacathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> Hezro the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani
the Gadite,

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the
Beerothite, armor bearers to Joab the son of Zeruiah,

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> Uriah the Hittite: thirty-seven in all.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Again the anger of Yahweh was kindled
against Israel, and he moved David against them, saying, "Go, number
Israel and Judah."

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> The king said to Joab the captain of the
army, who was with him, "Now go back and forth through all the tribes of
Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, and number the people, that I may
know the sum of the people."

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> Joab said to the king, "Now may Yahweh
your God add to the people, however many they may be, one hundred times;
and may the eyes of my lord the king see it. But why does my lord the
king delight in this thing?"

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> Notwithstanding, the king's word
prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the army. Joab and
the captains of the army went out from the presence of the king, to
number the people of Israel.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> They passed over the Jordan, and encamped
in Aroer, on the right side of the city that is in the middle of the
valley of Gad, and to Jazer:

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> then they came to Gilead, and to the land
of Tahtim Hodshi; and they came to Dan Jaan, and around to Sidon,

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> and came to the stronghold of Tyre, and
to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites; and they went
out to the south of Judah, at Beersheba.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> So when they had gone back and forth
through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months
and twenty days.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Joab gave up the sum of the numbering of
the people to the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand
valiant men who drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred
thousand men.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> David's heart struck him after that he
had numbered the people. David said to Yahweh, "I have sinned greatly in
that which I have done. But now, Yahweh, put away, I beg you, the
iniquity of your servant; for I have done very foolishly."

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> When David rose up in the morning, the
word of Yahweh came to the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying,

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> "Go and speak to David, 'Thus says
Yahweh, "I offer you three things. Choose one of them, that I may do it
to you."'"

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> So Gad came to David, and told him, and
said to him, "Shall seven years of famine come to you in your land? Or
will you flee three months before your foes while they pursue you? Or
shall there be three days' pestilence in your land? Now answer, and
consider what answer I shall return to him who sent me."

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> David said to Gad, "I am in distress.
Let us fall now into the hand of Yahweh; for his mercies are great. Let
me not fall into the hand of man."

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> So Yahweh sent a pestilence on Israel
from the morning even to the appointed time; and there died of the
people from Dan even to Beersheba seventy thousand men.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> When the angel stretched out his hand
toward Jerusalem to destroy it, Yahweh relented of the disaster, and
said to the angel who destroyed the people, "It is enough. Now stay your
hand." The angel of Yahweh was by the threshing floor of Araunah the
Jebusite.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> David spoke to Yahweh when he saw the
angel who struck the people, and said, "Behold, I have sinned, and I
have done perversely; but these sheep, what have they done? Please let
your hand be against me, and against my father's house."

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Gad came that day to David, and said to
him, "Go up, build an altar to Yahweh on the threshing floor of Araunah
the Jebusite."

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> David went up according to the saying
of Gad, as Yahweh commanded.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Araunah looked out, and saw the king
and his servants coming on toward him. Then Araunah went out, and bowed
himself before the king with his face to the ground.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Araunah said, "Why has my lord the king
come to his servant?" David said, "To buy your threshing floor, to build
an altar to Yahweh, that the plague may be stopped from afflicting the
people."

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> Araunah said to David, "Let my lord the
king take and offer up what seems good to him. Behold, the cattle for
the burnt offering, and the threshing instruments and the yokes of the
oxen for the wood:

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> all this, king, does Araunah give to
the king." Araunah said to the king, "May Yahweh your God accept you."

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> The king said to Araunah, "No; but I
will most certainly buy it from you for a price. I will not offer burnt
offerings to Yahweh my God which cost me nothing." So David bought the
threshing floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> David built an altar to Yahweh there,
and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So Yahweh was entreated
for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings](kg1)
