[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aza)  [Next](bel) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Susanna

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> There dwelt a man in Babylon, called
Joakim.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And he took a wife, whose name was Susanna,
the daughter of Hilkiah, a very fair woman and one who feared the Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Her parents also were righteous and taught
their daughter according to the law of Moses.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Now Joakim was a great rich man and had a
beautiful garden next to his house; and the Jews turned to him for help,
because he was more honorable than all others.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The same year, two of the elders of the
people were appointed to be judges, such ones as the Lord spoke of,
"Wickedness came from Babylon, from ancient judges, who seemed to govern
the people."

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> These spent much time at Joakim's house,
and all those who had any lawsuits came to them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Now when the people departed away at noon,
Susanna went into her husband's garden to walk.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the two elders saw her going in every
day and walking, so that their lust was inflamed toward her.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And they perverted their own mind and
turned away their eyes, so that they would not look to heaven, nor
remember just judgments.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And although they both were wounded with
her love, yet each dared not show the other his grief.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For they were ashamed to declare their
lust, that they desired to have to do with her.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Yet they watched diligently from day to
day to see her.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the one said to the other, "Let us go
home now, for it is dinner time."

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> So when they had gone out, they each
parted from the other, and turning back again they came to the same
place; and after they had asked each another the reason, they
acknowledged their lust, then they both appointed themselves a time when
they might find her alone.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And it happened, as they watched for a
fitting time, that she went in as before with two maids only, and she
intended to wash herself in the garden, for it was hot.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And there was no one there except the two
elders, who had hidden themselves and watched her.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Then she said to her maids, "Bring me oil
and washing balls and shut the garden doors, so that I may wash myself."

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And they did as she asked them, and shut
the garden doors, and went out themselves through private doors to fetch
the things that she had commanded them; but they did not see the elders,
because they were hidden.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Now when the maids were gone, the two
elders rose up and ran to her, saying,

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> "Behold, the garden doors are shut, so
that no man can see us, and we are in love with you; therefore consent
to us and lie with us.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> If you will not, we will bear witness
against you that a young man was with you, and therefore you sent your
maids away from you."

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Then Susanna sighed and said, "I am
hemmed in on every side; for if I do this thing, it is death to me; and
if I do not do it, I cannot escape your hands.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> It is better for me to fall into your
hands and not do it, than to sin in the sight of the Lord."

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> With that, Susanna cried with a loud
voice, and the two elders cried out against her.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Then the one ran and opened the garden
door.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> So when the servants of the house heard
the cry in the garden, they rushed in through the private door to see
what had happened to her.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> But, when the elders had declared their
story, the servants were greatly ashamed, for there was never such a
report made of Susanna.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And it came to pass the next day, when
the people were assembled before her husband Joakim, that the two elders
also came, full of mischievous imagination against Susanna to put her to
death;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> And they said before the people, "Send
for Susanna, the daughter of Hilkiah, Joakim's wife." And so they sent
for her.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> So she came with her father and mother,
her children, and all her kindred.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Now, Susanna was a very delicate woman
and beautiful to behold.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And these wicked men commanded her to
uncover her face, (for she was covered,) that they might be filled with
her beauty.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Therefore, her friends and all that saw
her wept.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> Then the two elders stood up in the midst
of the people and laid their hands upon her head.

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And she looked up toward heaven weeping,
for her heart trusted in the Lord.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And the elders said, "As we walked in the
garden alone, this woman came in with two maids and shut the garden
doors and sent the maids away.

<span id="an_1:37">1:37</span> Then a young man, who was hidden there,
came to her and lay with her.

<span id="an_1:38">1:38</span> Then, standing in a corner of the garden,
we saw this wickedness and ran towards them.

<span id="an_1:39">1:39</span> And when we saw them together, the man we
could not hold, for he was stronger than us, and he opened the door and
leaped out.

<span id="an_1:40">1:40</span> But having taken this woman, we asked her
who the young man was, but she would not tell us; to these things we
testify."

<span id="an_1:41">1:41</span> Then the assembly believed them because
they were the elders and judges of the people; so they condemned her to
death.

<span id="an_1:42">1:42</span> Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice
and said, "O everlasting God, who knows the secrets and knows all things
before they be:

<span id="an_1:43">1:43</span> You know that they have borne false
witness against me, and behold I must die; though I never did such
things as these men have maliciously invented against me."

<span id="an_1:44">1:44</span> And the Lord heard her voice.

<span id="an_1:45">1:45</span> Therefore, when she was led to be put to
death, the Lord raised up the holy spirit of a young youth whose name
was Daniel,

<span id="an_1:46">1:46</span> who cried with a loud voice, "I am free
of the blood of this woman."

<span id="an_1:47">1:47</span> Then all the people turned toward him and
said, "What do these words you have spoken mean?"

<span id="an_1:48">1:48</span> So, standing in the midst of them, he
said, "Are you such fools, you sons of Israel, that you have condemned a
daughter of Israel without examination or knowledge of the truth?

<span id="an_1:49">1:49</span> Return again to the place of judgment,
for they have borne false witness against her."

<span id="an_1:50">1:50</span> Therefore all the people returned again
in haste, and the elders said to him, "Come, sit down among us and teach
us, since that God has given you the honor of an elder."

<span id="an_1:51">1:51</span> Then Daniel said to them, "Put these two
aside, one far from another, and I will examine them."

<span id="an_1:52">1:52</span> So, when they were put apart one from
another, he called one of them and said to him, "O you who has grown old
in wickedness, now your sins, which you have committed before this time,
have come to light.

<span id="an_1:53">1:53</span> For you have pronounced false judgment
and have condemned the innocent and have let the guilty go free; even
though the Lord says, 'The innocent and righteous you shall not slay.'

<span id="an_1:54">1:54</span> Now then, if you saw her, tell me, under
what tree did you see them consorting together?" He answered, "Under a
mastick tree."

<span id="an_1:55">1:55</span> And Daniel said, "Very well; you have
lied against your own head; for even now the angel of God has received
the sentence of God to cut you in two."

<span id="an_1:56">1:56</span> So he put him aside and commanded them to
bring the other, and he said to him, "O you, offspring of Canaan and not
of Judah, beauty has deceived you and lust has perverted your heart.

<span id="an_1:57">1:57</span> Thus have you dealt with the daughters of
Israel, and they out of fear consorted with you; but the daughter of
Judah would not tolerate your wickedness.

<span id="an_1:58">1:58</span> Now therefore, tell me, under what tree
did you find them consorting together?" He answered, "Under an holm
tree."

<span id="an_1:59">1:59</span> Then Daniel said to him, "Well, you also
have lied against your own head; for the angel of God waits with the
sword to cut you in two, that he may destroy you."

<span id="an_1:60">1:60</span> With that all the assembly cried out with
a loud voice and praised God, who saves those who trust in him.

<span id="an_1:61">1:61</span> And they arose against the two elders,
for Daniel had convicted them of false witness by their own mouth.

<span id="an_1:62">1:62</span> And, according to the law of Moses, they
did to them in the same way as they maliciously intended to do to their
neighbor; and they put them to death. Thus, innocent blood was saved
that same day.

<span id="an_1:63">1:63</span> Therefore Hilkiah and his wife praised
God for their daughter Susanna, with Joakim her husband and all their
kindred, because there was no dishonesty found in her.

<span id="an_1:64">1:64</span> From that day forth, Daniel had a great
reputation in the sight of the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bel and the Dragon](bel)
