[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th1)  [Next](ti1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 2 Thessalonians

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the
assembly of the Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> We are bound to always give thanks to God
for you, brothers, even as it is appropriate, because your faith grows
exceedingly, and the love of each and every one of you towards one
another abounds;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> so that we ourselves boast about you in the
assemblies of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions
and in the afflictions which you endure.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> This is an obvious sign of the righteous
judgment of God, to the end that you may be counted worthy of the
Kingdom of God, for which you also suffer.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Since it is a righteous thing with God to
repay affliction to those who afflict you,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> and to give relief to you who are afflicted
with us, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty
angels in flaming fire,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> giving vengeance to those who don't know
God, and to those who don't obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> who will pay the penalty: eternal
destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> when he comes to be glorified in his
saints, and to be admired among all those who have believed (because our
testimony to you was believed) in that day.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> To this end we also pray always for you,
that our God may count you worthy of your calling, and fulfill every
desire of goodness and work of faith, with power;

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> that the name of our Lord Jesus may be
glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now, brothers, concerning the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together to him, we ask you

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> not to be quickly shaken in your mind, nor
yet be troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or by letter as from us,
saying that the day of Christ had come.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Let no one deceive you in any way. For it
will not be, unless the departure comes first, and the man of sin is
revealed, the son of destruction,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> he who opposes and exalts himself against
all that is called God or that is worshiped; so that he sits as God in
the temple of God, setting himself up as God.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Don't you remember that, when I was still
with you, I told you these things?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Now you know what is restraining him, to
the end that he may be revealed in his own season.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the mystery of lawlessness already
works. Only there is one who restrains now, until he is taken out of the
way.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Then the lawless one will be revealed, whom
the Lord will kill with the breath of his mouth, and destroy by the
manifestation of his coming;

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> even he whose coming is according to the
working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and with all deception of wickedness for
those who are being lost, because they didn't receive the love of the
truth, that they might be saved.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Because of this, God sends them a working
of error, that they should believe a lie;

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> that they all might be judged who didn't
believe the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But we are bound to always give thanks to
God for you, brothers loved by the Lord, because God chose you from the
beginning for salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief
in the truth;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> to which he called you through our Good
News, for the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> So then, brothers, stand firm, and hold
the traditions which you were taught by us, whether by word, or by
letter.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
God our Father, who loved us and gave us eternal comfort and good hope
through grace,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> comfort your hearts and establish you in
every good work and word.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the
word of the Lord may spread rapidly and be glorified, even as also with
you;

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and evil men; for not all have faith.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> But the Lord is faithful, who will
establish you, and guard you from the evil one.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> We have confidence in the Lord concerning
you, that you both do and will do the things we command.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> May the Lord direct your hearts into the
love of God, and into the patience of Christ.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Now we command you, brothers, in the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw yourselves from every
brother who walks in rebellion, and not after the tradition which they
received from us.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For you know how you ought to imitate us.
For we didn't behave ourselves rebelliously among you,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> neither did we eat bread from anyone's hand
without paying for it, but in labor and travail worked night and day,
that we might not burden any of you;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> not because we don't have the right, but to
make ourselves an example to you, that you should imitate us.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For even when we were with you, we
commanded you this: "If anyone will not work, neither let him eat."

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For we hear of some who walk among you in
rebellion, who don't work at all, but are busybodies.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Now those who are that way, we command
and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and
eat their own bread.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But you, brothers, don't be weary in
doing well.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> If any man doesn't obey our word in this
letter, note that man, that you have no company with him, to the end
that he may be ashamed.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Don't count him as an enemy, but admonish
him as a brother.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Now may the Lord of peace himself give
you peace at all times in all ways. The Lord be with you all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The greeting of me, Paul, with my own
hand, which is the sign in every letter: this is how I write.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy](ti1)
