[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th2)  [Next](ti2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: 1 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according
to the commandment of God our Savior, and Christ Jesus our hope;

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> to Timothy, my true child in faith: Grace,
mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> As I urged you when I was going into
Macedonia, stay at Ephesus that you might command certain men not to
teach a different doctrine,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> neither to pay attention to myths and
endless genealogies, which cause disputes, rather than God's
stewardship, which is in faith--

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> but the goal of this command is love, out
of a pure heart and a good conscience and sincere faith;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> from which things some, having missed the
mark, have turned aside to vain talking;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> desiring to be teachers of the law, though
they understand neither what they say, nor about what they strongly
affirm.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But we know that the law is good, if a man
uses it lawfully,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> as knowing this, that law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and insubordinate, for the ungodly
and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and
murderers of mothers, for manslayers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> for the sexually immoral, for
homosexuals, for slave-traders, for liars, for perjurers, and for any
other thing contrary to the sound doctrine;

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> according to the Good News of the glory
of the blessed God, which was committed to my trust.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And I thank him who enabled me, Christ
Jesus our Lord, because he counted me faithful, appointing me to
service;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> although I was before a blasphemer, a
persecutor, and insolent. However, I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorantly in unbelief.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> The grace of our Lord abounded
exceedingly with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> The saying is faithful and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of
whom I am chief.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> However, for this cause I obtained mercy,
that in me first, Jesus Christ might display all his patience, for an
example of those who were going to believe in him for eternal life.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now to the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, to God who alone is wise, be honor and glory forever and
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> This instruction I commit to you, my
child Timothy, according to the prophecies which led the way to you,
that by them you may wage the good warfare;

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> holding faith and a good conscience;
which some having thrust away made a shipwreck concerning the faith;

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom
I delivered to Satan, that they might be taught not to blaspheme.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I exhort therefore, first of all, that
petitions, prayers, intercessions, and givings of thanks, be made for
all men:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> for kings and all who are in high places;
that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and
reverence.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> who desires all people to be saved and come
to full knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For there is one God, and one mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> who gave himself as a ransom for all; the
testimony in its own times;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> to which I was appointed a preacher and an
apostle (I am telling the truth in Christ, not lying), a teacher of the
Gentiles in faith and truth.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I desire therefore that the men in every
place pray, lifting up holy hands without anger and doubting.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> In the same way, that women also adorn
themselves in decent clothing, with modesty and propriety; not just with
braided hair, gold, pearls, or expensive clothing;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> but (which becomes women professing
godliness) with good works.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Let a woman learn in quietness with all
subjection.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But I don't permit a woman to teach, nor
to exercise authority over a man, but to be in quietness.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For Adam was first formed, then Eve.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Adam wasn't deceived, but the woman,
being deceived, has fallen into disobedience;

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> but she will be saved through her
childbearing, if they continue in faith, love, and sanctification with
sobriety.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> This is a faithful saying: if a man seeks
the office of an overseer, he desires a good work.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The overseer therefore must be without
reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, sensible, modest,
hospitable, good at teaching;

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> not a drinker, not violent, not greedy for
money, but gentle, not quarrelsome, not covetous;

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> one who rules his own house well, having
children in subjection with all reverence;

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> (but if a man doesn't know how to rule his
own house, how will he take care of the assembly of God?)

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> not a new convert, lest being puffed up he
fall into the same condemnation as the devil.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Moreover he must have good testimony from
those who are outside, to avoid falling into reproach and the snare of
the devil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Servants, in the same way, must be
reverent, not double-tongued, not addicted to much wine, not greedy for
money;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Let them also first be tested; then let
them serve if they are blameless.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Their wives in the same way must be
reverent, not slanderers, temperate, faithful in all things.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let servants be husbands of one wife,
ruling their children and their own houses well.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For those who have served well gain for
themselves a good standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> These things I write to you, hoping to
come to you shortly;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> but if I wait long, that you may know how
men ought to behave themselves in the house of God, which is the
assembly of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Without controversy, the mystery of
godliness is great: God was revealed in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the
world, and received up in glory.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> But the Spirit says expressly that in later
times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to seducing
spirits and doctrines of demons,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> through the hypocrisy of men who speak
lies, branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron;

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> forbidding marriage and commanding to
abstain from foods which God created to be received with thanksgiving by
those who believe and know the truth.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For every creature of God is good, and
nothing is to be rejected, if it is received with thanksgiving.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For it is sanctified through the word of
God and prayer.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> If you instruct the brothers of these
things, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, nourished in the
words of the faith, and of the good doctrine which you have followed.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But refuse profane and old wives' fables.
Exercise yourself toward godliness.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For bodily exercise has some value, but
godliness has value in all things, having the promise of the life which
is now, and of that which is to come.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> This saying is faithful and worthy of all
acceptance.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For to this end we both labor and suffer
reproach, because we have set our trust in the living God, who is the
Savior of all men, especially of those who believe.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Command and teach these things.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no man despise your youth; but be an
example to those who believe, in word, in your way of life, in love, in
spirit, in faith, and in purity.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Until I come, pay attention to reading,
to exhortation, and to teaching.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Don't neglect the gift that is in you,
which was given to you by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of
the elders.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Be diligent in these things. Give
yourself wholly to them, that your progress may be revealed to all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Pay attention to yourself, and to your
teaching. Continue in these things, for in doing this you will save both
yourself and those who hear you.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Don't rebuke an older man, but exhort him
as a father; the younger men as brothers;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> the elder women as mothers; the younger as
sisters, in all purity.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Honor widows who are widows indeed.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But if any widow has children or
grandchildren, let them learn first to show piety towards their own
family, and to repay their parents, for this is acceptable in the sight
of God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now she who is a widow indeed, and
desolate, has her hope set on God, and continues in petitions and
prayers night and day.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> But she who gives herself to pleasure is
dead while she lives.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Also command these things, that they may be
without reproach.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But if anyone doesn't provide for his own,
and especially his own household, he has denied the faith, and is worse
than an unbeliever.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let no one be enrolled as a widow under
sixty years old, having been the wife of one man,

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> being approved by good works, if she has
brought up children, if she has been hospitable to strangers, if she has
washed the saints' feet, if she has relieved the afflicted, and if she
has diligently followed every good work.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But refuse younger widows, for when they
have grown wanton against Christ, they desire to marry;

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> having condemnation, because they have
rejected their first pledge.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Besides, they also learn to be idle,
going about from house to house. Not only idle, but also gossips and
busybodies, saying things which they ought not.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I desire therefore that the younger
widows marry, bear children, rule the household, and give no occasion to
the adversary for insulting.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> For already some have turned aside after
Satan.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any man or woman who believes has
widows, let them relieve them, and don't let the assembly be burdened;
that it might relieve those who are widows indeed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let the elders who rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in the word and in
teaching.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For the Scripture says, "You shall not
muzzle the ox when it treads out the grain." And, "The laborer is worthy
of his wages."

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Don't receive an accusation against an
elder, except at the word of two or three witnesses.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Those who sin, reprove in the sight of
all, that the rest also may be in fear.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I command you in the sight of God, and
Christ Jesus, and the chosen angels, that you observe these things
without prejudice, doing nothing by partiality.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Lay hands hastily on no one, neither be a
participant in other men's sins. Keep yourself pure.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Be no longer a drinker of water only, but
use a little wine for your stomach's sake and your frequent infirmities.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Some men's sins are evident, preceding
them to judgment, and some also follow later.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> In the same way also there are good works
that are obvious, and those that are otherwise can't be hidden.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Let as many as are bondservants under the
yoke count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God
and the doctrine not be blasphemed.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Those who have believing masters, let them
not despise them, because they are brothers, but rather let them serve
them, because those who partake of the benefit are believing and
beloved. Teach and exhort these things.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If anyone teaches a different doctrine, and
doesn't consent to sound words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the doctrine which is according to godliness,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> he is conceited, knowing nothing, but
obsessed with arguments, disputes, and word battles, from which come
envy, strife, insulting, evil suspicions,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> constant friction of people of corrupt
minds and destitute of the truth, who suppose that godliness is a means
of gain. Withdraw yourself from such.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But godliness with contentment is great
gain.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For we brought nothing into the world, and
we certainly can't carry anything out.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But having food and clothing, we will be
content with that.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But those who are determined to be rich
fall into a temptation and a snare and many foolish and harmful lusts,
such as drown men in ruin and destruction.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For the love of money is a root of all
kinds of evil. Some have been led astray from the faith in their greed,
and have pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But you, man of God, flee these things,
and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and
gentleness.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Fight the good fight of faith. Lay hold
of the eternal life to which you were called, and you confessed the good
confession in the sight of many witnesses.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I command you before God, who gives life
to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate
testified the good confession,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> that you keep the commandment without
spot, blameless, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> which in its own times he will show, who
is the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> who alone has immortality, dwelling in
unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor can see: to whom be
honor and eternal power. Amen.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Charge those who are rich in this present
world that they not be haughty, nor have their hope set on the
uncertainty of riches, but on the living God, who richly provides us
with everything to enjoy;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> that they do good, that they be rich in
good works, that they be ready to distribute, willing to communicate;

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold of eternal
life.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Timothy, guard that which is committed to
you, turning away from the empty chatter and oppositions of the
knowledge which is falsely so called;

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> which some professing have erred
concerning the faith. Grace be with you. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy](ti2)
