[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti2)  [Next](plm) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Titus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of
Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God's chosen ones, and the
knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> in hope of eternal life, which God, who
can't lie, promised before time began;

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> but in his own time revealed his word in
the message with which I was entrusted according to the commandment of
God our Savior;

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> to Titus, my true child according to a
common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ our Savior.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> I left you in Crete for this reason, that
you would set in order the things that were lacking, and appoint elders
in every city, as I directed you;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> if anyone is blameless, the husband of one
wife, having children who believe, who are not accused of loose or
unruly behavior.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For the overseer must be blameless, as
God's steward; not self-pleasing, not easily angered, not given to wine,
not violent, not greedy for dishonest gain;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> but given to hospitality, a lover of good,
sober minded, fair, holy, self-controlled;

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> holding to the faithful word which is
according to the teaching, that he may be able to exhort in the sound
doctrine, and to convict those who contradict him.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For there are also many unruly men, vain
talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> whose mouths must be stopped; men who
overthrow whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for
dishonest gain's sake.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> One of them, a prophet of their own,
said, "Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and idle gluttons."

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> This testimony is true. For this cause,
reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> not paying attention to Jewish fables and
commandments of men who turn away from the truth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> To the pure, all things are pure; but to
those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but both their
mind and their conscience are defiled.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> They profess that they know God, but by
their works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and unfit for
any good work.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But say the things which fit sound
doctrine,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> that older men should be temperate,
sensible, sober minded, sound in faith, in love, and in patience:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> and that older women likewise be reverent
in behavior, not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine, teachers of that
which is good;

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> that they may train the young women to love
their husbands, to love their children,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> to be sober minded, chaste, workers at
home, kind, being in subjection to their own husbands, that God's word
may not be blasphemed.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Likewise, exhort the younger men to be
sober minded;

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> in all things showing yourself an example
of good works; in your teaching showing integrity, seriousness,
incorruptibility,

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> and soundness of speech that can't be
condemned; that he who opposes you may be ashamed, having no evil thing
to say about us.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Exhort servants to be in subjection to
their own masters, and to be well-pleasing in all things; not
contradicting;

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> not stealing, but showing all good
fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God, our Savior, in all
things.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the grace of God has appeared,
bringing salvation to all men,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> instructing us to the intent that,
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we would live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world;

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> looking for the blessed hope and
appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ;

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify for himself a people for his own
possession, zealous for good works.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Say these things and exhort and reprove
with all authority. Let no man despise you.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Remind them to be in subjection to rulers
and to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> to speak evil of no one, not to be
contentious, to be gentle, showing all humility toward all men.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For we were also once foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and
envy, hateful, and hating one another.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But when the kindness of God our Savior and
his love toward mankind appeared,

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> not by works of righteousness, which we did
ourselves, but according to his mercy, he saved us, through the washing
of regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit,

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> whom he poured out on us richly, through
Jesus Christ our Savior;

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> that, being justified by his grace, we
might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> This saying is faithful, and concerning
these things I desire that you affirm confidently, so that those who
have believed God may be careful to maintain good works. These things
are good and profitable to men;

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> but shun foolish questionings, genealogies,
strife, and disputes about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Avoid a factious man after a first and
second warning;

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> knowing that such a one is perverted, and
sins, being self-condemned.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus,
be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined to winter
there.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Send Zenas, the lawyer, and Apollos on
their journey speedily, that nothing may be lacking for them.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Let our people also learn to maintain
good works for necessary uses, that they may not be unfruitful.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> All who are with me greet you. Greet
those who love us in faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon](plm)
