[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rev)  [Next](jdt) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### World English Bible: Tobias

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The book of the words of Tobit, son of
Tobiel, the son of Ananiel, the son of Aduel, the son of Gabael, a
descendent of Asael, of the tribe of Naphtali,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> who, in the time of Shalmaneser king of the
Assyrians, was led captive out of Thisbe, which is at the right hand of
that city, which is properly called Naphtali, in Galilee above Asher.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I, Tobit, have walked all the days of my
life in the ways of truth and justice, and I performed many charitable
deeds for my brethren and my nation, who came with me to Nineveh into
the land of the Assyrians.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And when I was in my own country, in the
land of Israel, in my youth, with all the tribe of Naphtali, my father
fell away from the house of Jerusalem, which was chosen out of all the
tribes of Israel so that all the tribes should sacrifice there, where
the Temple of the dwelling place of the most High was consecrated and
built for all ages.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Now all the tribes which revolted together,
and the house of my father Naphtali, sacrificed to the heifer Baal.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> But I alone went often to Jerusalem at the
feasts, as it was ordained for all the people of Israel by an
everlasting decree, bringing the first fruits and tenths of increase,
with the first-shorn sheep, and these I gave at the altar to the
priests, the children of Aaron.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The first tenth part of all increase I gave
to the sons of Aaron, who ministered at Jerusalem; another tenth part I
sold, and went, and spent it every year at Jerusalem;

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> and the third I gave to those who were in
need, as Deborah my father's mother had commanded me, because I was left
an orphan by my father.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Furthermore, when I had reached the age of
a man, I married Anna of my own kindred, and of her, I fathered Tobias.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And when we were carried away captives to
Nineveh, all my brethren and those who were of my kindred ate of the
bread of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But I kept myself from eating,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> because I remembered God with all my
heart.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the most High gave me grace and favor
before Shalmaneser, so that I was his purveyor.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And I went into Media, and I left in
trust with Gabael, the brother of Gabrias, at Rages a city of Media, ten
talents of silver.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Now when Shalmaneser was dead,
Sennacherib his son reigned in his place; but his reign was troubled so
that I could not go into Media.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And in the time of Shalmaneser I gave
many alms to my brethren and gave my bread to the hungry,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> and my clothes to the naked; and if I saw
any of my nation dead, or cast out around the walls of Nineveh, I buried
him.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And if the king Sennacherib had slain
anyone, when he arrived and fled from Judea, I buried them privately;
for in his wrath he killed many, but the bodies were not found when they
were sought by the king.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And when one of the Ninevites went and
complained to the king about me, that I buried them and hid myself, I
understood that I was sought to be put to death, so I withdrew myself
out of fear.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Then all my goods were forcibly taken
away, neither was there anything left for me, except my wife Anna and my
son Tobias.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And before fifty-five days had passed,
two of his sons killed him and they fled into the mountains of Ararath;
and Sarchedonus his son reigned in his place; he appointed, over his
father's accounts and over all his affairs, Achiacharus, my brother
Anael's son.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And since Achiacharus petitioned for me,
I returned to Nineveh. Now Achiacharus was cupbearer and keeper of the
signet and steward and overseer of the accounts; and Sarchedonus
appointed him next to him; and he was my brother's son.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now when I arrived home again, and my wife
Anna was restored to me with my son Tobias, at the feast of Pentecost,
which is the holy feast of the seven weeks, a good dinner was prepared
for me, which I sat down to eat.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And when I saw the abundance of meat, I
said to my son, "Go and bring whatsoever poor man you find among our
brethren, who is mindful of the Lord, and, see, I will wait for you."

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> But he returned and said, "Father, one of
our nation was strangled and cast out in the marketplace."

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Then, before I had tasted any of the meat,
I went out, and took him up into a room until sundown.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then I returned, and washed myself, and ate
my meat in sadness,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> remembering the prophecy of Amos, as he
said, "Your feasts shall be turned into mourning and all your mirth into
lamentation."

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Therefore I wept, and after sundown I went
and made a grave and buried him.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But my neighbors mocked me and said, "This
man is still not afraid to be put to death for this matter; and, see,
though he fled away before, he now buries the dead again."

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> That same night, I returned from the burial
and slept by the wall of my courtyard, because I was polluted. And my
face was uncovered,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> and I did not know that there were
sparrows in the wall. And, since my eyes were open, the sparrows emitted
warm dung into my eyes, and a whiteness fell into my eyes. And I went to
the physicians, but they did not help me. Moreover, Achiacharus had to
nourish me, until I went into Elymais.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And my wife Anna took in women's work.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And when she had sent these home again to
the owners, they paid her her wages and gave her in addition a young
goat.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And when it was in my house, and began to
call out, I said to her, "Where did this young goat come from? Is it not
stolen? Return it to the owners, for it is not lawful to eat anything
which is stolen."

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But she replied to me, "It was given as a
gift, over and above my wages." However, I did not believe her, but
directed her to return it to the owners, and I was ashamed at her. But
she replied to me, "Where are your alms and your righteous deeds? See
now, you and all your works are known."

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then I was grieved and I wept, and in my
sorrow I prayed, saying,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> "O Lord, you are just, and all your works
and all your ways are mercy and truth, and you judge truly and justly
for ever.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Remember me and look upon me, do not punish
me for my sins and my ignorance, nor for the sins of my fathers, who
sinned before you,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> for they did not obey your commandments.
Therefore you have delivered us as spoil, and into captivity, and to
death, and as a proverb of reproach to all the nations among whom we are
dispersed.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And now your judgments are many and true.
Deal with me according to my sins and my fathers' sins, because we have
not kept your commandments, nor have we walked in truth before you.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Now therefore deal with me as it seems best
to you, and command my spirit to be taken from me, so that I may be
dissolved and become earth; for it is better for me to die than to live,
because I have heard false reproaches and have much sorrow. Command
therefore that I may now be delivered out of this distress and go into
the everlasting place. Do not turn your face away from me."

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> It happened the same day, in Ecbatane a
city of Media, that Sarah the daughter of Raguel was also reproached by
her father's maids;

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> because she had been married to seven
husbands, whom Asmodeus the evil spirit had killed, before they had lain
with her. "Do you not know," they said, "that you have strangled your
husbands? You have already had seven husbands, yet you have not taken
the name of any of them.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> So then, do you beat us because of them? If
they are dead, go your way after them; let us never see either son or
daughter from you."

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> When she heard these things, she was very
sorrowful, so that she thought about strangling herself; but she said,
"I am the only daughter of my father, and if I do this, it shall be a
reproach to him, and I shall bring his old age with sorrow to the
grave."

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Then she prayed toward the window and
said, "Blessed are you, O Lord my God, and your holy and glorious name
is blessed and honorable for ever; let all your works praise you for
ever.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And now, O Lord, I set my eyes and my
face toward you,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> and say, 'Take me out of the earth, so
that I may no longer hear this reproach.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> You know, Lord, that I am pure, free from
all sin with man,

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> and that I never polluted my name, nor
the name of my father, in the land of my captivity. I am the only
daughter of my father, and he has no child to be his heir; nor does he
have any near kinsman, nor any son of a near kinsman alive, to whom I
might give myself as a wife. My seven husbands are already dead and so
why should I live? But if it does not please you that I should die, then
command some regard to be given to me and pity to be taken on me, so
that I will no longer hear reproach.'"

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> So the prayers of them both were heard
before the majesty of the great God.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And Raphael was sent to heal them both,
that is, to scale away the whiteness of Tobit's eyes, and to give Sarah
the daughter of Raguel as a wife to Tobias the son of Tobit; and to bind
Asmodeus the evil spirit, because she belonged to Tobias by right of
inheritance. At the very same time, Tobit came home and entered into his
house, and Sarah the daughter of Raguel came down from her upper room.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> On that day Tobit remembered the money
which he had committed to Gabael in Rages of Media,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> and he said to himself, "I have wished for
death; therefore should I not call for my son Tobias so that I may
transfer the money to him before I die?"

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And when he had called him, he said, "My
son, when I am dead, bury me; and do not despise your mother, but honor
her all the days of your life, and do what pleases her, and do not
grieve her.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Remember, my son, that she endured many
dangers for you, when you were in her womb; and when she is dead, bury
her next to me in one grave.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> My son, be mindful of the Lord our God all
your days, and do not let your will be set to sin, nor to transgress his
commandments; act uprightly all your life long, and do not follow the
ways of the unrighteousness.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For if you deal truly, your actions shall
bring prosperity to you and to all those who live justly.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> "Give alms from your resources; and when
you give alms, do not let your eye be envious, nor turn your face from
any of the poor, and then the face of God shall not be turned away from
you.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> If you have abundance, give alms
accordingly; if you have only a little, do not be afraid to give
according to that little;

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> for you will store up a good treasure for
yourself against the day of necessity,

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> because alms deliver from death and
preserve from falling into darkness.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For alms is a good gift, for all those
who give it, in the sight of the most High.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Beware of all whoredom, my son, and
prefer to take a wife from the posterity of your forefathers, and do not
take a strange woman to wife, who is not of your father's tribe; for we
are the children of the prophets, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Remember, my son, that our fathers from the beginning, all of them
married wives of their own kindred, and were blessed in their children,
and their posterity shall inherit the land.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now therefore, my son, love your
brethren, and do not despise in your heart your brethren, the sons and
daughters of your people, by not taking a wife from among them; for in
pride is destruction and much trouble, and in lewdness is decay and
great want; for lewdness is the mother of famine.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> "Do not let the wages of any man, who has
worked for you, be delayed by you, but give it to him promptly; for if
you serve God, he will also repay you. Be prudent, my son, in all things
you do, and be wise in all your conversation.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Do not do to any man the things which you
yourself hate. Do not drink wine to make you drunken; neither let
drunkenness go with you on your journey.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Give of your bread to the hungry, and of
your garments to those who are naked; and according to your abundance
give alms; and do not let your eye be envious, when you give alms.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Pour out your bread on the burial of the
just, but give nothing to the wicked.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Ask counsel of all who are wise, and
despise not any counsel which is beneficial.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> "Bless the Lord your God always, and
desire of him that your ways may be purposeful, and that all your paths
and counsels may prosper; for not every nation has counsel; but the Lord
himself gives all good things, and he humbles whom he will, as he will;
now therefore, my son, remember my commandments, neither let them be put
out of your mind.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And now I signify this to those who I
committed ten talents, to Gabael the son of Gabrias at Rages in Media.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And do not be afraid, my son, that we
might become poor; for you have much wealth, if you fear God and depart
from all sin and do what is pleasing in his sight."

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Tobias then answered and said, "Father, I
will do all things which you have commanded me;

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> but how can I receive the money, since I do
not know him?"

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then he gave him the handwriting, and said
to him, "Seek a man to go with you, while I yet live, and I will give
him wages; then go and receive the money."

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Therefore, when he went to seek a man, he
found Raphael who was an angel,

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> but he did not know it; and so he said to
him, "Can you go with me to Rages? And do you know those places well?"

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> The angel said to him, "I will go with you,
and I know the way well, for I have stayed with our brother Gabael."

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Then Tobias said to him, "Wait for me,
while I tell my father."

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Then he said to him, "Go and do not delay."
So he went in and said to his father, "See now, I have found one who
will go with me." Then he said, "Call him to me, so that I may learn
what tribe he is from and whether he is a trustworthy man to go with
you."

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> So he called him, and he came in, and they
greeted one another.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Then Tobit said to him, "Brother, tell me
what tribe and family you are from."

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> He said to him, "Do you seek for a tribe
or family, or for a hired man to go with your son?" Then Tobit said to
him, "I would know, brother, your kindred and name."

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Then he said, "I am Azariah, the son of
Ananiah the great and of your brethren."

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Then Tobit said, "You are welcome,
brother; do not be angry with me now, because I asked about your tribe
and your family; for you are my brother, of an honest and good stock.
For I know Ananiah and Jonathan, sons of that great Samaiah, because we
went together to Jerusalem to worship, and offered the firstborn, and
the tenths of the fruits; and they were not seduced with the error of
our brethren. My brother, you are of good stock.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But tell me, what wages shall I give you?
Will you accept a drachma a day, plus whatever is needed for my own son?

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Fine, but moreover, if you return safe, I
will add something to your wages."

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So they were well pleased. Then he said
to Tobias, "Prepare yourself for the journey, and may God give you a
good journey." And when his son had prepared everything for the journey,
his father said, "Go with this man; and may God who dwells in heaven
prosper your journey, and may the angel of God keep you company." So
they both went forth, and the young man's dog with them.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> But Anna his mother wept and said to
Tobit, "Why have you sent our son away? Is he not the staff of our hand,
in going in and out before us?

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Do not be greedy to add money to money,
but consider it as refuse compared to our child.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For what the Lord has given us to live on
should be sufficient for us."

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Then Tobit said to her, "Do not worry, my
sister; he will return in safety, and your eyes will see him.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> For the good angel will keep him company,
and his journey will be prosperous, and he will return safe."

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Then she ended her weeping.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And as they went on their journey, they
arrived in the evening at the river Tigris, and they lodged there.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And when the young man went down to wash
himself, a fish leaped out of the river and would have devoured him.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Then the angel said to him, "Take the
fish." And the young man took hold of the fish, and drew it to land.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> The angel said to him, "Open the fish, and
take the heart and the liver and the gall, and store them well."

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> So the young man did as the angel commanded
him. And when they had roasted the fish, they ate it. Then they both
went on their way, until they drew near to Ecbatane.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then the young man said to the angel,
"Brother Azariah, of what use is the heart and the liver and the gall of
the fish?"

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he said to him, "Concerning the heart
and the liver, if a devil or an evil spirit troubles anyone, we must
make a smoke of these in front of the man or the woman, and then the
person will no longer be troubled.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> As for the gall, it is used to anoint a man
who has whiteness in his eyes, so he shall be healed."

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And when they had arrived near Rages,

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> the angel said to the young man,
"Brother, today we will stay with Raguel, who is your cousin; he also
has only one daughter, named Sarah; I will speak on her behalf, so that
she may be given to you as a wife,

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> for the rights concerning her belong to
you, because you are her only kindred.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the maiden is fair and wise;
therefore listen to me now, and I will speak to her father. And when we
return from Rages, we will celebrate the marriage, for I know that
Raguel cannot give her in marriage to another, according to the Law of
Moses, or he would be liable to death, because the right of inheritance
belongs to you more than to any other."

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Then the young man answered the angel, "I
have heard, brother Azariah, that this maiden has been given to seven
men, who each died in the marriage room.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And now, I am the only son of my father
and I am afraid that if I go in to her, I may die, as the others before
me, for a wicked spirit loves her, and he hurts no one except those who
come to her. Therefore, I also fear that I may die, and bring my
father's life and my mother's life because of me to the grave with
sorrow; for they have no other son to bury them."

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Then the angel said to him, "Do you not
remember the precepts which your father gave you, that you should marry
a wife of your own kindred? Therefore hear me, O my brother; for she
shall be given to you as a wife; and have no regard for the evil spirit;
for this same night she shall be given to you in marriage.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And when you come into the marriage room,
you shall take the ashes of perfume, and shall lay upon them some of the
heart and liver of the fish, and shall make a smoke with it.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And the devil will smell it, and flee
away, and never again return. But when you come to her, rise up both of
you and pray to God, who is merciful, who will have pity on you and save
you. Fear not, for she is appointed to you from the beginning; and you
will keep her, and she will accompany you. Moreover, I suppose that she
will bear you children." Now, when Tobias had heard these things, he
loved her, and his heart was ready to be joined to her.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And when they arrived at Ecbatane, they
came to the house of Raguel, and Sarah met them. And after they had
greeted one another, she brought them into the house.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Then Raguel said to Edna his wife, "How
much this young man is like Tobit my kinsman!"

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And Raguel asked them, "Where do you come
from, brethren?" They said to him, "We are of the sons of Naphtali, who
are captives in Nineveh."

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then he said to them, "Do you know Tobit
our kinsman?" And they said, "We know him." Then he said, "Is he in good
health?"

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And they said, "He is both alive and in
good health." And Tobias said, "He is my father."

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Then Raguel leaped up and kissed him and
wept.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And he blessed him and said to him, "You
are the son of an honest and good man." But when he heard that Tobit was
blind, he was sorrowful and wept.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And likewise Edna his wife and Sarah his
daughter wept. Yet still they entertained them cheerfully, and
afterwards they had a ram of the flock killed, and they set a supply of
meat on the table. Then Tobias said to Raphael, "Brother Azariah, speak
about those things which you spoke about on the way here, and let this
matter be completed."

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> So he communicated the matter to Raguel.
And Raguel said to Tobias, "Eat and drink, and make merry,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> for it is fitting that you should marry
my daughter. Nevertheless I will declare to you the truth.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> I have given my daughter in marriage to
seven men, who each died on the night that they came in to her.
Nevertheless be merry for now." But Tobias said, "I will eat nothing
here until we agree and swear one to another."

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Raguel said, "Then take her from this
time forward, according to the custom, for you are her kinsman, and she
is yours, and may the merciful God give you good success in all things."

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Then he called his daughter Sarah, and
she came to her father, and he took her by the hand and gave her to be
wife to Tobias, saying, "Behold, take her after the Law of Moses, and
lead her away to your father." And he blessed them.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And he called Edna his wife, and took
paper and wrote an instrument of covenants and sealed it.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Then they began to eat.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Afterwards Raguel called his wife Edna
and said to her, "Sister, prepare another room and bring her into it."

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Then, when she had done as he had asked
her, she brought her into it. And she wept and received the tears of her
daughter, and she said to her,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> "Be of good comfort, my daughter. May the
Lord of heaven and earth give you joy in place of this your sorrow. Be
of good comfort, my daughter."

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And when they had dined, they brought
Tobias in to her.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And as he went, he remembered the words of
Raphael. And he took the ashes of the perfumes, and put the heart and
the liver of the fish on them, and made a smoke with them.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> When the evil spirit had smelled this odor,
he fled into the utmost parts of Egypt, and the angel bound him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And afterwards, when they were both
secluded together, Tobias rose out of the bed and said, "Sister, arise,
and let us pray that God will have pity on us."

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Then Tobias began to say, "Blessed are you,
O God of our fathers, and blessed is your holy and glorious name for
ever; let the heavens bless you, and all your creatures.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> You made Adam, and gave him Eve his wife as
a helper and support; of them came mankind, for you have said, 'It is
not good that man should be alone; let us make him a helper like
himself.'

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And now, O Lord, I take not this my sister
for pleasure, but in righteousness; therefore mercifully ordain that we
may grow old together."

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And she said with him, "Amen."

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> So they both slept that night. And Raguel
arose, and went and made a grave,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> saying, "I am afraid that he too is
dead."

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> But when Raguel returned to his house,

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> he said to his wife Edna, "Send one of
the maids, and let her see if he is alive. If he is not, then we can
bury him, and no one will know of it."

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> So the maid opened the door and went in
and found them both asleep.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And she came forth and told them that he
was alive.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Then Raguel praised God and said, "O God,
you are worthy to be praised with all pure and holy praise; therefore
let your saints praise you with all your creatures, and let all your
angels and your elect praise you for ever.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> You are to be praised, for you have made
me joyful; and what I feared has not happened, but you have dealt with
us according to your great mercy.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> You are to be praised because you had
mercy on two who were each the only begotten children of their fathers;
grant them mercy, O Lord, and finish their life in health with joy and
mercy."

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Then Raguel directed his servants to fill
the grave.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And he kept the wedding feast for
fourteen days.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> For before the days of the marriage were
finished, Raguel had said to him by an oath, that he should not depart
until the fourteen days of the marriage were fulfilled,

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> and that then he should take half of his
goods and go in safety to his father, and that he would have the rest
"when I and my wife are dead."

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then Tobias called Raphael and said to him,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> "Brother Azariah, take a servant and two
camels with you, and go to Rages of Media to Gabael, and bring me the
money and bring him to the wedding.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> For Raguel has sworn that I shall not
depart,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> but my father counts the days, and if I
delay for long, he will be very sorrowful."

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> So Raphael went out and lodged with Gabael
and gave him the handwriting, so he brought out bags which were sealed
up and gave them to him.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And early in the morning they both went
forth together, and they arrived at the wedding; and Tobias blessed his
wife.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Now Tobit his father counted every day;
and when the days for the journey were completed, and they had not
returned,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> then Tobit said, "Are they detained? Or
is Gabael dead and there is no man to give him the money?"

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Therefore he was very sorrowful.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Then his wife said to him, "My son must
be dead, since he has been gone so long." And she began to wail him and
said,

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> "Now I care for nothing, my son, since I
have let go of you, who is the light of my eyes."

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Tobit said to her, "Hold your peace; do
not worry, for he is safe."

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But she said, "Hold your peace and
deceive me not; my son is dead." And she went out every day into the
way, by which they had departed, and she ate no meat in the daytime, and
she did not cease throughout the nights to bewail her son Tobias, until
the fourteen days of the wedding were completed, which Raguel had sworn
that he should spend there. Then Tobias said to Raguel, "Let me go, for
my father and my mother must have stopped looking for me."

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But his father-in-law said to him,
"Remain with me, and I will send messengers to your father, and they
will declare to him how things go with you."

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> But Tobias said, "No. But let me go to my
father."

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Then Raguel arose, and gave him Sarah
his wife, and half his goods, servants, and cattle, and money.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he blessed them and sent them away,
saying, "May the God of heaven give you a prosperous journey, my
children."

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And he said to his daughter, "Honor
your father and your mother-in-law, who are now your parents, so that I
may hear a good report about you." And he kissed her. Edna also said to
Tobias, "May the Lord of heaven return you, my dear brother, and grant
that I may see your children of my daughter Sarah before I die, so that
I may rejoice before the Lord. See now, I commit my daughter to you with
a special trust; therefore do not lead her into evil."

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> After these things Tobias went his way
praising God because he had given him a prosperous journey, and he
blessed Raguel and Edna his wife, and went on his way until they drew
near to Nineveh.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Then Raphael said to Tobias, "You know,
brother, how you left your father;

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> let us hurry ahead, before your wife, and
prepare the house;

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> and you should carry in your hand the
gall of the fish." So they went their way, and the dog went after them.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Now Anna sat looking around, toward the
way, for her son.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And when she spotted him arriving, she
said to his father, "See now, your son arrives, and the man who went
with him."

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Then Raphael said, "I know, Tobias, that
your father will open his eyes.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> Therefore anoint his eyes with the gall,
and being irritated by it, he will rub his eyes and the whiteness will
fall away, and then he will see you."

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Then Anna ran forth, and fell upon the
neck of her son, and said to him, "Since I have seen you, my son, from
now on I am content to die." And they both wept.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Tobit also went forth toward the door,
and stumbled, but his son ran to him.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And he took hold of his father and
struck his fathers' eyes with the gall, saying, "Be of good hope, my
father."

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And when his eyes began to sting, he
rubbed them;

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> and the whiteness pealed away from the
corners of his eyes; and when he saw his son, he fell upon his neck.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And he wept and said, "Blessed are you,
O God, and blessed is your name for ever; and blessed are all your holy
angels.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For you have scourged me, and have
taken pity on me; for, behold, I see my son Tobias." And his son went in
rejoicing, and he told his father the great things which had happened to
him in Media.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Then Tobit went out to meet his
daughter-in-law at the gate of Nineveh, rejoicing and praising God; and
those who saw him go marveled because he had received his sight.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> But Tobit gave thanks before them,
because God had mercy on him. And when he came near to Sarah his
daughter-in-law, he blessed her, saying, "You are welcome, daughter. May
God be blessed, who brought you to us, and blessed be your father and
your mother." And there was joy among all his brethren who were at
Nineveh.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And Achiacharus, and Nasbas his
brother's son, came.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And Tobias' wedding was kept for seven
days with great joy.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Then Tobit called his son Tobias and said
to him, "My son, see that the man who went with you has his wages and
you must give him more."

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And Tobias said to him, "O father, it is
no harm to me to give him half of those things which I have brought,

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> for he has returned me to you in safety,
and made my wife whole, and brought me the money, and likewise healed
you."

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then the old man said, "It is due to
him."

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> So he called the angel and he said to
him, "Take half of all that you have brought and go away in safety."

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Then the angel took them both aside and
said to them, "Bless God, praise him, and magnify him, and praise him
for all the things which he has done for you in the sight of all who
live. It is good to praise God and exalt his name and to honorably show
forth the works of God; therefore do not be negligent in praising him.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> It is good to keep close the secret of a
king, but it is honorable to reveal the works of God. Do what is good
and no evil shall touch you.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Prayer is good with fasting and alms and
righteousness. A little with righteousness is better than much with
unrighteousness. It is better to give alms than to store up gold,

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> for alms can deliver from death and will
purge away all sin. Those who practice almsgiving and righteousness
shall be filled with life;

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> but those who sin are enemies to their
own life.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Surely I will withhold nothing from
you, for I said that it is good to keep close the secret of a king, but
that it is honorable to reveal the works of God.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Now therefore, when you pray, and when
Sarah your daughter-in-law prays, I will bring the remembrance of your
prayers before the Holy One. And when you buried the dead, I was with
you likewise.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And when you did not delay to rise up
and leave your dinner, to go and cover the dead, your good deed was not
hidden from me, but I was with you.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And now God has sent me to heal you and
Sarah your daughter-in-law.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> I am Raphael, one of the seven holy
angels, who present the prayers of the saints, and who go in and out
before the glory of the Holy One."

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Then they were both troubled and fell
upon their faces, for they were afraid.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But he said to them, "Fear not, for it
shall go well with you; therefore praise God.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> For I came, not by any favor of mine,
but by the will of our God; therefore praise him for ever.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> All these days I appeared to you, yet I
neither ate nor drank, but you saw a vision.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Now therefore give God thanks, for I go
up to him who sent me; but write all these things which have happened in
a book."

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And when they arose, they saw him no
more.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then they confessed the great and
wonderful works of God, and how the angel of the Lord had appeared to
them.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Then Tobit wrote a prayer of rejoicing
and said, "Blessed be God who lives for ever and blessed be his kingdom.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> For he scourges and has mercy; he leads
down to hell and brings up again; neither is there any who can avoid his
hand.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Confess him before the Gentiles, you
children of Israel, for he has scattered us among them.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> There declare his greatness and extol him
before all the living, for he is our Lord and he is the God our Father
for ever.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And he will scourge us for our
iniquities, and will have mercy again, and will gather us out of all the
nations among whom he has scattered us.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> If you turn to him with your whole heart
and with your whole mind and deal uprightly before him, then he will
turn to you and will not hide his face from you. Therefore see what he
will do with you, and confess him with your whole mouth, and praise the
Lord of might, and extol the everlasting King. In the land of my
captivity, I praise him and declare his might and majesty to a sinful
nation. O you sinners, turn and do justice before him; who can tell if
he will accept you and have mercy on you?

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> "I will extol my God and my soul shall
praise the King of heaven and shall rejoice in his greatness.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Let all men speak and let all praise him
for his righteousness.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> O Jerusalem, the holy city, he will
scourge you for your children's works and will have mercy again on the
sons of the righteous.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Give praise to the Lord, for he is
good, and praise the everlasting King, so that his tabernacle may be
built in you again with joy; and there let him make joyful in you those
who are captives, and love in you for ever those who are miserable.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Many nations shall come from far to the
name of the Lord God with gifts in their hands, with gifts to the King
of heaven; all generations shall praise you with great joy.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Cursed are all those who hate you and
blessed shall be all those who love you for ever.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Rejoice and be glad for the children of
the just, for they shall be gathered together and shall bless the Lord
of the just.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> O blessed are those who love you, for
they shall rejoice in your peace. Blessed are those who have been
sorrowful for all your scourges, for they shall rejoice for you, when
they have seen all your glory, and shall be glad for ever.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Let my soul bless God the great King.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> For Jerusalem shall be built up with
sapphires and emeralds and precious stone, your walls and towers and
battlements with pure gold.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And the streets of Jerusalem shall be
paved with beryl and carbuncle and stones of Ophir.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And all her streets shall say,
'Alleluia,' and they shall praise him, saying, 'Blessed be God, who has
extolled it for ever.'"

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> So Tobit ended his prayer praising God.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And he was fifty-eight years old when he
lost his sight, which was restored to him after eight years; and he gave
alms, and he increased in the fear of the Lord God and praised him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And when he was very aged, he called his
son, and the sons of his son, and said to him, "My son, take your
children, for see now I am aged and ready to depart out of this life.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Go into Media, my son, for I surely
believe those things which Jonah the prophet spoke about Nineveh, that
it shall be overthrown, and that for a time peace shall rest in Media
instead, and that our brethren shall lie scattered across the earth from
that good land, and Jerusalem shall be desolate, and the house of God in
it shall be burned and shall be desolate for a time.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And again God will have mercy on them and
bring them again into the land, where they shall build a temple, but not
like the first, until the time of that age is fulfilled; and afterward
they shall return from all the places of their captivity and build up
Jerusalem gloriously, and the house of God shall be built in it for ever
with a glorious building, just as the prophets have spoken.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And all nations shall turn and fear the
Lord God truly, and shall bury their idols.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> So shall all nations praise the Lord, and
his people shall confess God, and the Lord will exalt his people; and
all those who love the Lord God in truth and justice shall rejoice,
showing mercy to our brethren.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> "And now, my son, depart out of Nineveh,
because those things of which the prophet Jonah spoke will surely come
to pass.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> But you, keep the law and the
commandments and show yourself to be merciful and just, so that it may
go well with you.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And bury me decently, and your mother
with me; but delay no longer at Nineveh. Remember, my son, how Aman
handled Achiacharus, who brought him up; how out of light he brought him
into darkness, and how he took notice of him again; yet Achiacharus was
saved, but the other had his just reward, for he went down into
darkness. Manasseh gave alms and escaped the snares of death which they
had set for him, but Aman fell into the snare and perished.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> Therefore now, my son, consider what
alms can do and how righteousness can deliver." When he had said these
things, he gave up his spirit in the bed, when he was one hundred
fifty-eight years old; and he buried him honorably.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And when Anna his mother was dead, he
buried her with his father. But Tobias departed with his wife and
children to Ecbatane, to Raguel his father-in-law.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> There he became old with honor, and he
buried his father-in-law and mother-in-law honorably, and he inherited
their belongings and his father Tobit's belongings.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And he died at Ecbatane in Media, when
he was one hundred twenty-seven years old.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> But before he died, he heard of the
destruction of Nineveh, which was taken by Nebuchadnezzar and Ahasuerus;
and before his death he rejoiced over Nineveh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith](jdt)
