[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig03)  [Next](vig05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE STORY OF VIGA-GLUM

<span id="_Toc29619148">CHAPTER I</span>

THERE was a man called Ingiald, who lived at Thverá, on the Eyjafirth;
he was one of the original priests and a great chief, and he was already
in years when this story begins.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)
Ingiald was married, and had two sons, Steinolf and Eyiolf, both right
good men and fair to see. Ingiald himself was self-willed, reserved,
hard to deal with, and obstinate. He cared little for merchants, and did
not choose to submit to their arrogance. If he wanted anything from
them, he preferred sending other people for it to going himself.  
        One summer a ship came into Eyjafirth, the master of which was
named Hreidar: he was a man of great family, who had his home at Vorz in
Norway, and was very courageous and very popular. Ingiald’s son, Eyiolf,
was often about the ship in the course of the summer, and he and Hreidar
became great friends. Hreidar told him he should like to pass the winter
here in some house, and from the report he had heard he should prefer
that of Ingiald. Eyiolf said that such was not his father’s wont, but
still that he would see about it. When he came home, he spoke to his
father and asked him to take the master of the ship into his house--that
he was a good, worthy fellow--and pleaded strongly in his behalf.
Ingiald replied, "If you have invited him already, what is the use of
talking about it? I must bear my part in meeting the expense, and you
must bear yours in taking all the trouble;" but he added that he had
never had a foreigner staying with him before and that he was still not
desirous of doing so. Then Eyiolf answered, "It has not yet been settled
without your consent; but I have not had much share in the management of
the house as yet, and it seems your will that I should not have much, if
a guest is not to be received whom I have invited hither." "Well," said
Ingiald, "you shall have your own way in this matter, and the master and
one other man may come here. I shall make no charge, for your sake; but
you must take all the trouble for them, and I will defray the cost." "I
am well pleased," replied Eyiolf, "that so it should be."  
        Eyiolf went the next day, found Hreidar, and told him how
matters stood, whereupon Hreidar expressed his satisfaction and betook
himself, with his cargo, to Ingiald’s house. A short time afterwards he
learned that there was to be a great gathering there at Christmas. In
the meantime Ingiald, though reserved, was on good terms with him.  
        One day Hreidar asked Ingiald to go into the outhouse where his
cargo was; and when he went he invited him to choose whatever he liked
out of his goods. Ingiald said that he did not wish to take any of his
property, but acknowledged his liberality. Hreidar replied, "I have,
however, thought of something that you may want from us. I have been in
several of the best dwellings here in Eyjafirth, and I have seen none so
good as this; but the hangings for your hall are not such as to surpass
those of other people." So saying, he took from his chests a set of
hangings of such quality that no better had ever come to Iceland, and
gave them to Ingiald, who thanked him; and a friendly feeling was now
established between them. In the course of the winter Eyiolf said that
he should like to sail with Hreidar on his outward voyage, but Hreidar
did not answer him very readily. "Why," says Eyiolf, "will you not take
me with you? Do you not like me?" "I like you right well, but your
father will not approve of such a return for his hospitality, and I
should not like to repay his kindness by taking away a son who is such a
credit to him. If he approves, I shall willingly take you with me, and
be truly thankful for your going."  
        Now the traders prepared for their voyage, and when they were
ready, Eyiolf again asked Hreidar about taking him out: he told him what
he wanted, and how he did not mean to act in this matter against his
father’s wishes. Afterwards, he told his father how anxious he was to
go, and what had passed between himself and Hreidar. Ingiald said there
were few such mean as Hreidar to be found, "and what with your own
conduct and his tried worth, I shall allow you to go, for I am sure you
had better make the voyage with him than with any one else."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1](vig04.htm#fr_1) It might have been better to
keep the Icelandic term "Godi" in the text; for the civil duties of this
functionary were more important than his priestly office. "One of the
original priests" means one of the holders of a "Godord," or
"Mannaforrad," from the time of the settlement of the island at the
close of the ninths centry. On the nature of the Godi’s office, se Mr.
Dasent’s Preface to the Nial’s Saga, p. xlvi., and Maurer’s "Enstehung
des Isländischen Staats und seiner Verfassung" (München, 1852), ss. 82,
83, 89, etc. Compare also the subsequent note on the judicial
proceedings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](vig05)
