[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig09)  [Next](vig11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619154">CHAPTER VII</span>

GLUM sailed out to Iceland, and went home to Thverá, where he
straightway found his mother. She received him gladly, and told him the
unfairness of Sigmund and his father towards her. She bade him however
have patience, for that she was not able to cope with them. Then he rode
to the homestead, and saw that the fence ran in such a way as to
encroach on his property, and he sung these verses:--

Yes! closer than I thought, fair dame,  
This hedge so green hath hemm’d us in;  
Our peace at home is spoilt, and shame  
Must cling to us and all our kin.  
  
I sing it now, but in the fray  
I soon shall have to draw my sword.  
Too surely, whilst I’ve been away,  
My land hath found a wrongful lord.

        What had occurred whilst he was absent, was that Sigmund had
worried Astrida, and evidently wanted to drive her off her land. In the
autumn, before Glum returned, Sigmund and Thorkel had lost two heifers,
and supposed they had been stolen. Their suspicions fell on the serfs of
Astrida, who, they said, had no doubt killed and eaten them off hand,
and they caused these serfs to be summoned in the spring for the theft.
Now these were the best men Astrida had, and she thought she could
hardly mange her farm if they went away. So she went to her son
Thorstein, and told him what wrong Sigmund and his father were doing
her, and asked him to answer for her serfs. "I would rather atone for
them in money," she said, "than that they should be found guilty on a
false charge, and I should think it your business now to stand before
us, and to show yourself worthy of a good name." Thorstein seemed to
think that the prosecutors would so follow up the matter as to bring the
full force of their family interest to bear on it. "And if," said he,
"these serfs are essential to your household, we had better take such a
share of the fine as will make it possible to get the money to pay it."
"Yes," she answered, "but I hear that the only atonement they will take
is one which is intended to ruin us. However, as I see there is a little
help to be got where you are, the matter must rest in their hands."  
        One of the best things about the estate at Thverá was a certain
field known by the name of "the Suregiver," which was never without a
crop. It had been so arranged in the partition of the land that either
party should have this field year and year about. Then Astrida said to
Thorkel and Sigmund, "It is clear thay you wish to push me hard, and you
see that I have no one to manage for me, but rather than give up my
serfs I will leave the affair to be settled on your own terms." They
replied that was very prudent on her part, and after consulting together
they decided that they must either declare the men guilty, or award what
damages they thought proper. But Thorstein did not stir in the case, so
as to take the award out of their hands, and they assigned to the field
to themselves, as sole owners, with the intention of getting hold of all
her land, by thus depriving her of the main prop of her housekeeping.
And that very summer which was coming on, she ought, if she had her
rights, to have had the field.  
        Now, in the summer, when men were gone to the Thing, and when
this suit had been thus settled, the herdsmen going round the pastures
found the two heifers in a landslip, where the snow had drifted over
them early in the winter, and thus the calumny against Astrida’s serfs
was exposed. When Thorkel and Sigmund heard that the heifers had bee
found, they offered money to pay for the field, but they refused to
renounce the conveyance which had been made of it to them. Astrida
however answered that it would not be too great a compensation for the
false charge which had been go up, if she were allowed to have what was
her own. "So," said she, "I will either have what belongs to me, or I
will submit to the loss; and though there is no one here to set the
matter straight, I will wait, and I expect that Glum will come out and
put it in the right way." Sigmund replied, "It will be a long time
before he ploughs for that harvest. Why, there is that son of yours, who
is a much fitter man to help you, sitting by and doing nothing." "Pride
and wrong," said she, "often end badly, and this may happen in your
case."  
        It was somewhat late in the summer when Glum came out; he stayed
a little while with the ship, and then went home with his goods. His
temper and character were the same as thy had been. He gave little sign
of what he thought, and seemed as if he did not hear what had happened
whilst he was away. He slept every day till nine o’clock, and took no
thought about the management of the farm. If they had had their right,
the field would, as had been said, have been that summer in the hands of
Glum and his mother. Sigmund’s cattle moreover did them much injury, and
were to be found every morning in their home-field.  
        One morning Astrida waked Glum up, and told him that many of
Sigmund’s cattle had got into their home-field, and wanted to break in
among the hay which was laid in heaps, "and I am not active enough to
drive them out, and the men are all at work." He answered, "Well, you
have not often asked me to work, and there shall be no offence in your
doing so now." So he jumped up, took his horse, and a large stick in his
hand, drove the cattle briskly off the farm, thrashing them well till
they came to the homestead of Thorkel and Sigmund, and then he let them
do what mischief they please. Thorkel was looking after the hay and the
fences that morning, and Sigmund was with the labourers. The former
called out to Glum, "You may be sure people will not stand this at your
hands--that you should damage their beasts in this way, though you may
have got some credit while you were abroad." Glum answered, "The beasts
are not injured yet, but if they come again and trespass upon us some of
them will be lamed, and you will have to make the best of it; it is all
you will get; we are not going to suffer damage by your cattle any
longer." Sigmund cried, out, "You talk big, Glum, but in our eyes you
are now just as great a simpleton as when you went away, and we shall
not regulate our affairs according to your nonsense." Glum went home,
and then a fit of laughter came upon him, and affected him in such a
manner that he turned quite pale, and tears burst from his eyes, just
like large hailstones. He was often afterwards taken in this way when
the appetite for killing some one came upon him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](vig11)
