[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig19)  [Next](vig21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619164">CHAPTER XVII</span>

WHEN Thorir died his son Thorarin set up his household to the north of
Espihole and lived there. Glum had two children by his wife, of whom one
was Márr, as has been said above, and the other was Vigfuss; both
promising, but utterly unlike each other. Márr was quiet and silent, but
Vigfuss was a dashing fellow, ready to do an unfair thing, strong and
full of courage. There was a man living with Glum, who was called
Hallvard, and was a freedman of his; he had brought Vigfuss up, and
having got a good deal of property together by cheating in money matters
, he had made over the reversion if it to his foster-child. Hallvard had
a bad name, and went to live at a place called "The Tarns," in the
valley of the Eyjafirth: nor did his reputation impove on account of the
spot where he dwelt, for he was sharp in dealing with the cattle in the
common pastures up there. Vigfuss was a great traveller  
        A man hight Halli lived at Jorunnarstad, who was called "Halli
the white," and he was the son of Thorbiörn, whilst his mother was
Vigdis, the daughter of Andun the bald. Now Halli had fostered Einar,
the son of Eyiolf, who then lived at Saurbæ. Halli was blind, and was
mixed up in all the lawsuits in the country because he was both a wise
man and sound in his judgment. His sons were Orm and Brusi the Skald,
who lived at Törfufell, and Bárd, who lived at Skállstad. Bárd was a
noisy, quarrelsome fellow, better able to fight than anybody, and
reckless and abusive in his language; he had for a wife Una, the
daughter of Oddkell, in Thiorsádal.  
        One autumn Halli missed some ten or twelve wethers out of the
hill pastures, and they could not be found, so when Bárd and his father
met, Halli asked his son what he thought had become of the wethers. Bárd
replied, "I don’t wonder if sheep disappear, when a thief lives next
door to you, ever since Hallvard came into the district. "Yes," says
Halli, "I should like you to set on foot a suit against him, and summon
him for theft. I don’t think, if I make this charge against him, Glum
will go the lengths of clearing him by the oath of twelve men." "No,"
answered Bárd, "it will be a difficult matter for him to get the oath of
twelve men out of Glum and Vigfuss and their people."  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[1](vig20.htm#fr_15) See the Supplementary Note
at the end of the book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](vig21)
