[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig28)  [Next](vig30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619173">CHAPTER XXVI</span>

EINAR now set the suit on foot afresh for the Althing, and both sides
collected their people together, but before Glum left home he dreamt
that many persons came to Thverà to visit the god Frey, and he thought
he saw a great crowd on the sand-banks by the river, with Frey sitting
on a chair. He dreamt that he asked who they were who had come thither,
and they said, "We are thy departed kindred, and we are now begging Frey
that thou may’st not be driven out of Thverà, but it is no use, for he
answers shortly and angrily, and calls to mind now the gift of the ox by
Thorkel the tall." At that point Glum woke up, and ever afterwards he
professed that he was on worse terms with Frey.  
        Men rode to the Thing, and the suit was brought to a close in
such a way that Glum admitted the killing of Thorvald; but his kinsmen
and friends exerted themselves to secure the acceptance of a settlement
rather than the imposition of outlawry or banishment. So they compounded
the matter at the Thing, on the condition that Glum was to forfeit the
land at Thverà, half absolutely as an atonement to Ketell, the son of
Thorvald the crooked, and to convey the other half at a valuation; but
he was allowed to live there till the spring, and was then to be
outlawed in the district, and not to live nearer than in Hörgardal. So
they left the Thing. Einar afterwards bought the land, as had been
promised to him. In the spring his men came thither to work on the farm,
and Einar told them that they should give an account to him of every
word which Glum spoke. One day he came and talked with them on this
wise, "It is easy to see that Einar has got good workmen about him; the
work is well done on the land, and it is now of consequence that great
and little matters should both be attended to. You would do well to put
up posts here by the water side for drying clothes; it is convenient for
the women washing the larger articles; the wells at home are
indifferent."  
        When they got home Einar asked what Glum had said to them. They
told him how careful he was with reference to all the work done. "Did it
appear to you," said he, "that he was desirous of getting everything
ready for my hands?" "Yes," they replied, "so we think." "Well," replied
Einar, "I think differently. I think he meant very likely to hang you on
these posts, or stick on them some insult to me. You must not go there,
however."  
        Einar transferred his household to Thverà in the spring, but
Glum remained where he was till the last day for moving,  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) and when people were all ready to start he
sat down on the high seat and did not move, although he was summoned to
do so. He had the hall decorated with hangings, and refused to turn out
like mere "cottage tenants." Hallbera, the daughter of Thorodd, the son
of Hialm, was the mother of Gudmund and Einar, and lived at Hanakamb.
She came to Thverà, and saluted Glum, saying, "Good morning to you,
Glum, but you cannot stay here any longer. I have marked out the land of
Thverà with fire, and I eject you and all yours formally from it, as
made over to my son Einar."  <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) Then
Glum rose up and told her she might chatter away like a miserable old
woman as she was; but as he rode away he looked over his shoulder
towards the homestead and sung a stanza--

With sword and spear, as fame hath told,  
Like many a gallant earl of old,  
I won these lands by might and main.  
But now the wielder of the brand  
Has dash’d at last from out his hand,  
Broad lands and lordships lost again.

Glum lived at Mödrufell, in Hörgardal, with Thorgrim Fiuk, but he was
not content to remain there more than one winter. Then he dwelt two
winters in Myrkárdal, but a landslip fell near the homestead and
destroyed some of the buildings. After that he bought land at Thverbrek,
in Öxnadal, and dwelt there as long as he lived, and became aged and
blind.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[1](vig29.htm#fr_24) The last of the "flitting
days"--Fardagar. They began on the Thursday after the expiration of six
weeks of summer, which was reckoned to begin on the Thursday between the
9th and 15th of April. They fell therefore about the beginning of June.
See the Glossary to the Grágás, and Dasent’s Preface, p. liv.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[2](vig29.htm#fr_25) Maurer (s. 58) gives a
translation of this curious passage, and remarks that it shows the
hallowing of the land by fire as applicable not only to its first
occupation, but also to a change of possession.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[3](vig29.htm#fr_26) Some verses of Glum’s occur
here, but the text is so doubtful that I cannot venture a translation of
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](vig30)
