[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig27)  [Next](vig29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619172">CHAPTER XXV</span>

NOW men returned from the Thing, and Glum staid at home all the summer:
everything was quiet in the district till it came to the time of the
"Leet,"  <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) when they assembled at that
court. Glum, however, was not there, and nothing was heard of him. Márr
was at home in his dwelling; but in the autumn, five weeks before
winter, he held a wedding-feast, and invited men to it, so that not less
than a hundred and twenty people came together. This invitation appeared
strange to everybody, for those who were concerned in the wedding were
not persons of any consequence. That evening all the men of Eyjafirth
were seen riding in from the dales two or five at a time, and the people
who came down into the district were all collected in one body. Glum was
there, and Asgrim, and Gizor, with three hundred and sixty men, and they
came in the course of the night to the homestead, and sat at the
wedding-feast.  
        The morning after Glum sent to find Thorarin, and told him to
come to Diupadal, not later than six in the morning, to hear the oaths.
Thorarin bestirred himself and got together a hundred and twenty men,
and when they came to the temple, six people went into it, that is to
say, Gizor and Asgrim with Glum, and Einar and Hlenni the old with
Thorarin. Whoever had to take the "temple oath" laid hold with his hand
of the silver ring, which was stained red with the blood of the cattle
sacrificed, and which ought not to weigh less than three ounces. Then
Glum said word for word thus: "I name Asgrim to bear witness, and Gizor
in the second place to bear witness, that I take the ‘temple oath,’ on
the ring, and I say it to the God.  <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21)
When Thorvald the crooked got his death-blow--*Vark at þar--ok vák ek
þar--ok raudk at þ odd ok egg.* Now let those men who are skilled in
such matters, and who stand by, look to my oath."  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[3](#fn_22) Thorarin and his friends were not prepared
to find any fault, but they said they had never heard the form of words
used before. In the same manner the oaths were taken by Glum at
Gnupafell and at Thverà. Gizor and Asgrim stayed some nights at Thverà,
and when they went away Glum gave Gizor the blue cloak, and he gave
Asgrim the gold-mounted spear (which Vigfuss had given him).  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[4](#fn_23) In the course of the winter Thorvard met
Thorarin, and asked him, "Did Glum take the oath properly?" "We found
nothing to take hold of," said Thorarin. "It is a wonderful thing,"
replied Thorvard, "that wise people should make such mistakes. I have
known men who have declared themselves to have slain others, but I have
never known a case of a man swearing explicitly that he was guilty, as
Glum did. How could he say more than he did when he declared that *he
was there at the doing of the deed, that he took part in the death, and
that he reddened point and edge,* when Thorvald the crooked fell at
Hrisateig?--though I admit that he did not pronounce the words as they
are commonly pronounced. That scandal will never be done away with."
Thorarin replied, "I did not observe this, but I am tired of having to
do with Glum." "Well," said Thorvard, "if you are tired because your
health is not equal to it, let Einar take the matter up. He is a prudent
man, with a great kindred, and many will follow him. His brother Gudmund
will not be neutral, and he himself is most anxious for one thing-to get
to Thverà." Then they met Einar and consulted with him, and Thorarin
said, "If you will take the lead in the suit many men will back you in
it, and we will bring it about that you shall have Glum’s land, at a
price not exceeding that which he paid to Thorkel the tall." Einar
observed, "Glum has now parted with those two things, his cloak and his
spear, which his mother’s father, Vigfuss, gave him, and bad him keep,
if he wished to hold his position, telling him that he would fall away
in dignity from the time that he let them out of his hands. Now will I
take up the suit and follow it out."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[1](vig28.htm#fr_20) The Haust-thing, or autumn
assembly, was the same as the Leid or Leet, and was held not earlier
than fourteen days after the Althing, for the purpose of making known in
each district what had been done at the general assembly. It had, like
every other Thing, to be *helgad*, "consecrated," or opened by the Godi.
See Maurer, ss. 171-174; Dasent, Preface, p. lxvi.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[2](vig28.htm#fr_21) The god probably means
Thor. See Maurer, § 157.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[3](vig28.htm#fr_22) It is impossible to
represent this oath of Glum’s in English, or any other language, so as
to make the point of the story clear; but it may thus be
explained--There is in the Icelandic language, or rather there was, and
enelitic negative *at* (sometimes abbreviated to *a* or *t*), which is
attached to the verb. It occurs only in the ancient tongue, and there
only in poetry and legal formulæ. Thus *var ek* or *vark* means simply
"I was," *ek* being the pronoun of the first person; but *vark-at* means
"I was not." So *vák* (or *vá ek*) means "I slew;" but *vák-at* means "I
slwe not." But *at* is also a preposition corresponding to our
preposition "at," and *vark at, pronounced as two separate words* (with
the accent on *at*) would mean "I was at it." the reader will thus see
that the deceit practised by Glum consisted in so pronouncing the verb
and the particle *at*, that his enemies took it for the negative and not
for the preposition. The sense depended entirely on the question whether
it was or was not an enclitic. Glum’s adversaries understood him to say,
"I was not there; I slew him not there; I reddened not edge nor point on
him there;" whereas his own construction of what he swore to was
precisely the opposite and in fact expressly asserted his guilt. The
whole of this story is most curious as illustrative of the manner and
character of the people, and also in a philological point of view. The
reader who wishes to know more of the extinct negative suffix may
consult Grimm’s Grammar, b. iii. s. 715. Grimm is mistaken in saying
that this form occurs only in the old poetry, as is sufficiently shown
by this very Saga; but it is confined to the poetry and the laws. I may
add that Grimm’s attempt, at p. 718, to explain the origin of this
negative appears to me unsuccessful. I shall have occasion to remark
hereafter that this oath of Glum’s was not in itself part of a judicial
proceeding, but was imposed upon him as a special condition of an
exceptional character, when his adversaries agreed to compound their
suit.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[4](vig28.htm#fr_23) See above, chapter vi. The
parting with these gifts is the turning-point in Glum’s story.
Henceforth his luck is departed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](vig29)
