[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends & Sagas](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vig22)  [Next](vig24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="_Toc29619167">CHAPTER XX</span>

WE must now go back to the point where the foster-brothers Arngrim and
Steinolf were growing up together. When Thorgrim of Mödrufell died,
Arngrim went to his own house, and Steinolf remained with him, and there
was as much affection between them as there had ever been. Arngrim took
a wife, Thordis, the daughter of Biörn, and the sister of Arnor
Kerlingarnef. Steinolf was at that time abroad, engaged in trading
voyages, but when he was in Iceland he was at Arngrim’s house. It
happened one summer, on his arrival in the Eyjafirth, that Arngrim did
not invite him to his house, and though they met he did not speak to
him, imputing to him that he had talked with his wife, Thordis, more
than was proper; but the report of most men was that there was little or
nothing in the matter. Then Glum asked Steinolf to visit him, and he was
there for a year or two when he was in Iceland, and they regarded one
another with much affection as kinsmen. Steinolf was an active merry
fellow. One summer Glum did not ask him to his house, and said that he
preferred that he should be with his father at Upsal, "and my reason is,
I do not approve of men living in other people’s house, but if you are
with your father then you can come over hither to Thverà, and I shall be
glad to see you." Vigfuss, for some winters, whilst he was an outlaw,
was at Upsal with Arnor Red-cheek, and Steinolf was there also. One
autumn a yeoman at Öxnafell married his daughter, and invited all those
land-owners in Eyjafirth, who were of most consequence; Steinolf too was
invited. He came over to Thverà, and wanted to go with Glum, bout Glum
said he should not be at the wedding. Then Steinolf observed, "What I do
not like is that you do not abide by what you say." "Well," said Glum,
"my want of consistency will not do so much harm as your want of
prudence, and I will not go. It is a piece of presumption at any rate,
if there is no deeper design in it, for a yeoman to ask so many men of
consequence to his house. But I suspect that something more is meant
that appears, and that the yeoman did not get up this scheme himself, so
I think it better that I and my friends should stay away." Steinolf,
however, and those who were asked, with the exception of Glum, went to
the wedding. Einar, the son of Eyiolf, Thorvald, and Steingrim had a
good deal of talk together. When people were going away, Einar made a
long speech about the management of affairs in the district, and said it
was fitting that when they met in any number they should talk over the
matters of most urgency; that in this way things would get into a better
state. "For instance," he said, "there has long been a bad feeling among
men of the highest spirit, and I allude particularly to the fact that
there is a quarrel between the two kinsmen Arngrim and Steinolf, whilst
we think that some lie or calumny is at the bottom of it all. Now
Arngrim wishes to invite Steinolf to his house, and will receive him
honourably if he choose to accept the invitation. So get rid of all
unfriendly feeling between you." Steinolf professed his readiness to
accept the offer, and his unconsciousness of any cause of offence, and
he added that he loved Arngrim above all men. The each man returned to
his home, and Steinolf went back with Arngrim, and remained with him,
for several nights with all honour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](vig24)
