[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cha02)  [Next](cha04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/087785145X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Charity*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1766\], tr. by John Whitehead
\[1914\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Charity

<span class="margnote"><span id="101.">101.</span></span>

As there are genera of affections, and species of these genera, so there
are also of charities. There are therefore charities in the plural, and
there are degrees of charity of a twofold kind; which degrees are dealt
with in ANGELIC WISDOM CONCERNING THE DIVINE LOVE AND WISDOM, PART III.

<span class="margnote"><span id="102.">102.</span></span>

3\. A man ought to be a charity in form, not from himself but from the
Lord; thus he is a receptacle of charity. The life of a man who is to be
regenerated is the affection of truth from good, or charity; and that
life does not exist except from Life, thus from the Lord who is Life in
Himself, as He Himself teaches: that He is "the Way, the Truth, and the
Life"; <span id="fr_14"></span>[102-1](#fn_14.md) and elsewhere, that "As
the Father hath Life in Himself, so hath He given unto the Son to have
Life in Himself"; <span id="fr_15"></span>[102-2](#fn_15.md) and elsewhere.
But, because Life is God, the Divine cannot be appropriated to man, who
is finite and created, but it can inflow into, and be adjoined to, a
receptacle; just as the eye is not light in itself, but can receive
light, and as the ear is not hearing in itself, but is the receptacle
for it. So with the rest of the senses. So, also, with the mind and its
interior senses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="103.">103.</span></span>

Man, therefore, is indeed the subject of charity but a receptive
subject, for he is created into form receptive of life, just as the eye
is created into a form receptive of light and its objects of sight by
means of light; and the ear into a form receptive of sound by means of
inflowing sound with its harmonies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="104.">104.</span></span>

He who believes he is a form of charity from himself is mistaken; either
he believes that he is God, or he believes that the Divine is transfused
into him: so he denies God; or, if he does not think this, he places
merit in works of charity, and so his external is made a charity, and
not his internal; and in that case the Lord cannot dwell with him. The
Lord does not dwell in the things of a man's proprium, but in that which
is His own. He must dwell in what is Divine, and so He makes the man
receptive of the Divine proceeding, which is of charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="105.">105.</span></span>

Man, however, is so created that he may think and will as from himself,
and therefore speak and act as from himself; yet it is given him to know
that every good of charity and truth of faith is from the Lord. He who
does not think according to this truth is not in the light (lux) of
truth, but in a fatuous light (lumen), and this, in the light of heaven,
is darkness; and as a result he cannot be enlightened in any other
truths, except as concerns the memory only, but not as concerns
perception, which is faith in its essence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="106.">106.</span></span>

From these things it is evident that a man is only a form of charity,
and that the charity is of the Lord with him; and that it is given to
the man as if he himself were the charity, to the end that he may become
the receptacle of it, and so be in reciprocal conjunction, as from
himself, though really from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="107.">107.</span></span>

4\. A man is a form of charity of such a quality as, with him, good of
the will is conjoined to truths of the understanding. Everything of the
will is called a good, and everything of the understanding a truth,
because the will is in the heat of heaven, and the understanding in the
light of heaven. And just as the will without the understanding has not
any quality, and so cannot be called anything, but takes on a quality
and becomes something in the understanding, and becomes of such and such
a quality, or is something or other, according to what is in the
understanding; - so it is in the case of a good without truth, and a
good with truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="108.">108.</span></span>

Genuine truths should be learned therefore: with them the good of the
will conjoins itself, and thus does the good of the will become the good
of charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109.">109.</span></span>

It is in this way, that is, from the truths in the understanding, that
every variety of charity originates; for a truth in its essence is a
good, the truth being the form of the good, precisely as speech is the
voice's form. Let this be illustrated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="110.">110.</span></span>

There are two forms of the voice; the one of singing, the other of
speech; likewise of the affection of truth from good, or of charity. Let
these things be treated of. N.B.

<span class="margnote"><span id="111.">111.</span></span>

This being so, it is accordingly said that charity is the affection of
truth from good, or the affection of spiritual truth. From this comes
the affection of rational or moral truth, and the affection of civil or
natural truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="112.">112.</span></span>

It is in consequence of this that they who are in charity are in light,
or, if they are not in it, that they love light. Light is truth and heat
is good; and it is well known that all quickening and fructification is
from good by means of truth; so also is spiritual quickening and
fructification.

<span class="margnote"><span id="113.">113.</span></span>

Those who are not in charity, however, do not love truth in the light,
but they are able to love truth in the shade; and this truth is what the
truth of faith is at the present day, that is, that it ought to be
believed to be true, although it is not seen to be so with the
understanding. In this way, indeed, falsity may be called truth, and,
from its confirmation, may be called <span
id="fr_16"></span>[113-1](#fn_16.md) truth; as is done.

<span class="margnote"><span id="114.">114.</span></span>

5\. Whatever proceeds from such a man derives from that form that it is
a likeness of it; thus it is charity. There are three things that
proceed; there is thought, there is speech, and there is action. From a
man who is a form of charity, there proceeds thought from the affection
that is charity, speech from the voice which is of affection, and in
which there is the affection of the thought, and action by means of a
movement in which there is charity. This movement proceeds from effort;
and the affection of the thought makes the effort.

<span class="margnote"><span id="115.">115.</span></span>

The form of charity is first of all in his interior perception, which
proceeds from the heat and light of the Spiritual. There, indeed, the
man himself is a man. Out of that, charity is brought forth into the
resulting or lower things; it both puts itself forth and brings itself
into effect, scarcely otherwise than as there is produced from a seed
the shoot and, little by little, the tree, the tree becoming as it were
a tree in permanent being; while its fruits are the good works that are
done, from the will Of good through the understanding of truth, in the
body. And so the tree first has existence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="116.">116.</span></span>

Its inmost form is like seed. It is well known that no other thing can
spring from a seed than what is of that stock. It is the same with all,
though with much variation; but still both the twig and the branch with
fruit on them, are recognized as being from that tree.

<span class="margnote"><span id="117.">117.</span></span>

Whatever, therefore, a man does who inwardly is a charity, is from his
charity, although his deeds and speech and thoughts are of unlimited
variety. All the things he brings forth are as it were images of him
under differing forms, in all which, however, there is a common form, as
the plane out of which they are (ex quo). <span
id="fr_17"></span>[117-1](#fn_17.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="118.">118.</span></span>

For this reason it happens that, if only a man's ruling affection is
known, then, when he is saying or doing anything, another recognizes
from what purpose and from what love, as it were from what fountain, it
springs. The Lord says that an evil tree bringeth forth evil fruit, and
a good tree good fruit, and that an evil tree cannot bring forth good
fruit. <span id="fr_18"></span>[118-1](#fn_18.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="119.">119.</span></span>

A man's life is in everything he wills and thinks, in everything he
says, and in everything he does. No one can carry out any action from
life other than his own; all these things are effects of his life; and
therefore there is the likeness.

<span class="margnote"><span id="120.">120.</span></span>

In the spiritual world all affections are imaged forth variously, as
trees, gardens, birds, animals: in these, when inmostly inspected, there
is seen to be an image of the man; they are representatives of him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121.">121.</span></span>

In a word, there is an image of the man in each and every one of these
things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="122.">122.</span></span>

6\. The neighbour can be loved from what is not charity; and yet this,
regarded in itself, is not loving the neighbour. Let examples
illustrate. An evil man can love a good man, and yet not in himself love
good. Of a gentile, who says he will do his work faithfully because God
so wills, one can say, "This is a man an atheist can love." When anyone
who does not love his country hears someone else speaking and knows that
he does love his country, he can as it were love him for it. He listens
to him, saying to himself, "He is good at heart; he speaks from love,"
paying heed to him. I have heard hundreds pay heed to a man reputed to
love his country, and scarcely ten of them were men who loved their
country. The same can be the case with anyone who, hearing a preacher,
says that he speaks from God, out of zeal for their souls; and these who
do not love God at all, and believe nothing, are affected all the same
while hearing him, and they praise him, and love him, and send him
gifts. Every sincere man is loved by some who are insincere; every
truthful man is loved by some liars; the faithful man by the unfaithful;
the chaste man who loves his wife, by the unchaste; and so on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="123.">123.</span></span>

However, this happens with every one while paying attention in a general
way; but as soon as general perception passes away, then the light
passes away too. This takes place when he submits the matter to the
observation of his lower thought, and considers whether it is so or not.
Into this thought there inflows light from the man or the world, whereas
into general thought there inflows light out of heaven. This light
inflows into man's intellectual continually, if only he does not let
himself down into his own light; for, if he is that kind of man, he then
extinguishes the light of heaven. All men have a general perception of
truth; but the love of what is lower casts a man down precipitately into
perception from the proprium. This perception is a material
communicating with the sight of the eye. It is phantasy or imagination.

<span class="margnote"><span id="124.">124.</span></span>

7\. He loves the neighbour, who does so from the charity in himself. He
conjoins himself with his neighbour's good and not with his person; and
therefore, if the person departs from good, he does not love him. This
conjunction, however, is a spiritual conjunction, because the neighbour,
in a spiritual idea, is good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="125.">125.</span></span>

Consequently, for a man to love the neighbour, he must be a charity in
form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="126.">126.</span></span>

\[VI\] A MAN IS BORN TO THE END THAT HE MAY BECOME A CHARITY; BUT HE
CANNOT BECOME A CHARITY UNLESS HE CONSTANTLY DOES THE GOOD OF USE TO THE
NEIGHBOUR FROM AFFECTION AND DELIGHT. General explanation in this order:
(1) The general good exists from the goods of use the individuals each
perform; and the goods of use they each perform subsist from the general
good. (2) Ministries, functions, offices, and various employments are
the goods of use the individuals each perform, from which the general
good exists. (3) All the offices and employments in a kingdom,
commonwealth, or community, regarded as to the goods of use, make a form
which corresponds to the heavenly form. (4) They also make a form which
corresponds to the human form. (5) In this form, each one is a good of
use in accordance with the scope of his office or employment. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[126-1](#fn_19.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="127.">127.</span></span>

1\. The general good exists from the goods of use the individuals each
perform; and the goods of use they each perform subsist from the general
good. They are termed goods of use because all the goods which are of
love towards the neighbour, or of charity, are uses, and all uses are
goods, and therefore are named in one term, goods of use. They are also
called fruits of use.

<span class="margnote"><span id="128.">128.</span></span>

It is well known that every man is born to perform uses, and that he
does perform uses to others. He who does not is, indeed, called a
useless member, and rejected: he who performs uses to himself alone is
also a useless member, although not so called. In a well constituted
commonwealth, therefore, provision is made that no one shall be useless:
if any one is useless, he is driven to some work; even a beggar is, if
he is healthy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="129.">129.</span></span>

Infants and children, so long as they are under nurses and masters, are
not, indeed, performing goods of use, but yet they are learning to
perform them, and should have them for an end. Then the good of use is
in the end. For a house to be built, the materials must first be
obtained, and the foundation laid, and the walls erected; and so finally
the house is inhabited. The good of a house is the dwelling in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="130.">130.</span></span>

The general good consists of these things: That in a society or kingdom
there should be 1. What is Divine among them. 2. What is just among
them. 3. What is moral among them. 4. Diligence, skill, and uprightness
among them. 5. The necessaries for life. 6. The necessaries for all
kinds of work. 7. The necessaries for protection. 8. Sufficient wealth,
because these three kinds of necessaries are procured with it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="131.">131.</span></span>

The general good is from these things, coming not from the things
themselves, but from each of the individuals there, and through the
goods of use which they each perform - as what is Divine is indeed there
by means of ministers, and what is just by means of governors and
judges; as what is moral is there by means of what is Divine and what is
just; and as necessaries are there by means of all kinds of work and
commerce; and so on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="132.">132.</span></span>

It is well known that every general is constituted of particulars. That
is why it is called a general. Such, therefore, as the parts are, such
is the general. A garden in general is of such a quality as are its
trees and their fruits; meadows in general are of such a quality as are
their crops; fields in general are of such a quality as their seed and
its herbs and flowers; a ship in general is of such a quality as all its
parts, which are several. The order among the parts, and the quality of
the parts, causes the general to be more perfect or more imperfect.

<span class="margnote"><span id="133.">133.</span></span>

That the goods of use which individuals each perform subsist from the
general good, is well known; for each one derives his own good of use
from the general. All things necessary for life, industries, and
protection, and the wealth by which these necessaries are obtained, are
from this; for by a general is meant not only a community and its
society, but a whole region, and also a kingdom. But as these subjects
are very extensive, they will be more clearly set forth in what follows;
for there are many varieties, which however always agree with this law.

<span class="margnote"><span id="134.">134.</span></span>

2\. Ministries, functions, offices, and various occupations are the
goods of use the individuals each perform, from which the general good
exists. By ministries are meant the activities of the priesthood and the
duties connected with them; by functions are meant various civil
positions; and by employments are meant occupations like those of the
several kinds of craftsmen, by offices are meant various professions,
businesses, and positions of service. Of these four the commonwealth, or
society, consists.

<span class="margnote"><span id="135.">135.</span></span>

Those who are in ministries are responsible for what is Divine being
there; the functions of those in the various civil positions for what is
just being there, and also what is moral, as well as diligence, skill,
and uprightness; the various workmen for the necessaries for life, and
business men for the necessaries for all kinds of work; soldiers, for
protection, and this last especially to ensure sufficient wealth; also
farmers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="136.">136.</span></span>

Every one may know that the general good is in accordance with the goods
of every kind, the industries, the pursuits.

<span class="margnote"><span id="137.">137.</span></span>

3\. All the offices and employments, regarded as to the goods of use,
make a form which corresponds to the heavenly form. The heavenly form is
such that everyone there is in some ministry, some function, in some
office or employment, and in some work. All heavenly societies are such
that no one there is useless. He who does no work, wanting to live in
idleness, or only to talk, walk about, and sleep, is not tolerated
there. All things there are so ordered that they are allotted a place
nearer or further from the centre, in accordance with their use. The
nearer to the centre, the more magnificent are the palaces; the further
from the centre, the less magnificent are they. They are different in
the east, the west, the south, and the north. Every one, on coming into
a society, is initiated into his occupation, and is allotted a house
corresponding to his work. Every society is a series of affections, in
the order of the heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="138.">138.</span></span>

Every one there is delighted with his own pursuit; it is the source of
his delight. They shun idleness as one would a plague. The reason is
this, that every one there does his work as from the love of use, and so
has heart-felt delights; the love of use inflows out of the general body
into him. From a heavenly society, in the first instance, it was given
me to know that not only do the individuals, disposed in accordance with
the varieties of their affections, make the general good, but that every
one derives his own good from the general good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="139.">139.</span></span>

So it is on earth; for in this way an earthly society corresponds to a
heavenly society; and when it corresponds, then what is Divine is there,
what is just is there, what is moral and upright is there, good sense is
there, diligence is there. The general inspires these things into each
of the parts, when the part, which is an angel, is in charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="140.">140.</span></span>

The necessaries for life and for all kinds of work, and also riches, and
especially enjoyment and happiness, are given to him out of the general
body, in the measure that he is a charity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="141.">141.</span></span>

But people do not know this on earth, where everyone places delight and
good fortune in honours and wealth. Those who do so on earth become mean
and poor, and carry on an existence in the hells; while he who applies
himself to some occupation from an affection of charity, comes into a
heavenly society.

<span class="margnote"><span id="142.">142.</span></span>

In a heavenly society there are functions, offices, and occupations
innumerable, all spiritual, which might indeed be described, but not so
as to be apprehended.

<span class="margnote"><span id="143.">143.</span></span>

4\. They also make a form which corresponds to the human form. It is
similar in the human body. There, all the parts are goods of use in a
most perfect form. And as they are in a most perfect form, they are felt
as a one; nevertheless they are all different, and in each of these
there are different things in their own series and their own order.
There are the five organs of sense, the several viscera, the organs of
generation, several in each sex; there are the external members; there
are still more things of the mind, that is, of the will and the
understanding.

<span class="margnote"><span id="144.">144.</span></span>

The general things in the body are the heart and the lungs. Their
actions inflow into all parts of the body, organs, viscera, and members.
In the mind, it is the will and the understanding that are the general
things. The general things there look to the individual things as their
parts from which it subsists; and the general looks to the parts from
which it exists. <span id="fr_20"></span>[144-1](#fn_20.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="145.">145.</span></span>

All things there are formed from use, in use, and for use; they are all
forms of use.

<span class="margnote"><span id="146.">146.</span></span>

In the living \[animali\] body the form of government is such that any
one part draws its portion from the general, and it takes care that the
general gives to the part, so that it may subsist. The heart gives blood
to each of the parts throughout the body; and any one of these, as it
has need of it, takes what suits it, and surrenders something from its
own store. In a word, the, form is a wonderful one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="147.">147.</span></span>

There is the heavenly form of use in it; as is confirmed by the fact
that any one heavenly society is like a man; moreover, it appears like a
man. The uses there make that man, because the form of a heavenly
society corresponds to the form of the living \[animalis\] body in
respect of its uses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="148.">148.</span></span>

The heavenly form is, in the least things and in the greatest things, a
man; consequently the entire heaven is a Man, every society is a man,
each individual angel is a man. This is because the Lord, from whom is
heaven, is Man. <span id="fr_21"></span>[148-1](#fn_21.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="149.">149.</span></span>

5\. In this form, each one is a good of use in accordance with the scope
of his office or employment. Charity is nothing else than the affection
of truth from good, and the affection of truth from good is the
affection of use. For unless the affection of truth from good is brought
into act, it perishes; and an act therefrom is a use.

<span class="margnote"><span id="150.">150.</span></span>

Genuine truth, the affection of which is charity, looks to nothing else
than life with the neighbour; and therefore, the affection of truth from
good is nothing else. The good from which this affection is, is a
desiring to do, and a desiring to know for the sake of doing; otherwise
it is not the genuine good from which truth is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[102-1](cha03.htm#fr_14.md) John xiv. 6.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[102-2](cha03.htm#fr_15.md) John v. 26.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[113-1](cha03.htm#fr_16.md) The MS. here reads
"called" (vocari), but the context suggests that "believed" (credi) may
have been intended.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[117-1](cha03.htm#fr_17.md) The following note is
on the left-hand margin of the original MS. opposite nos. 117-122:
"There is a compassion of charity, a clemency of charity, a friendship
of charity, a good-will of charity, a modesty of charity: in a word, all
virtues are of charity, but they come another name, and so under another
category.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[118-1](cha03.htm#fr_18.md) Matt. vii. 17, 18; Luke
vi. 43.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[126-1](cha03.htm#fr_19.md) Sections 4 and 5
represent in each case the Author's second version, as shown by crossed
out passages in the MS. A sixth section, which has been scored out, is
substantially the same as the heading of chapter VII, number 158.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[144-1](cha03.htm#fr_20.md) There is a crossing out
in this sentence, from which a confusion has arisen. Possibly Swedenborg
meant to write, "The general things there look to the individual things
as their parts from which they exist, and the parts look to the general
from which they subsist," which would agree with what is said elsewhere.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[148-1](cha03.htm#fr_21.md) In the MS. here,
following a crossed out draft of subsection 5, there is the statement,
"Man is a form of heaven . . ." An examination of the MS. shows that
most probably it should have been deleted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 151-200](cha04.md)
