[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](phy09)  [Next](phy11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="img_03900"></span> ![](img/03900.jpg)

### CHAPTER II

<span id="img_03901"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![T](img/03901.jpg) |

OM KEWLEY had important business at Douglas that necessitated his
proceeding there a day or so after the events of the preceding chapter.
A settlement between the crew of a herring-boat that he had been working
with during the past season and the purchasers of their fish was to take
place, and the profits of their labour divided, when the parties
interested--boat-owner, master, crew, and fish-salesman--all met, and
each one was paid the share due to him. This was much too serious a
matter to be lightly set aside, so, spite of the entreaties of his wife
and neighbours, who were sadly afraid of his falling into the hands of
bugganes, or other evil-disposed fairyfolk, he made an early start to
walk to Douglas.

Without any let or hindrance from either fairy or

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

buggane he safely reached his destination, no sign of magician's castle
or aught else strange, occurring on the road; and in due course Tom
Kewley received his share of the earnings of the herring-boat in the
shape of good gold and silver coin. In the course of the day Tom had
repeated to several small knots of friends the particulars of Philip
Caine's adventure on Barrule Mountain, with all of whom he had sundry
noggins. As evening drew near he prepared to set out on his return home,
with his little store of money safely stowed away in the deep recesses
of his breeches' pocket. With a light step and a merry heart he started,
having a somewhat bulky package, slung upon his stick across his
shoulder, containing various commissions he had executed for the "gude
wife" at home. Just as he was passing the last houses of the town, and
about to cross the old bridge at the head of the harbour, he heard his
name called, and, turning round, saw Matthew Mylechreest, an old friend
and shipmate, standing at the door of a house of public entertainment
beckoning to him. Although he had already had as many noggins as were
good for him, he could not resist Mylechreest's invitation to have a
JOUGH-YN-DORIS--*anglice*, a parting glass--and another one after that,
so that when he actually did make his final start, he was in that happy
mellow state when all care, all fear, and all thought of the morrow is
banished from the heart and brain; when the world and all about it looks
cheery and good-humoured, while within there is a feeling of intense
self-satisfaction, the man and himself being on the very best of terms.

By the time he parted with Mylechreest it was getting late. The sun was
already down, and all folks at home were beginning to draw round their
firesides, the day's work being over. Tom said a last "good bye!" gave a
last shake of the hand, and started off on his walk to Ballasalla,
whistling and singing alternately as he went along; and, though he
feared no robber or highwaymen, yet he kept one hand in his breeches'
pocket as guard upon his bag of money, trying, as well as his somewhat
muddled brain would allow him, to reckon up all that he would have to do
with it, and always failing in the mental calculation as to the
possibility of making twenty

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

pounds do the work of twenty-five. Despairing after some time of being
able to come to a satisfactory solution of his little sum, and having
reached

<span id="img_04100"></span>

[![THE JOUGH-YN-DORI](tn/04100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04100.jpg)  
THE JOUGH-YN-DORI  

the top of what is now known as Richmond Hill, he turned round and
beheld Douglas town at his feet, with the lovely bay beyond.

The harvest moon was brightly shining, like a ball of burnished silver,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

in the heavens, shedding her soft yet brilliant light upon the dancing
waves, which as they rose and fell, each one sparkling like a mass of
diamonds, seemed to be clutching at the beauteous rays of the queen of
night, and carrying them down into the green sea depths, far down below
where corals grow and lustrous pearls lie hid. The lovely light of the
moon was set off by the deep shadows of the rocks and hills. On the
extreme left, jutting boldly out to sea, stood the dark rounded head of
Banks' How, with the waves breaking against its rocks in white and
sparkling foam that looked like boiling silver in the light of the moon,
contrasting grandly with the deep sombre head itself. On the right was
the highland of Douglas Head casting a still denser gloom on the
restless sea; while in front was the town with its many glimmering
lights, contrasting curiously with the effulgent beams of the harvest
moon.

Although Kewley had many a time before seen the same enchanting scene,
he stood some moments gazing on the beautiful panorama displayed before
him, and looking first at the dancing lights upon the waves and then the
cosy, comfortable lights in the houses--lights that told of many a snug
fireside and jovial party assembled there. He thought he saw them all
dance--lights, waves, and moonbeams--in and out, up and down, in one
continuous whirl. He could not make it out; he knew well enough it could
not be that the lights actually danced, such an idea was ridiculous, he
came to the conclusion that something had disagreed with him, something
indigestible, most probably it was the tanrogans--better known to
Englishmen as scollops; so in order, as he thought, to correct this and
set himself to rights for his journey, he hastened on to the
public-house on the hill-top, and, calling for a noggin of brandy,
swallowed it down, and once more set his face towards Ballasalla.

Walking briskly down the other side of the hill he resumed his whistling
and singing, each in turn, till he reached nearly to the bottom of the
glen over against Mount Murray, when, during a pause in his own music,
he fancied he heard another voice in the distance, singing also. He
stopped, the better to listen, and far away down in the glen he heard
the sounds of

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

low, plaintive music. He proceeded on in silence, having stopped his own
song, listening attentively to the other, and trying to catch the air in
spite of the gentle rustling of the trees overhead. As he neared the
bridge at Ballalona the sounds became louder and more distinct, and more
than one voice was clearly distinguishable. He had never heard anything
so charming in his life. He advanced slowly and softly, expecting every
moment to come upon the serenaders and not wishing to disturb them. As
he stepped upon the bridge it ceased suddenly, and then he heard at some
little distance a hearty peal of laughter from many voices, mingled with
sounds--like the clinking of glasses and the rapping of tables. What
could it be? He was quite sure no house was near. Taking few steps,
further on he stumbled over something in his path, and ere he could
quite recover himself and see what it was, a voice at his feet saluted
him.

"Now then, Mister Kewley! is it all the road that you're wanting? Isn't
the bridge wide enough for the both of us?"

Looking down to whence the voice proceeded, he beheld a wee fairy-man
standing before him. The little fellow had the most laughing eyes and
rougish-looking mouth imaginable, was a compact and perfect figure,
dressed in the very gayest colours, and was altogether a most gallant
and pleasing, though diminutive, cavalier.

Tom, doffing his cap to the little buck, said, "Pray, sir, was it you I
heard singing? I hope I have not interrupted you. I was listening so
attentively I did not heed what was before me, and ask your pardon most
humbly for stumbling over you."

"*Over* me, indeed! Well, I like that certainly," replied the mannikin,
whose dignity seemed offended at being considered small enough to be
stumbled over, and who evidently considered himself quite as tall as Tom
Kewley, whose knee was level with the feather in the fairy-man's cap.

"Oh, I beg--I beg," stammered Tom, but before he could proceed he was
interrupted by the loquacious little cavalier.

"You're mighty polite, Tom Kewley! and as you seem to have brought your
best manners out with you, and have a taste for music, you can come

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

with me, and I'll introduce you into some decent society for once in
your life. So follow me. But no more 'stumbling over me,' if you
please," and

<span id="img_04400"></span>

[![TOM KEWLEY MEETING THE LANNANSHEE](tn/04400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04400.jpg)  
TOM KEWLEY MEETING THE LANNANSHEE  

the Lannanshee laid particular stress upon the word "over," and looked
very imperious; then giving Tom a knowing wink, and placing the
forefinger

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

of his right hand against the side of his nose in a most comical way, he
continued, in a more friendly tone of voice--

"And if your walk has given you an appetite for supper, and the dust
wants washing out of your throat, you can be well supplied with the best
of good living as well as plenty of music, with drink enough to swim in;
and after refreshing yourself and putting your pipe into good tune with
some liquor, the likes of which you never yet tasted, and that will very
pleasantly wash all the cobwebs from your throat, you may give me and my
friends the pleasure of hearing the sound of your own voice. We shall
not be particular whether you sing in Manx or English; it's all one to
our fraternity."

Proceeding on and talking all the while, the little elfin led Tom
through a wood and over a curragh, the sounds of revelry and music
becoming louder and louder at every step. Presently they emerged into an
open space in front of an old ruined house, when a number of little
elves, like his guide, surrounded Tom, and after playing all manner of
pranks with him, pulling his coat-tails, sticking thorns into the calves
of his legs, and almost tripping him up by running in front of him and
between his legs, they led him down what appeared a long-standing
passage into a capacious apartment with a low-groined roof like a church
vault, all hung with festoons of cobwebs, upon which some of the little
people were swinging.

A long and very curious shaped table was in the centre of the room,
cunningly constructed of plaited fern-leaves and bullrushes, supported
on innumerable mushrooms, around which were seated a large company of
little ladies and gentlemen, all most gaily dressed in every conceivable
variety of costume. The table was loaded with bottles, flagons, goblets,
cups, and glasses of as many different shapes, sizes, and materials as
the dresses of the company, and good things of all sorts were in
abundance. The whole scene was one of the gayest description. Such a
rollicking, merry party Tom Kewley had never seen before.

As he entered, a little lady, in a very grotesque costume, had just
concluded a song, and the company were shouting their applause most
vociferously and beating the table with their drinking-cups and glasses.
On

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

looking around, as he was ushered up to the further end of the room, he
felt considerable surprise in recognizing in several of the little faces
the features of persons he had an indistinct recollection of having seen
somewhere else before, and more than one seemed to be quite familiar to
him.

Feeling his coat-tail pulled and his sleeve plucked, he turned round,
and seeing a little man beckoning to him to stoop down, he did so, and
listened as the mannikin whispered into his ear--

"Whatever you do, Tom Kewley, don't either eat or drink anything here,
or you will never return to your home in Ballasalla again. Let nothing
tempt you. Beware!"

Before Tom could ask for any explanation the little elf hurried away to
his seat at the lower end of the table.

Kewley was now conducted to the presence of the fairy king, who had
commanded that he should be introduced to him. This was done with much
ceremony, and the little monarch received him most graciously,
presenting Tom to the lovely fairy queen who sat at his left hand.

Never before had the bewildered Kewley seen anything so splendid and so
beautiful as the royal pair, whose dresses were composed of the most
exquisite materials, of various brilliant colours, and covered all over
with bright, sparkling jewels. The queen was reserved and dignified, his
small majesty was most affable and familiar, but with the air of a
polished gentleman, and evidently was well used to command the respect
and obedience of his rollicking and somewhat boisterous subjects.

"We welcome you, Tom Kewley, to our royal presence and to the fairy
glen, for we know you well, and always find a crock of clean water
standing at your door every night, and a well-swept and sanded floor on
New Year's eve, when we or our queen come to Ballasalla, and my subjects
give a fair report of you besides. Sit down, my good man, and join our
elfin feast, for again I say you are right welcome."

Tom, who stood bowing and scraping before the royal pair, was quite
overpowered by his majesty's gracious manner, and acknowledged his
condescension the best way a rough countryman like him could; and having

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

 

<span id="img_04700"></span>

[![THE FAIRY FEAST](tn/04700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04700.jpg)  
THE FAIRY FEAST  

 

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

been handed to a seat at the table, where room had been made for him,
within good view of the royal party, he sat down, and was immediately
supplied with a handsome MASSIVE SILVER CUP, which was instantly filled
with wine.

<span id="img_04800"></span> ![](img/04800.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](phy11)
