[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](phy12)  [Next](phy14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span id="img_06100"></span> ![](img/06100.jpg)

# KING OLAVE THE SECOND AND THE GREAT SWORD MACABUIN.

### A TALE OF THE ISLE OF MAN

<span id="img_06100"></span> ![](img/06100.jpg)

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span id="img_06200"></span>

[![](tn/06200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06200.jpg.md)

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span id="img_06300"></span> ![](img/06300.jpg)

### CHAPTER I

<span id="img_06301"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![I](img/06301.jpg.md) |

N the latter part of the eleventh and the early part of the twelfth
centuries, the Isle of Man was the home of the boldest race of rovers
that scoured the seas; and one of the Manx monarchs, Hacon, was reckoned
the mightiest sea-king of his day, and was appointed by Edgar, king of
England, to the chief command of the allied English and Manx fleets; and
with three thousand six hundred vessels sailed round the British Isles
and swept the seas, driving all other rovers and pirates from the face
of the ocean. Well earned was his title of "Prince of Seamen," and he
may be regarded as the first on the list of British admirals--a roll
containing, among other proud names, the glorious ones of Drake and
Frobisher, Blake and Duncan, Howe, St. Vincent, Nelson, and a host of
others, the mention of whose names will ever call forth a flush of pride
on a Briton's cheek.

It is of a descendant of Hacon, King Olave the Second, called Olave

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Goddardson, the son of Goddard Crovan, by whom
the royal sceptre of Man was for a time very worthily swayed; and the
possessor of the great sword Macabuin, made by Loan Maclibhuin, the dark
smith of Drontheim, our present story has to tell.

The Island of Man had some time previous been subjugated by the
Norsemen, and partitioned among their several leaders or jarls, who were
vassals to the king, holding their lands and possessions from him under
feudal tenure; he in his turn doing homage and paying tribute to his
suzerain, the king of Norway.

One of the most powerful of the many earls or jarls of Man was a <span
id="img_06400"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/06400.jpg"><img src="tn/06400.jpg" alt="ELK HORNS" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
ELK HORNS<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) stalwart and marauding baron named
Kitter, who, when not roving the seas in quest of booty, in company with
other piratical Vikings, resided in an extensive but rude-built castle
near the summit of South Barrule, the loftiest mountain in the southern
part of the island.

In those days the inhabitants of Man were more addicted to warlike than
to peaceful pursuits. Piracy was more to their taste than husbandry, and
the land was wild and but poorly cultivated. The forests and moors
afforded an almost undisturbed shelter for hordes of wild animals. The
bison, elk, and red deer roamed over the country with other noble game,

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

to meet with which in these days the sportsman must cross not only the
broad Atlantic, but travel far into the western wilds of America, to the
slopes of the Rocky Mountains.

The chase has ever been a favourite pursuit with man in all ages, and
has furnished relaxation and amusement to the greatest heroes of
antiquity. Jarl Kitter, when not engaged in piratical forays on the
coasts of England, Scotland, or Ireland, gave himself up to the
pleasures of the chase. He was indeed a very Nimrod. Consideration for
those who were peaceably inclined and cultivated the soil has never been
a characteristic of mighty hunters; and in like manner to the great
Norman William, king of England, and his son Rufus, who drove hundreds
of poor Saxon peasants from their homes to create the great
hunting-ground of the new forest in Hampshire, did this Manx jarl seek
to rid the country around his domain of its human inhabitants in order
the better to preserve the game.

The natural consequence was that he was both feared and hated far and
wide by the peasantry. His dogs worried their cattle and flocks, while
his lawless and insolent retainers damaged or destroyed their scanty
crops. Many there were who only wanted the opportunity to revenge their
wrongs upon the tyrant, some of whom did not hesitate to invoke the aid
of witchcraft.

At a short distance from the southern coast of the Isle of Man is a
smaller island, known as the Calf of Man, and Jarl Kitter's foresters,
having reported to him that there were some very fine deer among the
hills there, he determined to organize a great hunting expedition, and
to cross over the sound which separates the Calf from the main island,
and with his favourite dogs and all his retinue have a good day's sport.

He assembled all his foresters and serving-men, huntsmen and dogs to
take part in the chase, leaving only his cook at home to mind the castle
and prepare the feast that all would require upon their return, and set
out for the Calf of Man.

Eaoch, or Loud Tongue, for so this *chef de cuisine* was named, was
possessed, among other qualifications, of so surprisingly loud a voice
that his

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

shout could be heard for miles, such was the extraordinary power of his
lungs. He perfectly out-Stentored Stentor.

Cooking for so large a family as would assemble round the festive board
on the hunting party's return was warm work. Not only warm, but dry, so
much so that Eaoch was compelled to pay frequent visits to the cellar to
quench his thirst, and so much wine did he take that his culinary
exertions and his potations combined, quite overpowered him, and he fell
fast asleep in front of his kitchen fire.

Oda, a celebrated witch, who resided in a cavern on the coast near Port
Erin, had been specially retained and feed very liberally by the
suffering country people to help them in wreaking vengeance upon their
common enemy, the Jarl, so soon as an opportunity should present itself.
Oda had kept a careful watch; and directly Kitter and his retainers set
forth upon their expedition, the witch took up her quarters near at hand
ready to avail herself of any chance that offered itself for carrying
out her purpose.

Eaoch, the cook, not only slumbered but snored; and he did so almost as
loud as he shouted. The first grunt not only reached the watchful Oda's
ear, but gave warning to the people in the country round about, that
their opportunity had at last arrived.

Before he had snored many minutes Oda was by his side and saw how
matters stood; she caused a large cauldron of fat to boil over into the
fire. An instant blaze was the result, setting the whole place in
flames, and some of the hot grease splashing out of the pot on to the
face of Enoch, he awoke in great fright and pain.

Scalded and singed, out he rushed from the burning castle and began to
roar so lustily that he gave the alarm to Jarl Kitter and his hunters on
the Calf, a distance of ten miles away.

Hearing the well-known voice of his cook, the attention of Kitter was
directed towards his castle, and looking in the direction of Barrule, he
and his companions beheld the flames pouring forth from every door and
window of the castle, and ascending with dense volumes of smoke high
into the air.

The chase was instantly abandoned, and he with those of his followers

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

who were nearest to hand, hurried down to the shore, and jumping into
the first *Currach* they could reach, started to cross the narrow but
rapid channel that separates the Calf from the mainland.

All was hurry and confusion; the currach itself was only a rude boat

<span id="img_06700"></span>

[![](tn/06700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06700.jpg.md)

constructed of wicker-work covered with hides, and far too frail to
combat with the surging, boisterous waters of the Sound, as the channel
is called, which were rushing through the narrow space between the two
islands like a mill race.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

Oda, the witch, guessing that Kitter's party could not fail to be
alarmed at the sound of Eaoch's shouts and the smoke from the burning
castle, would return as soon as possible, hastened down to the south
shore, and standing on the top of the high, precipitous rock now known
as Spanish Head, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) watched the
embarkation of the Jarl and his hunters in the currach.

Using her powers of witchcraft, she speedily caused a storm to arise.
The boat was overcrowded and unsteady. Jarl Kitten swore worse than any
Flanders trooper, the helmsman's wonted skill forsook him, and he with
his shipmates became panic-struck at the sudden storm.

The rapid current and the wind together drove the fragile and
overburdened vessel violently upon a rocky islet lying midway between
the two shores. She at once swamped and capsized, leaving every one of
its living freight struggling in the raging sea. It was in vain to cling
to the rocks and call for help. The waters overwhelmed them all, and
washed them one by one into the surging stream. All perished, not a soul
was saved.

The rocky islet has ever since that day, in commemoration of this event,
borne the name of Kitterland, or Kitter's Island.

 

<span id="img_06800"></span> ![](img/06800.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[64:1](phy13.htm#fr_0.md) The above illustration is
from a photograph taken from an elk's head and horns, dug up in a
curragh in the south part of the Isle of Man, and are now in the
possession of William Gell, Esq., of Rose Mount, Douglas.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[68:1](phy13.htm#fr_1.md) This headland is so called
in consequence of a large ship of the Spanish Armada being wrecked
there, after trying to escape from one of Drake's vessels that had
chased her right round the north of Scotland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](phy14.md)
