[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tgr18)  [Next](tgr20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NJ5W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Think and Grow Rich*, by Napoleon Hill \[1938\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                         |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| THE "depression" was a blessing in disguise. It reduced the whole world to a new starting point that gives every one a new opportunity. |

</div>

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="70"><p><span id="img_lbrk"></span> <img src="img/lbrk.jpg" /></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="468"><h3 id="chapter-14" data-align="center">CHAPTER 14</h3>
<h3 id="the-sixth-sense" data-align="center">THE SIXTH SENSE</h3>
<p>THE DOOR TO THE TEMPLE OF WISDOM</p>
<p><em>The Thirteenth Step toward Riches</em></p></td>
<td width="71"><p><span id="img_rbrk"></span> <img src="img/rbrk.jpg" /></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

THE "thirteenth" principle is known as the SIXTH SENSE, through which
Infinite Intelligence may, and will communicate voluntarily, without any
effort from, or demands by, the individual.

This principle is the apex of the philosophy. It can be assimilated,
understood, and applied ONLY by first mastering the other twelve
principles.

The SIXTH SENSE is that portion of the subconscious mind which has been
referred to as the Creative Imagination. It has also been referred to as
the "receiving set" through which ideas, plans, and thoughts flash into
the mind. The "flashes" are sometimes called "hunches" or
"inspirations."

The sixth sense defies description! It cannot be described to a person
who has not mastered the other principles of this philosophy, because
such a person has no knowledge, and no experience with which the sixth
sense may be compared. Understanding of the sixth sense comes only by
meditation through mind development *from within*. The sixth sense
probably is the medium of contact between the finite mind of man and
Infinite Intelligence, and for this reason, *it is a mixture of both the
mental and the spiritual*. It is believed to be the point at which the
mind of man contacts the Universal Mind.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

After you have mastered the principles described in this book, you will
be prepared to accept as truth a statement which may, otherwise, be
incredible to you, namely:

Through the aid of the sixth sense, you will be warned of impending
dangers in time to avoid them, and notified of opportunities in time to
embrace them.

There comes to your aid, and to do your bidding, with the development of
the sixth sense, a "guardian angel" who will open to you at all times
the door to the Temple of Wisdom.

Whether or not this is a statement of truth, you will never know, except
by following the instructions described in the pages of this book, or
some similar method of procedure.

The author is not a believer in, nor an advocate of "miracles," for the
reason that he has enough knowledge of Nature to understand that Nature
*never deviates from her established laws*. Some of her laws are so
incomprehensible that they produce what appear to be "miracles." The
sixth sense comes as near to being a miracle as anything I have ever
experienced, and it appears so, only because I do not understand the
method by which this principle is operated.

This much the author does know--that there is a power, or a First Cause,
or an Intelligence, which permeates every atom of matter, and embraces
every unit of energy perceptible to man--that this Infinite Intelligence
converts acorns into oak trees, causes water to flow down hill in
response to the law of gravity, follows night with day, and winter

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

with summer, each maintaining its proper place and relationship to the
other. This Intelligence may, through the principles of this philosophy,
be induced to aid in transmuting DESIRES into concrete, or material
form. The author has this knowledge, because he has experimented with
it--and has EXPERIENCED IT.

Step by step, through the preceding chapters, you have been led to this,
the last principle. If you have mastered each of the preceding
principles, you are now prepared to accept, *without being skeptical*,
the stupendous claims made here. If you have not mastered the other
principles, you must do so before you may determine, definitely, whether
or not the claims made in this chapter are fact or fiction.

While I was passing through the age of "hero-worship" I found myself
trying to imitate those whom I most admired. Moreover, I discovered that
the element of FAITH, with which I endeavored to imitate my idols, gave
me great capacity to do so quite successfully.

I have never entirely divested myself of this habit of hero-worship,
although I have passed the age commonly given over to such. My
experience has taught me that the next best thing to being truly great,
is to emulate the great, by feeling and action, as nearly as possible.

Long before I had ever written a line for publication, or endeavored to
deliver a speech in public, I followed the habit of reshaping my own
character, by trying to imitate the nine men whose lives and life-works
had been most impressive to me. These nine men were, Emerson, Paine,
Edison, Darwin,

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Lincoln, Burbank,
Napoleon, Ford, and Carnegie. Every night, over a long period of years,
I held an imaginary Council meeting with this group whom I called my
"Invisible Counselors."

The procedure was this. Just before going to sleep at night, I would
shut my eyes, and see, in my imagination, this group of men seated with
me around my Council Table. Here I had not only an opportunity to sit
among those whom I considered to be great, but I actually dominated the
group, by serving as the Chairman.

I had a very DEFINITE PURPOSE in indulging my imagination through these
nightly meetings. My purpose was to rebuild my own character so it would
represent a composite of the characters of my imaginary counselors.
Realizing, as I did, early in life, that I had to overcome the handicap
of birth in an environment of ignorance and superstition, I deliberately
assigned myself the task of voluntary rebirth through the method here
described.

BUILDING CHARACTER THROUGH AUTO-SUGGESTION

Being an earnest student of psychology, I knew, of course, that all men
have become what they are, because of their DOMINATING THOUGHTS AND
DESIRES. I knew that every deeply seated desire has the effect of
causing one to seek outward expression through which that desire may be
transmuted into reality. I knew that self-suggestion is a powerful
factor in building character, that it is, in fact, the sole principle
through which character is builded.

With this knowledge of the principles of mind

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

operation, I was fairly well armed with the equipment needed in
rebuilding my character. In these imaginary Council meetings I called on
my Cabinet members for the knowledge I wished each to contribute,
addressing myself to each member in audible words, as follows:--

"Mr. Emerson, I desire to acquire from you the marvelous understanding
of Nature which distinguished your life. I ask that you make an impress
upon my subconscious mind, of whatever qualities you possessed, which
enabled you to understand and adapt yourself to the laws of Nature. I
ask that you assist me in reaching and drawing upon whatever sources of
knowledge are available to this end.

"Mr. Burbank, I request that you pass on to me the knowledge which
enabled you to so harmonize the laws of Nature that you caused the
cactus to shed its thorns, and become an edible food. Give me access to
the knowledge which enabled you to make two blades of grass grow where
but one grew before, and helped you to blend the coloring of the flowers
with more splendor and harmony, for you, alone, have successfully gilded
the lily.

"Napoleon, I desire to acquire from you, by emulation, the marvelous
ability you possessed to inspire men, and to arouse them to greater and
more determined spirit of action. Also to acquire the spirit of enduring
FAITH, which enabled you to turn defeat into victory, and to surmount
staggering obstacles. Emperor of Fate, King of Chance, Man of Destiny, I
salute you!

"Mr. Paine, I desire to acquire from you the freedom of thought and the
courage and clarity with

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

which to express convictions, which so distinguished you!

"Mr. Darwin, I wish to acquire from you the marvelous patience, and
ability to study cause and effect, without bias or prejudice, so
exemplified by you in the field of natural science.

"Mr. Lincoln, I desire to build into my own character the keen sense of
justice, the untiring spirit of patience, the sense of humor, the human
understanding, and the tolerance, which were your distinguishing
characteristics.

"Mr. Carnegie, I am already indebted to you for my choice of a
life-work, which has brought me great happiness and peace of mind. I
wish to acquire a thorough understanding of the principles of *organized
effort*, which you used so effectively in the building of a great
industrial enterprise.

"Mr. Ford, you have been among the most helpful of the men who have
supplied much of the material essential to my work. I wish to acquire
your spirit of persistence, the determination, poise, and
self-confidence which have enabled you to master poverty, organize,
unify, and simplify human effort, so I may help others to follow in your
footsteps.

"Mr. Edison, I have seated you nearest to me, at my right, because of
the personal cooperation you have given me, during my research into the
causes of success and failure. I wish to acquire from you the marvelous
spirit of FAITH, with which you have uncovered so many of Nature's
secrets, the spirit of unremitting toil with which you have so often
wrested victory from defeat."

My method of addressing the members of the

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

imaginary Cabinet would vary, according to the traits of character in
which I was, for the moment, most interested in acquiring. I studied the
records of their lives with painstaking care. After some months of this
nightly procedure, I was astounded by the discovery that these imaginary
figures became, apparently *real*.

Each of these nine men developed individual characteristics, which
surprised me. For example, Lincoln developed the habit of always being
late, then walking around in solemn parade. When he came, he walked very
slowly, with his hands clasped behind him, and once in a while, he would
stop as he passed, and rest his hand, momentarily, upon my shoulder. He
always wore an expression of seriousness upon his face. Rarely did I see
him smile. The cares of a sundered nation made him grave.

That was not true of the others. Burbank and Paine often indulged in
witty repartee which seemed, at times, to shock the other members of the
cabinet. One night Paine suggested that I prepare a lecture on "The Age
of Reason," and deliver it from the pulpit of a church which I formerly
attended. Many around the table laughed heartily at the suggestion. Not
Napoleon! He drew his mouth down at the corners and groaned so loudly
that all turned and looked at him with amazement. To him the church was
but a pawn of the State, not to be reformed, but to be used, as a
convenient inciter to mass activity by the people.

On one occasion Burbank was late. When he came, he was excited with
enthusiasm, and explained that he had been late, because of an
experiment

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

he was making, through which he hoped to be able to grow apples on any
sort of tree. Paine chided him by reminding him that it was an apple
which started all the trouble between man and woman. Darwin chuckled
heartily as he suggested that Paine should watch out for little
serpents, when he went into the forest to gather apples, as they had the
habit of growing into big snakes. Emerson observed--"No serpents, no
apples," and Napoleon remarked, "No apples, no state!"

Lincoln developed the habit of always being the last one to leave the
table after each meeting. On one occasion, he leaned across the end of
the table, his arms folded, and remained in that position for many
minutes. I made no attempt to disturb him. Finally, he lifted his head
slowly, got up and walked to the door, then turned around, came back,
and laid his hand on my shoulder and said, "My boy, you will need much
courage if you remain steadfast in carrying out your purpose in life.
But remember, when difficulties overtake you, the common people have
common sense. Adversity will develop it."

One evening Edison arrived ahead of all the others. He walked over and
seated himself at my left, where Emerson was accustomed to sit, and
said, "You are destined to witness the discovery of the secret of life.
When the time comes, you will observe that life consists of great swarms
of energy, or entities, each as intelligent as human beings *think*
themselves to be. These units of life group together like hives of bees,
and remain together until they disintegrate, *through lack of harmony*.

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These units have
differences of opinion, the same as human beings, and often fight among
themselves. These meetings which you are conducting will be very helpful
to you. They will bring to your rescue some of the same units of life
which served the members of your Cabinet, during their lives. These
units are eternal. THEY NEVER DIE! Your own thoughts and DESIRES serve
as the magnet which attracts units of life, from the great ocean of life
out there. Only the friendly units are attracted--the ones which
harmonize with the nature of your DESIRES."

The other members of the Cabinet began to enter the room. Edison got up,
and slowly walked around to his own seat. Edison was still living when
this happened. It impressed me so greatly that I went to see him, and
told him about the experience. He smiled broadly, and said, "Your dream
was more a reality than you may imagine it to have been." He added no
further explanation to his statement.

These meetings became so realistic that I became fearful of their
consequences, and discontinued them for several months. The experiences
were so uncanny, I was afraid if I continued them I would lose sight of
the fact that the meetings were purely *experiences of my imagination*.

Some six months after I had discontinued the practice I was awakened one
night, or thought I was, when I saw Lincoln standing at my bedside. He
said, "The world will soon need your services. It is about to undergo a
period of chaos which will cause men and women to lose faith, and become

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

panic stricken. Go ahead with your work and complete your philosophy.
That is your mission in life. If you neglect it, for any cause
whatsoever, you will be reduced to a primal state, and be compelled to
retrace the cycles through which you have passed during thousands of
years."

I was unable to tell, the following morning, whether I had dreamed this,
or had actually been awake, and I have never since found out which it
was, but I do know that the dream, if it were a dream, was so vivid in
my mind the next day that I resumed my meetings the following night.

At our next meeting, the members of my Cabinet all filed into the room
together, and stood at their accustomed places at the Council Table,
while Lincoln raised a glass and said, "Gentlemen, let us drink a toast
to a friend who has returned to the fold."

After that, I began to add new members to my Cabinet, until now it
consists of more than fifty, among them Christ, St. Paul, Galileo,
Copernicus, Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, Homer, Voltaire, Bruno, Spinoza,
Drummond, Kant, Schopenhauer, Newton, Confucius, Elbert Hubbard, Brann,
[Ingersoll](errata.htm#1.md), Wilson, and William James.

This is the first time that I have had the courage to mention this.
Heretofore, I have remained quiet on the subject, because I knew, from
my own attitude in connection with such matters, that I would be
misunderstood if I described my unusual experience. I have been
emboldened now to reduce my experience to the printed page, because I am
now less concerned about what "they say" than I was

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

in the years that have passed. One of the blessings of maturity is that
it sometimes brings one greater courage to be truthful, regardless of
what those who do not understand, may think or say.

Lest I be misunderstood, I wish here to state most emphatically, that I
still regard my Cabinet meetings as being purely imaginary, but I feel
entitled to suggest that, while the members of my Cabinet may be purely
fictional, and the meetings existent only in my own imagination, they
have led me into glorious paths of adventure, rekindled an appreciation
of true greatness, encouraged creative endeavor, and emboldened the
expression of honest thought.

Somewhere in the cell-structure of the brain, is located an organ which
receives vibrations of thought ordinarily called "hunches." So far,
science has not discovered where this organ of the sixth sense is
located, but this is not important. The fact remains that human beings
do receive accurate knowledge, through sources other than the physical
senses. Such knowledge, generally, is received when the mind is under
the influence of extraordinary stimulation. Any emergency which arouses
the emotions, and causes the heart to beat more rapidly than normal may,
and generally does, bring the sixth sense into action. Anyone who has
experienced a near accident while driving, knows that on such occasions,
the sixth sense often comes to one's rescue, and aids, by split seconds,
in avoiding the accident.

These facts are mentioned preliminary to a statement of fact which I
shall now make, namely, that

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

during my meetings with the "Invisible Counselors" I find my mind most
receptive to ideas, thoughts, and knowledge which reach me through the
sixth sense. I can truthfully say that I owe entirely to my "Invisible
Counselors" full credit for such ideas, facts, or knowledge as I
received through "inspiration."

On scores of occasions, when I have faced emergencies, some of them so
grave that my life was in jeopardy, I have been miraculously guided past
these difficulties through the influence of my "Invisible Counselors."

My original purpose in conducting Council meetings with imaginary
beings, was solely that of impressing my own subconscious mind, through
the principle of auto-suggestion, with certain characteristics which I
desired to acquire. In more recent years, my experimentation has taken
on an entirely different trend. I now go to my imaginary counselors with
every difficult problem which confronts me and my clients. The results
are often astonishing, although I do not depend entirely on this form of
Counsel.

You, of course, have recognized that this chapter covers a subject with
which a majority of people are not familiar. The Sixth Sense is a
subject that will be of great interest and benefit to the person whose
aim is to accumulate vast wealth, but it need not claim the attention of
those whose desires are more modest.

Henry Ford, undoubtedly understands and makes practical use of the sixth
sense. His vast business and financial operations make it necessary for
him

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

to understand and use this principle. The late Thomas A. Edison
understood and used the sixth sense in connection with the development
of inventions, especially those involving basic patents, in connection
with which he had no human experience and no accumulated knowledge to
guide him, as was the case while he was working on the talking machine,
and the moving picture machine.

Nearly all great leaders, such as Napoleon, [Bismarck](errata.htm#2.md),
Joan of Arc, Christ, Buddha, Confucius, and Mohammed, understood, and
probably made use of the sixth sense almost continuously. The major
portion of their greatness consisted of their knowledge of this
principle.

The sixth sense is not something that one can take off and put on at
will. Ability to use this great power comes slowly, through application
of the other principles outlined in this book. Seldom does any
individual come into workable knowledge of the sixth sense before the
age of forty. More often the knowledge is not available until one is
well past fifty, and this, for the reason that the spiritual forces,
with which the sixth sense is so closely related, do not mature and
become usable except through years of meditation, self-examination, and
serious thought.

No matter who you are, or what may have been your purpose in reading
this book, you can profit by it without understanding the principle
described in this chapter. This is especially true if your major purpose
is that of accumulation of money or other material things.

The chapter on the sixth sense was included, because

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

the book is designed for the purpose of presenting a complete philosophy
by which individuals may unerringly guide themselves in attaining
whatever they ask of life. The starting point of all achievement is
DESIRE. The finishing point is that brand of KNOWLEDGE which leads to
understanding--understanding of self, understanding of others,
understanding of the laws of Nature, recognition and understanding of
HAPPINESS.

This sort of understanding comes in its fullness only through
familiarity with, and use of the principle of the sixth sense, hence
that principle had to be included as a part of this philosophy, for the
benefit of those who demand more than money.

Having read the chapter, you must have observed that while reading it,
you were lifted to a high level of mental stimulation. Splendid! Come
back to this again a month from now, read it once more, and observe that
your mind will soar to a still higher level of stimulation. Repeat this
experience from time to time, giving no concern as to how much or how
little you learn at the time, and eventually you will find yourself in
possession of a power that will enable you to throw off discouragement,
master fear, overcome procrastination, and draw freely upon your
imagination. Then you will have felt the touch of that unknown
"something" which has been the moving spirit of every truly great
thinker leader, artist, musician, writer, statesman. Then you will be in
position to transmute your DESIRES into their physical or financial
counterpart as easily as you may lie down and quit at the first sign of
opposition.

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

FAITH VS. FEAR!

Previous chapters have described how to develop FAITH, through
Auto-suggestion, Desire and the Subconscious. The next chapter presents
detailed instructions for the mastery of FEAR.

Here will be. found a full description of the six fears which are the
cause of all discouragement, timidity, procrastination, indifference,
indecision, and the lack of ambition, self-reliance, initiative,
self-control, and enthusiasm.

Search yourself carefully as you study these six enemies, as they may
exist only in your subconscious mind, where their presence will be hard
to detect.

Remember, too, as you analyze the "Six Ghosts of Fear," that they are
nothing but ghosts because they exist only in one's mind.

Remember, also, that ghosts--creations of uncontrolled imagination--have
caused most of the damage people have done to their own minds,
therefore, ghosts can be as dangerous as if they lived and walked on the
earth in physical bodies.

The Ghost of the Fear of Poverty, which seized the minds of millions of
people in 1929, was so real that it caused the worst business depression
this country has ever known. Moreover, this particular ghost still
frightens some of us out of our wits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15. How to Outwit the Six Ghosts of Fear](tgr20.md)
