[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tgr09)  [Next](tgr11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NJ5W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Think and Grow Rich*, by Napoleon Hill \[1938\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="70"><p><span id="img_lbrk"></span> <img src="img/lbrk.jpg" /></p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="468"><h3 id="chapter-5" data-align="center">CHAPTER 5</h3>
<h3 id="specialized-knowledge" data-align="center">SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE</h3>
<p>SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE PERSONAL EXPERIENCES OR OBSERVATIONS</p>
<p><em>The Fourth Step toward Riches</em></p></td>
<td width="71"><p><span id="img_rbrk"></span> <img src="img/rbrk.jpg" /></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

THERE are two kinds of knowledge. One is general, the other is
specialized. General knowledge, no matter how great in quantity or
variety it may be, is of but little use in the accumulation of money.
The faculties of the great universities possess, in the aggregate,
practically every form of general knowledge known to civilization. *Most
of the professors have but little or no money*. They specialize on
*teaching* knowledge, but they do not specialize on the organization, or
the *use* of knowledge.

KNOWLEDGE will not attract money, unless it is organized, and
intelligently directed, through practical PLANS OF ACTION, to the
DEFINITE END of accumulation of money. Lack of understanding of this
fact has been the source of confusion to millions of people who falsely
believe that "knowledge is power." It is nothing of the sort! Knowledge
is only *potential* power. It becomes power only when, and if, it is
organized into definite plans of action, and directed to a definite end.

This "missing link" in all systems of education known to civilization
today, may be found in the failure of educational institutions to teach
their students HOW TO ORGANIZE AND USE KNOWLEDGE AFTER THEY ACQUIRE IT.

Many people make the mistake of assuming that,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

because Henry Ford had but little "schooling," he is not a man of
"education." Those who make this mistake do not know Henry Ford, nor do
they understand the real meaning of the word "educate." That word is
derived from the Latin word "educo," meaning to educe, to draw out, to
DEVELOP FROM WITHIN.

An educated man is not, necessarily, one who has an abundance of general
or specialized knowledge. An educated man is one who has so developed
the faculties of his mind that he may acquire anything he wants, or its
equivalent, without violating the rights of others. Henry Ford comes
well within the meaning of this definition.

During the world war, a Chicago newspaper published certain editorials
in which, among other statements, Henry Ford was called "an ignorant
pacifist." Mr. Ford objected to the statements, and brought suit against
the paper for libeling him. When the suit was tried in the Courts, the
attorneys for the paper pleaded justification, and placed Mr. Ford,
himself, on the witness stand, for the purpose of proving to the jury
that he was ignorant. The attorneys asked Mr. Ford a great variety of
questions, all of them intended to prove, by his own evidence, that,
while he might possess considerable specialized knowledge pertaining to
the manufacture of automobiles, he was, in the main, ignorant.

Mr. Ford was plied with such questions as the following:

"Who was Benedict Arnold?" and "How many soldiers did the British send
over to America to put down the Rebellion of 1776?" In answer to the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

last question, Mr. Ford replied, "I do not know the exact number of
soldiers the British sent over, but I have heard that it was a
considerably larger number than ever went back."

Finally, Mr. Ford became tired of this line of questioning, and in reply
to a particularly offensive question, he leaned over, pointed his finger
at the lawyer who had asked the question, and said, "If I should really
WANT to answer the foolish question you have just asked, or any of the
other questions you have been asking me, let me remind you that I have a
row of electric push-buttons on my desk, and by pushing the right
button, I can summon to my aid men who can answer ANY question I desire
to ask concerning the business to which I am devoting most of my
efforts. Now, will you kindly tell me, WHY I should clutter up my mind
with general knowledge, for the purpose of being able to answer
questions, when I have men around me who can supply any knowledge I
require?"

There certainly was good logic to that reply.

That answer floored the lawyer. Every person in the courtroom realized
it was the answer, not of an ignorant man, but of a man of EDUCATION.
Any man is educated who knows where to get knowledge when he needs it,
and how to organize that knowledge into definite plans of action.
Through the assistance of his "Master Mind" group, Henry Ford had at his
command all the specialized knowledge he needed to enable him to become
one of the wealthiest men in America. *It was not essential that he have
this knowledge in his own mind*. Surely no person who has sufficient
inclination and intelligence

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

to read a book of this nature can possibly miss the significance of this
illustration.

Before you can be sure of your ability to transmute DESIRE into its
monetary equivalent, you will require SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE of the
service, merchandise, or profession which you intend to offer in return
for fortune. Perhaps you may need much more specialized knowledge than
you have the ability or the inclination to acquire, and if this should
be true, you may bridge your weakness through the aid of your "Master
Mind" group.

Andrew Carnegie stated that he, personally, knew nothing about the
technical end of the steel business; moreover, he did not particularly
care to know anything about it. The specialized knowledge which he
required for the manufacture and marketing of steel, he found available
through the individual units of his MASTER MIND GROUP.

The accumulation of great fortunes calls for POWER, and power is
acquired through highly organized and intelligently directed specialized
knowledge, but that knowledge does not, necessarily, have to be in the
possession of the man who accumulates the fortune.

The preceding paragraph should give hope and encouragement to the man
with ambition to accumulate a fortune, who has not possessed himself of
the necessary "education" to supply such specialized knowledge as he may
require. Men sometimes go through life suffering from "inferiority
complexes," because they are not men of "education." The man who can
organize and direct a "Master Mind" group of men who possess knowledge
useful

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

in the accumulation of money, is just as much a man of education as any
man in the group. REMEMBER THIS, if you suffer from a feeling of
inferiority, because your schooling has been limited.

Thomas A. Edison had only three months of "schooling" during his entire
life. He did not lack education, neither did he die poor.

Henry Ford had less than a sixth grade "schooling" but he has managed to
do pretty well by himself, financially.

SPECIALIZED KNOWLEDGE is among the most plentiful, and the cheapest
forms of service which may be had! If you doubt this, consult the
payroll of any university.

IT PAYS TO KNOW HOW TO PURCHASE KNOWLEDGE

First of all, decide the sort of specialized knowledge you require, and
the purpose for which it is needed. To a large extent your major purpose
in life, the goal toward which you are working, will help determine what
knowledge you need. With this question settled, your next move requires
that you have accurate information concerning dependable sources of
knowledge. The more important of these are:

|       |                                                                                                                    |
|-------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| \(a\) | One's own experience and education                                                                                 |
| \(b\) | Experience and education available through cooperation of others (Master Mind Alliance)                            |
| \(c\) | Colleges and Universities                                                                                          |
| \(d\) | Public Libraries (Through books and periodicals in which may be found all the knowledge organized by civilization) |
|       | <span id="page_110">p. 110</span>                                                                                  |
| \(e\) | Special Training Courses (Through night schools and home study schools in particular.)                             |

As knowledge is acquired it must be organized and put into use, for a
definite purpose, through practical plans. Knowledge has no value except
that which can be gained from its application toward some worthy end.
This is one reason why college degrees are not valued more highly. They
represent nothing but miscellaneous knowledge.

If you contemplate taking additional schooling, first determine the
purpose for which you want the knowledge you are seeking, then learn
where this particular sort of knowledge can be obtained, from reliable
sources.

Successful men, in all callings, never stop acquiring specialized
knowledge related to their major purpose, business, or profession. Those
who are not successful usually make the mistake of believing that the
knowledge acquiring period ends when one finishes school. The truth is
that schooling does but little more than to put one in the way of
learning how to acquire practical knowledge.

With this Changed World which began at the end of the economic collapse,
came also astounding changes in educational requirements. The order of
the day is SPECIALIZATION! This truth was emphasized by Robert P. Moore,
secretary of appointments of Columbia University.

"SPECIALISTS MOST SOUGHT

"Particularly sought after by employing companies are candidates who
have specialized in some

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

field--business-school graduates with training in accounting and
statistics, engineers of all varieties, journalists, architects,
chemists, and also outstanding leaders and activity men of the senior
class.

"The man who has been active on the campus, whose personality is such
that he gets along with all kinds of people and who has done an adequate
job with his studies has a most decided edge over the strictly academic
student. Some of these, because of their all-around qualifications, have
received several offers of positions, a few of them as many as six.

"In departing from the conception that the 'straight A' student was
invariably the one to get the choice of the better jobs, Mr. Moore said
that most companies look not only to academic records but to activity
records and personalities of the students.

"One of the largest industrial companies, the leader in its field, in
writing to Mr. Moore concerning prospective seniors at the college,
said:

"'We are interested primarily in finding men who can make exceptional
progress in management work. For this reason we emphasize qualities of
character, intelligence and personality far more than specific
educational background.'

"'APPRENTICESHIP' PROPOSED

"Proposing a system of 'apprenticing' students in offices, stores and
industrial occupations during the summer vacation, Mr. Moore asserts
that after the first two or three years of college, every student should
be asked 'to choose a definite future course

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

and to call a halt if he has been merely pleasantly drifting without
purpose through an unspecialized academic curriculum.'

"Colleges and universities must face the practical consideration that
all professions and occupations now demand specialists," he said, urging
that educational institutions accept more direct responsibility for
vocational guidance.

One of the most reliable and practical sources of knowledge available to
those who need specialized schooling, is the night schools operated in
most large cities. The correspondence schools give specialized training
anywhere the U. S. mails go, on all subjects that can be taught by the
extension method. One advantage of home study training is the
flexibility of the study programme which permits one to study during
spare time. Another stupendous advantage of home study training (if the
school is carefully chosen), is the fact that most courses offered by
home study schools carry with them generous privileges of consultation
which can be of priceless value to those needing specialized knowledge.
No matter where you live, you can share the benefits.

Anything acquired without effort, and without cost is generally
unappreciated, often discredited; perhaps this is why we get so little
from our marvelous opportunity in public schools. The SELF-DISCIPLINE
one receives from a definite programme of specialized study makes up to
some extent, for the wasted opportunity when knowledge was available
without cost. Correspondence schools are highly organized business
institutions. Their tuition fees are so low that they are forced to
insist

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

upon prompt payments. Being asked to pay, whether the student makes good
grades or poor, has the effect of causing one to follow through with the
course when he would otherwise drop it. The correspondence schools have
not stressed this point sufficiently, for the truth is that their
collection departments constitute the very finest sort of training on
DECISION, PROMPTNESS, ACTION and THE HABIT OF FINISHING THAT WHICH ONE
BEGINS.

I learned this from experience, more than twenty-five years ago. I
enrolled for a home study course in Advertising. After completing eight
or ten lessons I stopped studying, but the school did not stop sending
me bills. Moreover, it insisted upon payment, whether I kept up my
studies or not. I decided that if I had to pay for the course (which I
had legally obligated myself to do), I should complete the lessons and
get my money's worth. I felt, at the time, that the collection system of
the school was somewhat too well organized, but I learned later in life
that it was a valuable part of my training for which no charge had been
made. Being forced to pay, I went ahead and completed the course. Later
in life I discovered that the efficient collection system of that school
had been worth much in the form of money earned, because of the training
in advertising I had so reluctantly taken.

We have in this country what is said to be the greatest public school
system in the world. We have invested fabulous sums for fine buildings,
we have provided convenient transportation for children living in the
rural districts, so they may attend the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

best schools, but there is one astounding weakness to this marvelous
system--IT IS FREE! One of the strange things about human beings is that
they value only that which has a price. The free schools of America, and
the free public libraries, do not impress people *because they are
free*. This is the major reason why so many people find it necessary to
acquire additional training after they quit school and go to work. It is
also one of the major reasons why EMPLOYERS GIVE GREATER CONSIDERATION
TO EMPLOYEES WHO TAKE HOME STUDY COURSES. They have learned, from
experience, that any person who has the ambition to give up a part of
his spare time to studying at home has in him those qualities which make
for leadership. This recognition is not a charitable gesture, it is
sound business judgment upon the part of the employers.

There is one weakness in people for which there is no remedy. It is the
universal weakness of LACK OF AMBITION! Persons, especially salaried
people, who schedule their spare time, to provide for home study, seldom
remain at the bottom very long. Their action opens the way for the
upward climb, removes many obstacles from their path, and gains the
friendly interest of those who have the power to put them in the way of
OPPORTUNITY.

The home study method of training is especially suited to the needs of
employed people who find, after leaving school, that they must acquire
additional specialized knowledge, but cannot spare the time to go back
to school.

The changed economic conditions prevailing since

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

the depression have made it necessary for thousands of people to find
additional, or new sources of income. For the majority of these, the
solution to their problem may be found only by acquiring specialized
knowledge. Many will be forced to change their occupations entirely.
When a merchant finds that a certain line of merchandise is not selling,
he usually supplants it with another that is in demand. The person whose
business is that of marketing personal services must also be an
efficient merchant. If his services do not bring adequate returns in one
occupation, he must change to another, where broader opportunities are
available.

Stuart Austin Wier prepared himself as a Construction Engineer and
followed this line of work until the depression limited his market to
where it did not give him the income he required. He took inventory of
himself, decided to change his profession to law, went back to school
and took special courses by which he prepared himself as a corporation
lawyer. Despite the fact the depression had not ended, he completed his
training, passed the Bar Examination, and quickly built a lucrative law
practice, in Dallas, Texas; in fact he is turning away clients.

Just to keep the record straight, and to anticipate the alibis of those
who will say, "I couldn't go to school because I have a family to
support," or "I'm too old," I will add the information that Mr. Wier was
past forty, and married when he went back to school. Moreover, by
carefully selecting highly specialized courses, in colleges best
prepared to teach the subjects chosen, Mr. Wier completed in two

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

years the work for which the majority of law students require four
years. IT PAYS TO KNOW HOW TO PURCHASE KNOWLEDGE!

The person who stops studying merely because he has finished school is
forever hopelessly doomed to mediocrity, no matter what may be his
calling. The way of success is the way of continuous pursuit of
knowledge.

Let us consider a specific instance.

During the depression a salesman in a grocery store found himself
without a position. Having had some bookkeeping experience, he took a
special course in accounting, familiarized himself with all the latest
bookkeeping and office equipment, and went into business for himself.
Starting with the grocer for whom he had formerly worked, he made
contracts with more than 100 small merchants to keep their books, at a
very nominal monthly fee. His idea was so practical that he soon found
it necessary to set up a portable office in a light delivery truck,
which he equipped with modern bookkeeping machinery. He now has a fleet
of these bookkeeping offices "on wheels" and employs a large staff of
assistants, thus providing small merchants with accounting service equal
to the best that money can buy, at very nominal cost.

Specialized knowledge, plus imagination, were the ingredients that went
into this unique and successful business. Last year the owner of that
business paid an income tax of almost ten times as much as was paid by
the merchant for whom he worked when the depression forced upon him a
temporary adversity which proved to be a blessing in disguise.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

The beginning of this successful business was an IDEA!

Inasmuch as I had the privilege of supplying the unemployed salesman
with that idea, I now assume the further privilege of suggesting another
idea which has within it the possibility of even greater income. Also
the possibility of rendering useful service to thousands of people who
badly need that service.

The idea was suggested by the salesman who gave up selling and went into
the business of keeping books on a wholesale basis. When the plan was
suggested as a solution of his unemployment problem, he quickly
exclaimed, "I like the idea, but I would not know how to turn it into
cash." In other words, he complained he would not know how to market his
bookkeeping knowledge *after he acquired it*.

So, that brought up another problem which had to be solved. With the aid
of a young woman typist, clever at hand lettering, and who could put the
story together, a very attractive book was prepared, describing the
advantages of the new system of bookkeeping. The pages were neatly typed
and pasted in an ordinary scrapbook, which was used as a silent salesman
with which the story of this new business was so effectively told that
its owner soon had more accounts than he could handle.

There are thousands of people, all over the country, who need the
services of a merchandising specialist capable of preparing an
attractive brief for use in marketing personal services. The aggregate
annual income from such a service might easily exceed

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

that received by the largest employment agency, and the benefits of the
service might be made far greater to the purchaser than any to be
obtained from an employment agency.

The IDEA here described was born of necessity, to bridge an emergency
which had to be covered, but it did not stop by merely serving one
person. The woman who created the idea has a keen IMAGINATION. She saw
in her newly born brain-child the making of a new profession, one that
is destined to render valuable service to thousands of people who need
practical guidance in marketing personal services.

Spurred to action by the instantaneous success of her first "PREPARED
PLAN TO MARKET PERSONAL SERVICES," this energetic woman turned next to
the solution of a similar problem for her son who had just finished
college, but had been totally unable to find a market for his services.
The plan she originated for his use was the finest specimen of
merchandising of personal services I have ever seen.

When the plan book had been completed, it contained nearly fifty pages
of beautifully typed, properly organized information, telling the story
of her son's native ability, schooling, personal experiences, and a
great variety of other information too extensive for description. The
plan book also contained a complete description of the position her son
desired, together with a marvelous word picture of the exact plan he
would use in filling the position.

The preparation of the plan book required several week's labor, during
which time its creator sent her son to the public library almost daily,
to procure

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

data needed in selling his services to best advantage. She sent him,
also to all the competitors of his prospective employer, and gathered
from them vital information concerning their business methods which was
of great value in the formation of the plan he intended to use in
filling the position he sought. When the plan had been finished, it
contained more than half a dozen very fine suggestions for the use and
benefit of the prospective employer. (The suggestions were put into use
by the company).

One may be inclined to ask, "Why go to all this trouble to secure a
job?" The answer is straight to the point, also it is dramatic, because
it deals with a subject which assumes the proportion of a tragedy with
millions of men and women whose sole source of income is personal
services.

The answer is, "DOING A THING WELL NEVER IS TROUBLE! THE PLAN PREPARED
BY THIS WOMAN FOR THE BENEFIT OF HER SON, HELPED HIM GET THE JOB FOR
WHICH HE APPLIED, AT THE FIRST INTERVIEW, AT A SALARY FIXED BY HIMSELF."

Moreover--and this, too, is important--THE POSITION DID NOT REQUIRE THE
YOUNG MAN TO START AT THE BOTTOM. HE BEGAN AS A JUNIOR EXECUTIVE, AT AN
EXECUTIVE'S SALARY.

"Why go to all this trouble?" do you ask?

Well, for one thing, the PLANNED PRESENTATION of this young man's
application for a position clipped off no less than ten years of time he
would have required to get to where he began, had he "started at the
bottom and worked his way up."

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

This idea of starting at the bottom and working one's way up may appear
to be sound, but the major objection to it is this--too many of those
who begin at the bottom never manage to lift their heads high enough to
be seen by OPPORTUNITY, so they remain at the bottom. It should be
remembered, also, that the outlook from the bottom is not so very bright
or encouraging. It has a tendency to kill off ambition. We call it
"getting into a rut," which means that we accept our fate because we
form the HABIT of daily routine, a habit that finally becomes so strong
we cease to try to throw it off. And that is another reason why it pays
to start one or two steps above the bottom. By so doing one forms the
HABIT of looking around, of observing how others get ahead, of seeing
OPPORTUNITY, and of embracing it without hesitation.

Dan Halpin is a splendid example of what I mean. During his college
days, he was manager of the famous 1930 National Championship Notre Dame
football team, when it was under the direction of the late Knute Rockne.

Perhaps he was inspired by the great football coach to aim high, and NOT
MISTAKE TEMPORARY DEFEAT FOR FAILURE, just as Andrew Carnegie, the great
industrial leader, inspired his young business lieutenants to set high
goals for themselves. At any rate, young Halpin finished college at a
mighty unfavorable time, when the depression had made jobs scarce, so,
after a fling at investment banking and motion pictures, he took the
first opening with a potential future he could find--selling electrical
hearing aids on a commission

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

basis. ANYONE COULD START IN THAT SORT OF JOB, AND HALPIN KNEW IT, but
it was enough to open the door of opportunity to him.

For almost two years, he continued in a job not to his liking, and he
would never have risen above that job if he had not done something about
his dissatisfaction. He aimed, first, at the job of Assistant Sales
Manager of his company, and got the job. That one step upward placed him
high enough above the crowd to enable him to see still greater
opportunity, also, it placed him where OPPORTUNITY COULD SEE HIM.

He made such a fine record selling hearing aids, that A. M. Andrews,
Chairman of the Board of the Dictograph Products Company, a business
competitor of the company for which Halpin worked, wanted to know
something about that man Dan Halpin who was taking big sales away from
the long established Dictograph Company. He sent for Halpin. When the
interview was over, Halpin was the new Sales Manager, in charge of the
Acousticon Division. Then, to test young Halpin's metal, Mr. Andrews
went away to Florida for three months, leaving him to sink or swim in
his new job. He did not sink! Knute Rockne's spirit of "All the world
loves a winner, and has no time for a loser," inspired him to put so
much into his job that he was recently elected Vice-President of the
company, and General Manager of the Acousticon and Silent Radio
Division, a job which most men would be proud to earn through ten years
of loyal effort. Halpin turned the trick in little more than six months.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

It is difficult to say whether Mr. Andrews or Mr. Halpin is more
deserving of eulogy, for the reason that both showed evidence of having
an abundance of that very rare quality known as IMAGINATION. Mr. Andrews
deserves credit for seeing, in young Halpin, a "go-getter" of the
highest order. Halpin deserves credit for REFUSING TO COMPROMISE WITH
LIFE BY ACCEPTING AND KEEPING A JOB HE DID NOT WANT, and that is one of
the major points I am trying to emphasize through this entire
philosophy--that we rise to high positions or remain at the bottom
BECAUSE OF CONDITIONS WE CAN CONTROL IF WE DESIRE TO CONTROL THEM.

I am also trying to emphasize another point, namely, that both success
and failure are largely the results of HABIT! I have not the slightest
doubt that Dan Halpin's close association with the greatest football
coach America ever knew, planted in his mind the same brand of DESIRE to
excel which made the Notre Dame football team world famous. Truly, there
is something to the idea that hero-worship is helpful, provided one
worships a WINNER. Halpin tells me that Rockne was one of the world's
greatest leaders of men in all history.

My belief in the theory that business associations are vital factors,
both in failure and in success, was recently demonstrated, when my son
Blair was negotiating with Dan Halpin for a position. Mr. Halpin offered
him a beginning salary of about one half what he could have gotten from
a rival company. I brought parental pressure to bear, and induced him to
accept the place with Mr. Halpin, because

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I BELIEVE THAT
CLOSE ASSOCIATION WITH ONE WHO REFUSES TO COMPROMISE WITH CIRCUMSTANCES
HE DOES NOT LIKE, IS AN ASSET THAT CAN NEVER BE MEASURED IN TERMS OF
MONEY.

The bottom is a monotonous, dreary, unprofitable place for any person.
That is why I have taken the time to describe how lowly beginnings may
be circumvented by proper planning. Also, that is why so much space has
been devoted to a description of this new profession, created by a woman
who was inspired to do a fine job of PLANNING because she wanted her son
to have a favorable "break."

With the changed conditions ushered in by the world economic collapse,
came also the need for newer and better ways of marketing PERSONAL
SERVICES. It is hard to determine why someone had not previously
discovered this stupendous need, in view of the fact that more money
changes hands in return for personal services than for any other
purpose. The sum paid out monthly, to people who work for wages and
salaries, is so huge that it runs into hundreds of millions, and the
annual distribution amounts to billions.

Perhaps some will find, in the IDEA here briefly described, the nucleus
of the riches they DESIRE! Ideas with much less merit have been the
seedlings from which great fortunes have grown. Woolworth's Five and Ten
Cent Store idea, for example, had far less merit, but it piled up a
fortune for its creator.

Those seeing OPPORTUNITY lurking in this suggestion will find valuable
aid in the chapter on Organized Planning. Incidentally, an efficient
merchandiser

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

of personal services would find a growing demand for his services
wherever there are men and women who seek better markets for their
services. By applying the Master Mind principle, a few people with
suitable talent, could form an alliance, and have a paying business very
quickly. One would need to be a fair writer, with a flair for
advertising and selling, one handy at typing and hand lettering, and one
should be a first class business getter who would let the world know
about the service. If one person possessed all these abilities, he might
carry on the business alone, until it outgrew him.

The woman who prepared the "Personal Service Sales Plan" for her son now
receives requests from all parts of the country for her cooperation in
preparing similar plans for others who desire to market their personal
services for more money. She has a staff of expert typists, artists, and
writers who have the ability to dramatize the case history so
effectively that one's personal services can be marketed for much more
money than the prevailing wages for similar services. She is so
confident of her ability that she accepts, as the major portion of her
fee, a percentage of the *increased* pay she helps her clients to earn.

It must not be supposed that her plan merely consists of clever
salesmanship by which she helps men and women to demand and receive more
money for the same services they formerly sold for less pay. She looks
after the interests of the purchaser as well as the seller of personal
services, and so prepares her plans that the employer receives full
value for the additional money he pays. The method by

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

which she accomplishes this astonishing result is a professional secret
which she discloses to no one excepting her own clients.

If you have the IMAGINATION, and seek a more profitable outlet for your
personal services, this suggestion may be the stimulus for which you
have been searching. The IDEA is capable of yielding an income far
greater than that of the "average" doctor, lawyer, or engineer whose
education required several years in college. The idea is saleable to
those seeking new positions, in practically all positions calling for
managerial or executive ability, and those desiring re-arrangement of
incomes in their present positions.

There is no fixed price for sound IDEAS!

Back of all IDEAS is specialized knowledge. Unfortunately, for those who
do not find riches in abundance, specialized knowledge is more abundant
and more easily acquired than IDEAS. Because of this very truth, there
is a universal demand and an ever-increasing opportunity for the person
capable of helping men and women to sell their personal services
advantageously. Capability means IMAGINATION, the one quality needed to
combine specialized knowledge with IDEAS, in the form of ORGANIZED PLANS
designed to yield riches.

If you have IMAGINATION this chapter may present you with an idea
sufficient to serve as the beginning of the riches you desire. Remember,
the IDEA is the main thing. Specialized knowledge may be found just
around the corner--any corner!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6. Imagination (The Fifth Step toward Riches)](tgr11.md)
