[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj019)  [Next](csj021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XVII

#### A LEPER CLEANSED—THE DRAUGHT OF FISH—PALSIED MAN CURED

A.D. 28. Age 31. *By Lake Gennesaret*. *Capernaum*.

Matthew 8, 1-4; 9, 2-7; Mark 1, 40-45; 2, 1-12; Luke 5, 1-15; and 18-25.

WHEN Jesus was come down from the mountain, multitudes followed him.
And, behold, there came a leper, who, seeing Jesus, besought him,
saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth *his* hand, and touched him,
saying,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

I will; be thou clean.

</div>

And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. Jesus straitly charged him,

<div class="jesussaid">

See thou tell no man; but go thy way: say nothing to any man. Shew
thyself to the priest, and offer the gift for thy cleansing, those
things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

</div>

But he began to blaze abroad the matter; and so much the more went there
a fame abroad of Jesus.

¶It came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon Jesus to hear the
word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret, and saw two ships. He
entered into one, which was Simon's, and prayed him that he would thrust
out a little from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out
of the ship.

Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon,

<div class="jesussaid">

Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught.

</div>

Simon answering said, Master we have toiled all the night, and have
taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net.

When they had this done, they inclosed a multitude of fishes: and their
net brake. They beckoned unto *their* partners, which were in the other
ship, that they should come and help them. They came, and filled both
the ships, so that they began to sink.

When Simon Peter saw *it*, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, Depart
from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord.

For he was astonished at the draught of the fishes: and so *was* also
James, and John, which were partners with Simon.

Jesus said unto Simon,

<div class="jesussaid">

Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.

</div>

They brought their ships to land, forsook all, and followed Jesus.

¶Again Jesus entered into Capernaum after *some* days; and it was noised
that he was in the house. Straightway many were gathered together,
insomuch that there was no room to receive *them*, no, not so much as
about the door: and he preached the word unto them.

¶And, behold, men brought one sick of the palsy, lying on a bed borne by
four. They could not come nigh unto Jesus for the press: and when they
could not find by what *way* they might bring him in, they went upon the
housetop, and uncovered the roof, and let him down through the tiling
with *his* couch into the midst before Jesus.

Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy,

<div class="jesussaid">

Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee. <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_14)

</div>

Certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,
said within themselves, This man blasphemeth: who can forgive sins, but
God alone? Jesus knowing their thoughts said,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

What reason ye in your hearts? Why reason ye these things? Wherefore
think ye evil? Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy
sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive
sins,

</div>

He saith to the sick of the palsy,

<div class="jesussaid">

I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go thy way into thine
house.

</div>

And he arose, took up his bed, and departed to his house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[25:\*](csj020.htm#fr_15) Matthew, and Mark.
Luke's narrative has it, "Man, thy sins are forgiven thee." (Luke 5,
20.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Matthew (Levi) Called](csj021)
