[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj034)  [Next](csj036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXII

### HOME AGAIN: A PROPHET WITHOUT HONOR—MISSION OF THE TWELVE: INSTRUCTIONS, ADMONITIONS, SPARROWS, HAIRS NUMBERED—THEY SET OUT

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Nazareth*. *Capernaum*.

Mark 6, 1-6, 7-13: Matthew 13, 54-58; 9, 35-38; 10, 5-42: Luke 9, 1-6.

JESUS went out from thence, and came into his own country. When the
sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and many
hearing *him* were astonished, saying, What wisdom *is* this which is
given unto him? Is not this the carpenter, the son of Joseph? Is not his
mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and
Judas? and his sisters, are they not all here? Whence then has this
*man* all these things and they were offended in him. But Jesus said
unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and among his
own kin, and in his own house.

</div>

And he did not many works, there, because of their unbelief.

¶Jesus went about the cities and villages, teaching in synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing sickness among the
people.

But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion, because
they fainted and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.
Then saith he to his disciples,

<div class="jesussaid">

The harvest truly *is* plenteous, but the laborers *are* few; pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth laborers into
his harvest.

</div>

¶Jesus called *unto him* the twelve, <span
id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_38) and began to send them forth by two and
two; and gave them power over unclean spirits, and to cure diseases.

These twelve Jesus sent forth to preach the gospel of the kingdom; and
he commanded them:

<div class="jesussaid">

Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans
enter ye not: but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.

</div>

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils:
freely ye have received, freely give.

Take nothing for *your* journey, neither staves <span
id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_39) nor bread; provide neither gold, nor
silver, nor brass in your purses, nor scrip for *your* journey, neither
two coats apiece; nor yet shoes, but be shod with sandals; for the
workman is worthy of his meat.

And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, in what place soever ye
enter into a house, inquire who in it is worthy; and there abide till ye
go, and thence depart. And when ye come into a house, salute it. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[†](#fn_40) And if the house be worthy, let your peace
come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. And
whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out
of that house or city, shake off the very dust from your feet for a
testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment,
than for that city.

¶Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and
they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye shall be brought
before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and
the Gentiles.

But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall
speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.
For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which
speaketh in you.

And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father
the child: and the children shall rise up against *their* parents, and
cause them to be put to death.

And ye shall be hated of all *men* for my name's sake: but he that
endureth to the end shall be saved. But when they persecute you in this
city, flee ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shall not have
gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.

The disciple is not above *his* master, nor the servant above his lord.
It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant
as his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more *shall they call* them of his household?

Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered that shall not be
revealed; and hid that shall not be known. What I tell you in darkness
*that* speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, *that* preach ye
upon the housetops. And fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both
soul and body in hell.

Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not

</div>

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your head
are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many
sparrows.

Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny me before
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send
peace, but a sword. For I am come to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law
against her mother in law. And a man's foes *shall be* they of his own
household. He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of
me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
And he that taketh not his cross, and followeth after me, is not worthy
of me. He that findeth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his
life for my sake shall find it.

¶He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth
him that sent me. He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet
shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man
in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man's reward.

And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of
cold *water* only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he
shall in no wise lose his reward.

</div>

They went out through the towns, and preached that men should repent.
Healing every where, they anointed with oil many that were sick, and
cast out many unclean spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[45:\*](csj035.htm#fr_39) Listed by name in XX
of this book (page [29](csj022.htm#page_29)). The reader interested in
the personnel of "the twelve," and in the Master's instructions to them,
will profit by a comparison of the three texts: Matthew 10, 1-42: Mark
3, 13-19; 6, 7-11: Luke 6, 13-16; 9, 1-5.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[46:\*](csj035.htm#fr_40) . . . save a staff
only. Mark 6, 8.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[46:†](csj035.htm#fr_41) Say, Peace be to this
house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it:
if not, it shall turn to you again (Luke 10, 5-6).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIII. Herod Desires To See Christ](csj036)
