[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj071)  [Next](csj073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXIX

### "WOE UNTO YOU, SCRIBES AND PHARISEES!"—HYPOCRISY AND CANT CONDEMNED—"O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM!"—"BLESSED IS HE THAT COMETH IN THE NAME OF THE LORD"

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem, in the Temple*.

Matthew 23, 1-39.

TO the multitude, and to his disciples spake Jesus, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat: all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, *that* observe and do; but do not ye
after their works: for they say, and do not. For they bind heavy burdens
and grievous to be borne, and lay *them* on men's shoulders; but they
*themselves* will not move them with one of their fingers.

But all their works they do for to be seen of men: they make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, and love the
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, and
greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi. But be
not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, *even* Christ; and all ye
are brethren.

And call no *man* your father upon the earth: for one is your Father
which is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters: for one is your
Master, *even* Christ.

But he that is greatest among you shall be your servant. And whosoever
shall exalt himself shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself
shall be exalted.

¶But woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, hypocrites! for ye shut up the
kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in *yourselves*,
neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of
mint and anise and cummin, and have omitted the weightier *matters* 

</div>

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

of the law, judgment, mercy and faith: these ought ye to have done, and
not to leave the other undone. Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat,
and swallow a camel.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye make clean the
outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of
extortion and excess. *Thou* blind Pharisee, cleanse first that *which
is* within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be clean
also.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are like unto
whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within
full of dead *men's* bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also
outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy
and iniquity.

Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build the
tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous, and
say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that ye are the children of
them which killed the prophets. Fill ye up then the measure of your
fathers. *Ye* serpents, *ye* generation of vipers, how can ye escape the
damnation of hell?

¶Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes:
and *some* of them ye shall kill and crucify; and *some* of them shall
ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute *them* from city to city:
that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from
the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of
Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Verily I say
unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation.

 <span id="fr_87"></span>[\*](#fn_83.md)O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, *thou* that
killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen
gathereth her chickens under *her* wings, and ye would not!

Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, Ye
shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed *is* he that
cometh in the name of the Lord.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[108:\*](csj072.htm#fr_87.md) Turn back and reread
LIV in this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXX. “Now Is My Soul Troubled”](csj073.md)
