[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj038)  [Next](csj040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXVI

### "I AM THE BREAD OF LIFE"—IN THE SYNAGOGUE: TO THE PEOPLE, TO THE DISCIPLES, TO THE TWELVE: "ONE OF YOU IS A DEVIL"—MANY DISCIPLES FALL AWAY

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Capernaum*.

John 6, 22-71.

THE day following, the people which stood on the other side of the sea,
where they did eat bread, when they saw that Jesus was not there,
neither his disciples, took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking
him. And When they had found him, they said unto him, Master when camest
thou hither? Jesus answered,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye seek me, not because ye saw the
miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled. Labor
not for the meat which perisheth, but for the meat which endureth unto
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him hath
God the Father sealed.

</div>

Then said they, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?
Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent.

</div>

They said, What sign shewest thou then, that we may see and believe
thee? Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave
them bread from heaven. Then said Jesus,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from
heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven. For the
bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto
the world.

</div>

Then said they, Lord, evermore give us this bread. And Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he
that believeth on me shall never thirst. But I said unto you, That ye
also have seen me, and believe not.

All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to
me I will in no wise cast out.

For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of
him that sent me. And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that
of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that
every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have
everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.

</div>

The Jews then murmured because he said, I am the bread which came down
from heaven. And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose
father and mother we know? How is it then that he saith, I came down
from heaven? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Murmur not among yourselves. No man can come to me, except the Father
which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day. It
is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God.

Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father,
cometh unto me. Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is
of God, he hath seen the Father.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting
life.

I am that bread of life.

Your fathers did eat manna in the [wilderness](errata.htm#1), and are
dead. This is

</div>

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and
not die. I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man
eat of this bread, he shall live forever: and the bread that I will give
is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

</div>

The Jews therefore strove among themselves saying, How can this man give
us *his* flesh to eat? Then said Jesus, <span
id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_41)

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh,
and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the
last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He
that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in
him. As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father, so he
that eateth me, even he shall live by me. This is that bread which came
down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he
that eateth of this bread shall live for ever. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[\*](#fn_41)

</div>

These things said Jesus in the synagogue in Capernaum. Many of his
disciples said, This is a hard saying; who can hear it?

When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured, he said unto
them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Doth this offend you?

*What* and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?

It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words
that I speak unto you, *they* are spirit, and *they* are life.

But there are some of you that believe not.

</div>

For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him. And he said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were
given unto him of my Father.

</div>

¶From that *time* many of his disciples walked not with him. Then said
Jesus unto the twelve,

<div class="jesussaid">

Will ye also go away?

</div>

Simon Peter answered, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast the words of
eternal life. And we are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the
living God. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil?

</div>

He spake of Judas Iscariot; for he it was that should betray Jesus,
being one of the twelve.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[51:\*](csj039.htm#fr_43) Symbolism: Turn to the
paragraph in parenthesis in XLV of this book being from verse 39 of John
7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVII. Pharisees Querulous](csj040)
