[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj085)  [Next](csj087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXXXIII

### CHRIST'S TRIAL CONTINUED—FALSE WITNESS—PETER THRICE DENIES CHRIST—MORNING: FURTHER QUESTIONING—JUDAS A SUICIDE

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem*.

Matthew 26, 59-75; 27, 1-7: Mark 14, 55-72: Luke 22, 56-71: John 18,
17-27.

THE chief priests and all the council sought witness against Jesus, to
put him to death. Many bare false witness against him, but their witness
agreed not together. At the last came two, saying, We heard this
*fellow* say, I am able to destroy the temple of God, that is made with
hands, and within three days I will build another made without hands.

The high priest arose, and asked Jesus, Answerest thou nothing? But
Jesus held his peace, and answered nothing.

The high priest said, Tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of
God. And Jesus said,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Thou hast said. I am. Nevertheless I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye
see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of heaven.

</div>

Then saith the high priest, Now ye have heard his blasphemy: what need
ye any further witnesses? What think ye?

They answered, He is guilty of death.

When they had blindfolded Jesus, they struck him on the face, and say
unto him, Prophesy, who is it that smote thee?

¶Now Peter was beneath in the palace: and the damsel that kept the door
came and looked upon him as he sat by the fire, and said, Thou also wart
with Jesus of Galilee.

But he denied before *them* all, saying, I know him not: I know not,
neither understand I what thou sayest.

And he went into the porch; and the cock crew.

After a little while another saw Peter, and said, Thou art also of them,
for thou art a Galilean: thy speech agreeth *thereto:* thy speech
betrayeth thee.

And Peter denied again, Man, I am not.

About the space of an hour after, another confidently affirmed, Of a
truth this *fellow* was with Jesus.

But Peter began to swear, *saying*, I know not this man of whom ye
speak.

And the second time the cock crew. Then Peter called to mind the word
that Jesus said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice.

</div>

And when Peter thought thereon, he wept. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[\*](#fn_100)

¶As soon as it was day, the elders of the people, and the chief priests
and the scribes led Jesus into their council, saying, Art thou the
Christ? And he said,

If I tell you, ye will not believe: and if I also ask you, ye will not
answer me, nor let me go. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the
right hand of the power of God.

Then said they, Art thou then the Son of God? And Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Ye say that I am.

</div>

They said, We ourselves have heard of his own mouth.

And the whole council held a consultation, to put Jesus to death.

¶Judas, when he saw that Jesus was condemned, repented, and brought the
thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests, saying, I have sinned in
that I have betrayed the innocent blood.

They said, What *is that* to us? see thou *to that*.

Then Judas cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and went and
hanged himself.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

The chief priests said, It is the price of blood: it is not lawful to
put them into the treasury. They took counsel, and bought with them the
potter's field, to bury strangers in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[132:\*](csj086.htm#fr_104) The interested
reader should compare, in the text, the four accounts of Peter's
denials: Matthew 26, 69-75: Mark 14, 66-72: Luke 22, 56-62: John 18,
17-27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXIV. Christ Before Pilate—“Crucify Him”](csj087)
