[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj046)  [Next](csj048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLIV

### "EXCEPT YE BECOME AS LITTLE CHILDREN"—HUMILITY AND FORGIVENESS—PARABLES: THE NINETY AND NINE, THE WICKED SERVANT—"WHERE TWO OR THREE ARE GATHERED TOGETHER"

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Capernaum*.

Matthew 18, 1-35.

AT the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus called a little child unto
him, set him in the midst of them, and said, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_52.md)

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same
is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whoso shall receive one such
little child in my name receiveth me.

But whoso shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it
were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
*that* he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

¶Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that
offences come; but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh!

</div>

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Wherefore, if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast
*them* from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather than having' two hands or two feet to be cast into
everlasting fire.

And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast *it* from thee: it
is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than having
two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto
you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven. For the Son of man is come to save that which was
lost.

 <span id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_53.md) How think ye? if a man have a
hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the
ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh that which is
gone astray? And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he
rejoiceth more of that sheep, than of the ninety and nine which went not
astray. Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven,
that one of these little ones should perish.

¶Moreover if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him
his fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou hast
gained thy brother. But if he will not hear *thee*, *then* take with
thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word may be established. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it
unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto
thee as a heathen man and a publican.

Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound
in heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven. <span id="fr_57"></span>[†](#fn_54.md)

Again I say unto you, That if two of you shall agree on earth as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my
Father which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered together
in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

</div>

¶Then Peter said, Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I
forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

I say not unto thee, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven.
Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which
would take account of his servants. And when he had begun to reckon, one
was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents. But forasmuch
as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife,
and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The servant
therefore fell down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience
with me, and I will pay thee all. Then the lord of that servant was
moved with compassion and loosed him,

</div>

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

and forgave him the debt.

But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellow servants,
which owed *him* a hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him
by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest. And his fellow servant
fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me,
and I will pay thee all. And he would not: but went and cast him into
prison, till he should pay the debt.

So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and
came and told unto their lord all that was done. Then his lord, after
that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave
thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me; shouldest not thou also
have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on thee?

And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he
should pay all that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly
Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one
his brother their trespasses.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[61:\*](csj047.htm#fr_55.md) It is of interest to
note that some of these sayings (from Matthew) addressed by Jesus *to
the disciples* are like some of his sayings addressed *to John* (as
reported by Mark in XLIII just preceding).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[62:\*](csj047.htm#fr_56.md) Compare with similar
parable from Luke (15, 4-7) in LVI in this book.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[62:†](csj047.htm#fr_57.md) Thus Jesus to *the
disciples* (from Matthew). Turn back to XL in this book, and note the
same promise, *to Peter* (also from Matthew).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLV. At the Feast of the Tabernacle](csj048.md)
