[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj031)  [Next](csj033.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXIX

### PARABLES: THE MUSTARD SEED, THE LEAVEN, THE MERCHANTMAN, THE NET—PARABLE OF THE TARES EXPLAINED—THE TEMPEST QUELLED

A.D. 28. Age 31. *Capernaum: Sea of Galilee*.

Mk. 4, 30-34; 35-41: Matt. 13, 31-34; 36-52: Lk. 13, 18-21; 8, 22-25.

ANOTHER parable put he forth unto them, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_37"></span>[†](#fn_36.md)Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom
of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it? A grain of mustard
seed is the least of all seeds: is indeed less than all the seeds that
be in the earth; but when it is sown in the earth, *it* groweth up: it
becometh greater than all herbs; it shooteth out great branches, and
becometh a tree, so that the fowls of the air come and lodge in the
branches thereof.

</div>

Then said he,

<div class="jesussaid">

Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I resemble it?
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustard seed, which a man
took and cast into a garden in his field; and it grew, and waxed a great
tree, and the birds of the air lodged in the branches thereof, in the
shadow of it.

</div>

¶Again Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God?

</div>

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

And another parable spake he unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid
in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

</div>

All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables.

Then he sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his
disciples came, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the
field. He answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

He that soweth the good seed is the Son of man; the field is the world;
the good seed are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the
children of the wicked one; the enemy that sowed them is the devil; the
harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels.

As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shall it
be in the end of this world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels,
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and
them which do iniquity; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire:
there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their
Father.

Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.

¶Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field;
the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth
and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

¶Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchantman, seeking goodly
pearls: who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold
all that he had, and bought it.

¶Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the
sea, and gathered of every kind: which, when it was full, they drew to
shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the
bad away.

So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and
sever the wicked from the just, and shall cast them into the furnace of
fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

</div>

Jesus saith unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Have ye understood all these things?

</div>

They say, Yea, Lord. Then said he unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Therefore every scribe *which* is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven,
is like unto a man *that is* a householder, which bringeth forth out of
his treasure *things* new and old.

</div>

And with many such parables spake Jesus the word unto them, as they were
able to hear it. But without a parable spake he not unto them: and when
they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.

The same day, when even was come, Jesus entered into a ship. His
disciples followed, and he said unto them,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Let us pass over unto the other side of the lake.

</div>

They took him even as he was in the ship. And they launched forth.

As they sailed, behold, there came down a storm of wind: the waves beat
into the ship, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves.

Jesus was in the hinder part of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and his
disciples awoke him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish. He said unto
them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?

</div>

Then he arose and rebuked the winds, and the raging of the water: he
said unto the sea,

<div class="jesussaid">

Peace, be still.

</div>

The wind ceased: there was a great calm, and Jesus said unto his
disciples,

<div class="jesussaid">

Why are ye fearful? where is your faith? how is it that ye have no
faith?

</div>

But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that even the
winds and the sea obey him?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[40:†](csj032.htm#fr_37.md) This parable and the
one following may profitably be compared with the similar ones from Luke
(13, 18-21) at the end of LIII in this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. The Madman and the Swine](csj033.md)
