[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj003)  [Next](csj005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### LINEAGE OF JESUS

### I

#### LINEAGE OF JESUS—BORN IN BETHLEHEM

##### FROM NARRATIVES OF MATTHEW AND LUKE

Matthew 1, 1-2; 6-7; 11-12; 16-17.

THE book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham:

Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat . . . .

. . .. And Jesse begat David the king; and David the king begat Solomon;
and Solomon begat . . . .

. . .. And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they
were carried away to Babylon; and Jechonias begat . . . .

. . .. And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born
Jesus who is called Christ.

So all the generations from Abraham to David *are* <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) fourteen generations; and from David until
the carrying away into Babylon *are* fourteen generations; and from the
carrying away into Babylon unto Christ *are* fourteen generations.

 

Luke 2, 1-12; 16-21.

It came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Cesar
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. And all went to be taxed,
every one into his own city.

Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into
Judea, unto the city of David which is called Bethlehem (because he was
of the house and lineage of David), to be taxed with Mary his espoused
wife, being great with child.

So it was, that, while they were there, the days were accomplished that
she should be delivered. She brought forth her firstborn son, and
wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because
there was no room for them in the inn. *Dec. B.C. 5*. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[†](#fn_1)

¶There were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, keeping
watch over their flock by night. And, lo, the angel of the Lord came
upon them, and said, Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city
of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Ye shall find the babe
wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying
in a manger.

When eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his
name was called *JESUS*, which was so named of the angel before he was
conceived in the womb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:\*](csj004.htm#fr_0) Like this "*are*," all
the words which are italicized in the King James text are set in italics
throughout this book also.

The punctuations also are, throughout, the punctuations of the King
James text.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:†](csj004.htm#fr_1) It happens that dates
"from the birth of Christ" did not begin to be cast until centuries
after Christ's day. The monk said to be then responsible for the
calculations made a mistake. The consensus of informed opinion now is
that the "birth" of Jesus is to be set back *four* years. Accordingly
the boy Jesus was "*five* years old" in December of what would have been
the first year of the *anno Domini* calendar if that calendar had been
started on the day of his birth: that is, five years and one week old on
New Year's Day, A.D. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Escape From Herod—Again In Galilee At Nazareth](csj005)
