[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj060)  [Next](csj062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LVIII

### SERMON IN PARABLES (CONCLUDED): OFFENCES, FORGIVENESS, FAITH, MASTER AND SERVANT, MARTHA, MARY, LAZARUS: "LAZARUS, COME FORTH"—"I AM THE RESURRECTION"—JEWS TAKE COUNSEL TO KILL JESUS

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Perea*. *Bethany*. *Perea*.

Luke 17, 1-10: John 11, 1-54.

THEN said Jesus unto the disciples,

<div class="jesussaid">

It is impossible but that offences will come: but woe *unto him*,

</div>

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

through whom they come! It were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should
offend <span id="fr_72"></span>[\*](#fn_69.md) one of these little ones.

Take heed to yourselves: If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke
him; and if he repent, forgive him. And if he trespass against thee
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee,
saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him.

</div>

The apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith. And the Lord said,

<div class="jesussaid">

If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye might say unto this
sycamine tree, Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in
the sea; and it should obey you.

But which of you, having a servant ploughing or feeding cattle, will say
unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to
meat? and will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup,
and gird thyself, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and
afterward thou shalt eat and drink?

Doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded
him? I trow not.

So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that
which was our duty to do.

</div>

¶Lazarus, of Bethany, the brother of Mary and Martha, was sick. (It was
*that* Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet
with her hair. <span id="fr_73"></span>[†](#fn_70).md) The sisters sent
unto Jesus, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick. Jesus
said,

<div class="jesussaid">

This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son
of God might be glorified thereby.

</div>

Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. He abode two days
in the place where he was; then saith he to his disciples,

<div class="jesussaid">

Let us go into Judea again.

</div>

*His* disciples say, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee; and
goest thou thither again? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he
stumbleth not, because he seeth the light of this world. But if a man
walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him.

Our friend Lazarus sleepeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of his
sleep.

</div>

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Howbeit Jesus spake of Lazarus' death; but they thought that he had
spoken of rest in sleep. Then said Jesus plainly,

<div class="jesussaid">

Lazarus is dead. And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to
the intent ye may believe; nevertheless let us go unto him.

</div>

And when Jesus came, he found that Lazarus had *lain* in the grave four
days.

Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him;
but Mary was *still* in the house. Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if
thou hadst been here, my brother had not died. But I know, that even
now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give *it* thee. Jesus
saith unto her,

<div class="jesussaid">

Thy brother shall rise again.

</div>

Martha answered, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at
the last day. Jesus said unto her,

<div class="jesussaid">

I am the resurrection, and the life; he that believeth in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me
shall never die. Believest thou this?

</div>

Martha saith, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of
God, which should come into the world.

When she had so said, she went her way, and called Mary her sister
secretly, saying, The Master is come.

Mary arose quickly, and came unto him in that place where Martha met
him. The Jews which were with Mary in the house followed her. She fell
at Jesus’ feet, saying, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had
not died.

Jesus saw her weeping: he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, and
said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Where have ye laid him?

</div>

They say, Lord, come and see.

Jesus wept.

Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him!

Jesus cometh to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it. Jesus
said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Take ye away the stone.

</div>

Martha, the sister, saith, Lord, he hath been dead four days. Jesus
saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldst believe, thou shouldst see
the glory of God?

</div>

Then they took away the stone. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me. And I knew that thou
hearest me always: but because of the people which stand by I said it,
that they may believe that thou hast sent me.

</div>

When he had thus spoken, he cried,

<div class="jesussaid">

Lazarus, come forth.

</div>

He that was dead came forth, bound with graveclothes. Jesus saith unto
them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Loose him, and let him go.

</div>

¶Then gathered the chief priests, and the Pharisees a council, and said,
What do we? for this man doeth many miracles. If we let him alone, all
*men* will believe on him: and the Romans shall come and take away both
our place and nation.

Then from that day forth they took counsel together for to put Jesus to
death.

Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence
unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and
there continued with his disciples.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[87:\*](csj060.htm#fr_71) Thus Luke (16, 18.md).
See also in XIV of this book (from Matthew 5, 31-32), and in LXI of this
book (from Matthew 19, 9; and Mark 10, 11).

<span id="fn_69"></span>[88:\*](csj061.htm#fr_72.md) *Offend:* be a
hindrance to, or cause to stumble.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[88:†](csj061.htm#fr_73.md) Some weeks later, as
told in LXXIV of this book (in part from John 12, 3-4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIX. “The Kingdom of God Is Within You”](csj062.md)
