[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj039)  [Next](csj041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

### XXXVII

### PHARISEES QUERULOUS—TRADITION OF THE ELDERS: UNWASHEN HANDS—WASHING OF POTS NOT THE WHOLE OF GODLINESS—BLIND LEADERS OF THE BLIND

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Capernaum*.

Mark 7, 1-23: Matthew 15, 1-20.

 <span id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_42.md)CERTAIN of the scribes saw some of
Jesus’ disciples eat bread with unwashen hands. They found fault: for
the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash *their* hands oft, eat
not, holding the tradition of the elders. And many other things there
be, which they have received to hold, *as* the washing of cups, and
pots, brazen vessels, and of tables.

The Pharisees and scribes asked Jesus, Why walk not thy disciples
according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen
hands? Why do thy disciples transgress?

But Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? Full
well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your tradition.
For God commanded, saying (Moses said), Honor thy father and thy mother:
and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death.

But ye say, If a man shall say (Whosoever shall say) to *his* father or
*his* mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou
mightest be profited by me; and honor not his father or his mother: *he
shall be free*. And ye suffer him no more to do aught for his father or
his mother; making the word of God of none effect through your
tradition, which ye have delivered; and many such like things do ye.
Thus have ye made the commandment of God of none effect by your
tradition.

Well hath Elias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, This
people draweth night unto me with their mouth, this people honoreth me
with *their* lips; but their heart is far from me. Howbeit in vain do
they worship me, teaching *for* doctrines the commandments of men.

*Ye* hypocrites! For, laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the
tradition of men, *as* the washing of pots and cups: and many other like
things ye do.

</div>

¶And he called the multitude, and said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Hearken unto me every one *of you*. Hear, and understand. Not that which
goeth into the mouth defileth a man. There is nothing from without a
man, that entering into him can defile him; but the things which come
out of him, those are they that defile the man.

If any man have ears to hear, let him hear.

</div>

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

His disciples, when he was entered into the house from the people, asked
Jesus concerning the parable. Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Are ye also yet so without understanding? Do not ye yet perceive that
whatsoever thing from without entereth into a man, entereth in at the
mouth, goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the draught, purging
all meats? It entereth not into his heart; it cannot defile him.

But those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from the
heart; and they defile the man: for from within, out of the heart of
men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts,
covetousness, wickedness, false witness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil
eye, blasphemies, pride, foolishness: all these evil things come from
within, and these are *the things* which defile the man; but to eat with
unwashen hands defileth not a man.

</div>

Then his disciples said unto Jesus, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were
offended, after they heard this saying? But he answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted
up. Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[52:\*](csj040.htm#fr_44.md) The two accounts of
this episode (Matthew's and Mark's) abound in interesting likenesses and
contrasts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVIII. The Woman of Canaan](csj041.md)
