[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj049)  [Next](csj051.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLVII

### JESUS HEALS MAN BORN BLIND—THE JEWS CROSSEXAMINE THE MAN—AGAIN: "I AM THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD"—PARABLE: "I AM THE DOOR. I AM THE GOOD SHEPHERD"—WINTER FEAST OF THE DEDICATION—AGAIN HE ELUDES THE JEWS

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Jerusalem*.

John 9, 1-41; 10, 1-18; 22-40.

AS JESUS passed by, he saw a man which was blind from *his* birth. His
disciples asked, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he
was born blind? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the works of God
should be made manifest in him.

I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night
cometh, when no man can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the
light of the world.

</div>

When he had thus spoken, he anointed the eyes of the blind man with
clay, and said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Go, wash in the pool of Siloam.

</div>

He went, and washed, and came seeing.

¶The neighbors said, Is not this he that sat and begged? He answered, I
am *he*.

Therefore, said they, how were thine eyes opened?

He said, A man called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said
unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and
I received sight.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

It was the sabbath day when Jesus opened his eyes. Therefore said some
of the Pharisees, This man \[Jesus\] is not of God, because he keepeth
not the sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such
miracles? And there was a division among them.

The Jews called the parents, and asked them, Is this your son, who ye
say was born blind? how then doth he now see?

His parents answered, We know that this is our son, and that he was born
blind: but by what means he now seeth, we know not; he is of age; ask
him.

His parents feared the Jews: for the Jews had agreed already, that if
any man did confess that Jesus was Christ, he should be put out of the
synagogue.

Again the Jews called the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give
God the praise: we know that this man \[Jesus\] is a sinner: we know not
from whence he is.

The man answered, Why herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not
from whence he is, and *yet* he hath opened mine eyes. Now we know that
God heareth not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and
doeth his will, him he heareth. If this man were not of God, he could do
nothing.

They answered, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach
us? And they cast him out.

Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he
said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Dost thou believe on the Son of God?

</div>

He answered, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.

</div>

And he said, Lord, I believe.

¶Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might
see; and that they which see might be made blind.

</div>

*Some* of the Pharisees heard these words, and said, Are we blind also?
Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We see;
therefore your sin remaineth.

</div>

¶This parable spake Jesus unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
robber. But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the
sheep. To him the porter openeth; and the sheep hear his voice: and he
calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.

And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them,

</div>

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. And a stranger will
they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the voice of
strangers.

</div>

But they understood not. Then said Jesus,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that
ever came before me are thieves and robbers: but the sheep did not hear
them.

I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall
go in and out, and find pasture.

The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I
am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly.

I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep.
But he that is a hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are
not, seeth the wolf coming, and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth: and the
wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep. The hireling fleeth,
because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep.

I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the
Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for
the sheep.

And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and
one shepherd.

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I
might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of
myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.
This commandment have I received of my Father.

</div>

¶At Jerusalem it was the feast of the dedication. It was winter. Jesus
walked in the temple in Solomon's porch.

Then came the Jews round about him, and said, How long dost thou make us
to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father's
name, they bear witness of me. But ye believe not, because ye are not of
my sheep, as I said unto you. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall
never perish, neither shall any *man* pluck them out of my hand.

My Father, which gave *them* me, is greater than all; and no *man* is
able to pluck *them* out of my Father's hand.

I and *my* Father are one.

</div>

The Jews took up stones again to stone him, Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Many good works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of those
works do ye stone me?

</div>

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

The Jews answered, For a good work we stone thee not; but for blasphemy;
and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods?

If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the
Scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him, whom the Father hath
sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I
am the Son of God?

If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But if I do, though
ye believe not me, believe the works; that ye may know, and believe,
that the Father *is* in me, and I in him.

</div>

Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their
hand, and went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at
first baptized; and there he abode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVIII. “Hath Not Where To Lay His Head”](csj051.md)
