[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj091)  [Next](csj093.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXXXIX

### AFTER THE RESURRECTION (CONTINUED): CHRIST IN PERSON: WITH THE TWO MEN; WITH THE ELEVEN—DOUBTING THOMAS

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Emmaus. Jerusalem*.

Mark 16, 12-13: Luke 24, 13-31; 33-43: John 20, 19-29.

AFTER that, Jesus appeared in another form unto two of them, that same
day, as they walked to Emmaus, a village which was from Jerusalem
*about* three-score furlongs.

While they talked together of all these things which had happened, Jesus
himself drew near. But their eyes were holden that they should not know
him. And he said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

What manner of communications *are* these that ye have one to another,
as ye walk, and are sad?

</div>

One of them (Cleopas) answering said, Art thou a stranger in Jerusalem,
and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these
days? Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

What things?

</div>

They answered, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth: and how our rulers have
crucified him. But we trusted that it had been he which should have
redeemed Israel.

Jesus said unto them,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

O fools <span id="fr_107"></span>[\*](#fn_103.md), and slow of heart to
believe all that the prophets have spoken: ought not Christ to have
suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?

And beginning at Moses, he expounded the things in all the Scriptures
concerning himself.

</div>

¶They drew nigh unto the village whither they went: and Jesus made as
though he would have gone further. But they constrained him, saying,
Abide with us: for it is toward evening. And he went in to tarry with
them.

As he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and blessed *it*, and brake,
and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he
vanished out of their sight.

The same hour, they returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered
together, saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.
They (the two) told what things *were done* in the way, and how Jesus
was known of them in breaking of bread.

¶As they spake, the same day at evening, being the first *day* of the
week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for
fear of the Jews, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

Peace *be* unto you.

</div>

But they supposed they had seen a spirit, and were affrighted. And he
said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my
hands and my feet, that it is myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

</div>

While they wondered, he said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Have ye here any meat?

</div>

They gave him of a fish, and of a honeycomb; and he did eat before them.
Then said he to them again,

<div class="jesussaid">

Peace *be* unto you; as *my* Father hath sent me, even so I send you.

Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them: *and* whosesoever *sins* ye retain, they are retained.

</div>

¶But Thomas was not with them. When the other disciples said unto him,
We have seen the Lord, he said, Except I shall see in his hands the
print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and
thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.

After eight days, again the disciples were within, and Thomas with them:
then came Jesus, as they sat at meat, the doors being shut, and stood in
the midst, and said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Peace *be* unto you.

</div>

Then saith he to Thomas,

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand,
and thrust *it* into my side: and be not faithless, but believing.

</div>

Thomas answered, My Lord and my God. Jesus said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they
that have not seen, and *yet* have believed.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[140:\*](csj092.htm#fr_107.md) *O fools:* Moffat's
Translation (1922) has it, "O foolish men . . ."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XC. At The Sea of Tiberias](csj093.md)
