[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj050)  [Next](csj052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLVIII

### JAMES AND JOHN REBUKED—"HATH NOT WHERE TO LAY HIS HEAD"—THE SEVENTY SENT TWO AND TWO: RETURN REJOICING—EXPLICIT INSTRUCTIONS—A PRAYER

A.D. 29, Age 32. *Leaving Galilee. Samaria. Perea*.

Luke 9, 51-62; 10, 1-24

WHEN the time was come that Jesus should be received up, he steadfastly
set his face to go to Jerusalem, and sent messengers before: they
entered into a village of the Samaritans.

They did not receive him; and his disciples James and John said, Lord
wilt thou that we command fire to come down and consume them, as Elias
did? But he rebuked them, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save *them*.

</div>

They went to another village. In the way, a certain *man* said unto
Jesus, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. Jesus said
unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Foxes have holes, and birds of the air *have* nests; but the Son of man
hath not where to lay *his* head.

</div>

And he said unto another,

<div class="jesussaid">

Follow me.

</div>

But he said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father. Jesus said
unto him,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God.

</div>

Another said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first go bid them
farewell, which are at home at my house. Jesus said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for
the kingdom of God.

</div>

¶After these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them
two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he
himself would come. Therefore said he unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

The harvest truly *is* great, but the laborers *are* few: pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers
into his harvest.

 <span id="fr_61"></span>[\*](#fn_58.md)Go your ways: behold, I send you
forth as lambs among wolves. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes:
and salute no man by the way.

And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house.
And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not,
it shall turn to you again.

And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they
give: for the laborer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house.

And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things
as are set before you: and heal the sick that are therein, and say unto
them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.

But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your
ways out into the streets of the same, and say, Even the very dust of
your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you:
notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come
nigh unto you.

But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day for
Sodom, than for that city.

 <span id="fr_62"></span>[†](#fn_59.md)Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto
thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and
Sidon, which have been done in you, they had a great while ago repented,
sitting in sackcloth and ashes. But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre
and Sidon at the judgment, than for you.

And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down
to hell.

He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me;
and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me.

</div>

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

¶The seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are
subject unto us through thy name. Jesus said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven. Behold, I give unto you
power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the
enemy; and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding, in this
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice,
because your names are written in heaven.

</div>

¶In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said,

<div class="jesussaid">

I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and has revealed them unto
babes: even so, Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight.

All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knoweth who the
Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and *he* to
whom the Son will reveal *him*.

</div>

¶He turned him unto *his* disciples, and said privately,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_63"></span>[\*](#fn_60.md)Blessed *are* the eyes which see
the things that ye see: for I tell you, that many prophets and kings
have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen *them;*
and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard *them*.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[72:\*](csj051.htm#fr_61.md) Beginning here,
compare these instructions to the "other seventy" with the similar
instructions to "the twelve" in XXXII of this book.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[72:†](csj051.htm#fr_62.md) This censure of the
cities, and the following homage, "I thank thee," are from Luke (10,
13-15, and 21-22). See footnote in XXIV of this book.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[73:\*](csj051.htm#fr_63) Thus Luke (10, 23-24.md).
Turn back to the fourth footnote in XXVIII in this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIV. The Good Samaritan](csj052.md)
