[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj004)  [Next](csj006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

### THE ESCAPE FROM HEROD—AGAIN IN GALILEE AT NAZARETH

#### FROM MATTHEW'S NARRATIVE

B.C. 4

Matthew 2, 1-5; 7-15; 19-23.

NOW when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the
king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, saying,
Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in
the east, and are come to worship him.

When Herod the king had heard *these things*, he was troubled. And when
he had gathered the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he
demanded of them where Christ should be born. They said, In Bethlehem of
Judea.

Then Herod privily called the wise men, and inquired of them what time
the star appeared. He sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Search
diligently for the child; and when ye have found him, bring me word,
that I may come and worship him also.

The wise men departed; and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east,
went before them, till it stood over where the child was. They rejoiced
with exceeding great joy.

¶And when they saw the child with Mary his mother, they worshipped him:
and they opened their treasures, and presented unto him gifts, gold, and
frankincense, and myrrh.

Warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, the wise
men departed into their own country another way.

When the wise men were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth
to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, take the child and his mother, and
flee into Egypt and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod
will seek the child to destroy him.

Joseph arose, took the child and his mother by night, and departed into
Egypt: and was there until the death of Herod.

¶When Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream
to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and take the child and his mother,
and go into the land of Israel.

But Joseph heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea in the room of his
father Herod: he was afraid to go thither: he turned aside into the
parts of Galilee: and he came and dwelt in Nazareth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Boy Jesus](csj006)
