[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj086)  [Next](csj088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXXXIV

### CHRIST HALED BEFORE PILATE: PILATE'S DILEMMA—"CRUCIFY HIM"—PILATE VACILLATES: SENDS JESUS TO HEROD, WHO SENDS HIM BACK—JESUS SCOURGED—PILATE DELIVERS JESUS TO BE CRUCIFIED

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem*.

John 18, 28-40; 19, 1-16: Luke 23, 1-11; 13-25: Mark 15, 1-15: Matthew
27, 11-26.

THE whole council arose and led Jesus away from the high priest,
Caiaphas, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor, in the hall
of judgment.

Pilate went out unto them, and said, Take ye him, and judge him
according to your law.

The Jews answered, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death.

Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and
said unto him, Art thou the King of Jews? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?

</div>

Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation have delivered thee unto
me: what hast thou done? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then
would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but
now is my kingdom not from hence.

</div>

Pilate therefore said, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause
came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. very
one that is of the truth heareth my voice.

</div>

Pilate answered, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out
again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault *at
all*. But ye have a custom that I should release unto you one at the
passover: will ye that I release the King of the Jews?

Then cried they all, Not this man, but Barabbas.

Now Barabbas was a robber.

The chief priests and the officers cried out, Crucify *him*, crucify
him.

Pilate saith, Take ye him, and crucify *him:* for I find no fault in
him.

The Jews answered, By our law he ought to die, because he made himself
the Son of God.

¶When Pilate heard that saying, he saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou?
But Jesus gave no answer.

Then saith Pilate, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have power to
crucify thee, and have power to release thee? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Thou couldest have no power *at all* against me, except it were given
thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the
greater sin.

</div>

Thenceforth Pilate sought to release Jesus: but the Jews cried out, We
found this *fellow* forbidding to give tribute to Cesar, saying that he
himself is Christ a king. If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesar's
friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Cesar.

Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

Thou sayest it.

</div>

The chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered nothing.

And Pilate asked him again, Answerest thou nothing? hearest thou not how
many things they witness against thee?

Jesus answered him to never a word; so that Pilate marvelled: and he
said to the people, I find no fault in this man.

They were the more fierce, saying, He stirreth up the people throughout
Jewry, from Galilee to this place.

When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilean.
And as soon as he knew that Jesus belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he
sent him to Herod, who was at Jerusalem at that time.

¶Herod was exceeding glad: for he had heard many things of Jesus; and
had hoped to see some miracle done by him. He questioned with Jesus in
many words; but Jesus answered him nothing. And Herod sent *him* back to
Pilate.

¶Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers of the people;
and he said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that
perverteth the people; and, behold, I, having examined *him* before you,
have found no fault in him touching those things whereof ye accuse him:
no, nor yet Herod.

¶Now at *that* feast the governor must of necessity release unto the
people a prisoner, whom they would.

Pilate therefore said, Will ye that I release unto you Barabbas? or
Jesus which is called the Christ?

They cried out all at once, Release Barabbas.

Pilate saith, What shall I do then with Jesus?

They cried out again, Let him be crucified.

Pilate saith, Shall I crucify your King?

The chief priests answered, We have no king but Cesar.

¶When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, he took water, and
washed *his* hands before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the
blood of this just person: see ye *to it*.

Then answered the people, His blood be on us, and on our children.

And *so* Pilate, willing to content the people, gave sentence that it
should be as they required. He released him that for sedition and murder
was cast into prison: but he delivered Jesus, when he had scourged
*him*, to their will, to be crucified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXV. The Crucifixion—“Father, Forgive Them”](csj088.md)
