[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj053)  [Next](csj055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LI

### SERMON TO THE INNUMERABLE MULTITUDE: PRECEPTS, PARABLES: THE SPARROWS, THE SELF-CENTERED RICH MAN, THE RAVENS, THE LILIES—"THE HAIRS OF YOUR HEAD ARE NUMBERED"—"LET YOUR LIGHTS BE BURNING"

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Perea*.

Luke 12, 1-40.

IN the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable
multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon another, Jesus
began to say unto his disciples first of all,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. For there
is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither hid, that shall
not be known. Therefore, whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be
heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets
shall be proclaimed upon the housetops.

And I say unto you my friend, Be not afraid of them that kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do. But I will forewarn you
whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after he hath killed hath power to
cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear him.

Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is
forgotten before God? But even the very hairs on your head are all
numbered. Fear not therefore; ye are of more value than many sparrows.

Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall
the Son of man also confess before the angels of God: but he that
denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of God. And
whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost it
shall not be forgiven.

And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and
powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye
shall say: for the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye
ought to say.

</div>

¶One of the company said, Master, speak to my brother, that he divide
the inheritance with me. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you?

</div>

And he said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Take heed, and beware of covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not
in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.

</div>

And he spake a parable:

<div class="jesussaid">

The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully: and he
thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room
where to bestow my fruits.

And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build
greater and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will
say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take
thine ease, eat, drink, *and* be merry.

But God said unto him, *Thou* fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast
provided?

So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward
God.

</div>

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

¶Jesus said unto his disciples,

<div class="jesussaid">

Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall
eat, neither for the body, what ye shall put on. The life is more than
meat, and the body *is more* than raiment.

Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have
storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them: how much more are ye better
than the fowls?

And which of you with taking thought can add to his stature one cubit?
If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye
thought for the rest?

Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they spin not; and yet
I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one
of these. If then God so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field,
and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more *will he clothe* you,
O ye of little faith?

And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, neither be ye
of doubtful mind. For all these things do the nations of the world seek
after; and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things.

¶But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall be
added unto you.

Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give
you the kingdom. Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves
bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not,
where no thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth. For where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Let your loins be girded about, and *your* lights burning; and ye
yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will return
from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto
him immediately.

Blessed *are* those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall find
watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make
them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if he
shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find
*them* so, blessed are those servants.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[\*](#fn_63.md)And this know, that if the goodman of the
house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched,
and not have suffered his house to be broken through. Be ye therefore
ready also; for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[78:\*](csj054.htm#fr_66.md) This paragraph and the
first four paragraphs of LII furnish an interesting comparison with a
similar passage near the end of LXXII in this book (being Matthew 24,
43-51).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LII. Sermon to the Innumerable Multitude (cont.)](csj055.md)
