[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj082)  [Next](csj084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXXX

### CHRIST PRAYS FOR AID—"I HAVE FINISHED THE WORK"—PRAYS FOR THE APOSTLES ALSO, AND THEIR WORK—PRAYS FOR ALL BELIEVERS

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem: Upper Room*.

John 17, 1-26.

THESE words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven,

<div class="jesussaid">

Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee: as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life
eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou hast sent. I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished
the work which thou gavest me to do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me
with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the
world was.

I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy
word. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me
are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me;
and they have received *them*, and have known surely that I came out
from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.

</div>

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast
given me; for they are thine. And all mine are thine, and thine are
mine; and I am glorified in them. And now I am no more in the world, but
these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through
thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as
we *are*. While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name:
those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the
son of perdition: that the Scripture might be fulfilled.

And now come I to thee; and these things I speak in the world, that they
might have my joy fulfilled in themselves. I have given them thy word;
and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even
as I am not of the world. I pray not that thou shouldest take them out
of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil. They are
not of the world, even as I am not of the world. Sanctify them through
thy truth: thy word is truth. As thou hast sent me into the world, even
so have I also sent them into the world. And for their sakes I sanctify
myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth.

Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on
me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in
me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may
believe that thou hast sent me. And the glory which thou gavest me I
have given them: that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them,
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world
may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved
me.

Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where
I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou
lovedst me before the foundation of the world.

O righteous Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known
thee, and these have known that thou hast sent me. And I have declared
unto them thy name, and will declare *it:* that the love wherewith thou
hast loved me may be in them, and I in them.

Arise, let us go hence.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXXI. In Gethsemane](csj084.md)
