[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj048)  [Next](csj050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLVI

### A WOMAN'S ACCUSERS SHAMED—CHRIST CONFUTES THE JEWS—"I AM THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD"—"THE TRUTH SHALL MAKE YOU FREE"—"I SEEK NOT MINE OWN GLORY"—"BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS, I AM"—HE ELUDES THE MOB

A.D. 29. Age 32. *Jerusalem*.

John 8, 2-59.

EARLY in the morning Jesus came again into the temple. The people came;
and he sat down, and taught them.

¶The scribes and Pharisees brought a woman taken in adultery. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[†](#fn_57.md) They say unto Jesus, Master, Moses in the
law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou?

This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him.

But Jesus stooped, and with his finger wrote on the ground, *as though
he heard them not*. So when they continued asking him, he lifted up
himself, and said unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.

</div>

Again Jesus stooped, and wrote on the ground. And they, being convicted
by *their own conscience*, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest:
Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.

When he had lifited up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?

</div>

She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her,

<div class="jesussaid">

Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.

</div>

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

¶Jesus spake again unto the people, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life.

</div>

The Pharisees therefore said, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record
is not true. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Though I bear record of myself, *yet* my record is true: for I know
whence I came, and whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and
whither I go.

Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man. And yet if I judge, my
judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I
am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth
witness of me.

</div>

Then said they, Where is thy father? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also.

</div>

These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple: and
no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come. Then said Jesus
again,

<div class="jesussaid">

I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins: whither I
go, ye cannot come.

</div>

Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? because he saith, Whither I
go, ye cannot come. And he said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am not of
this world. I said therefore unto you that ye shall die in your sins:
for if ye believe not that I am *he*, ye shall die in your sins.

</div>

Then said they, Who art thou? And Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Even *the same* that I said unto you from the beginning.

I have many things to say and to judge of you: but he that sent me is
true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him.

</div>

They understood not that he spake to them of the Father. Then said
Jesus,

<div class="jesussaid">

When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am
*he*, and *that* I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught
me, I speak these things. And he that sent me is with me: the Father
hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him.

</div>

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

As he spake these words, many believed. Then said Jesus to those Jews
which believed on him,

<div class="jesussaid">

If ye continue in my word, *then* are ye my disciples indeed; and ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

</div>

¶They answered, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any
man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be made free? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant
of sin. And the servant abideth not in the house for ever: *but* the Son
abideth ever. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed.

I know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my
word hath no place in you. I speak that which I have seen with my
Father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father.

</div>

They answered, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith,

<div class="jesussaid">

If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. But now
ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have
heard of God: this did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your father.

</div>

Then they said, We be not born of fornication; we have one Father,
*even* God. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and
came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me.

Why do ye not understand my speech? *even* because ye cannot hear my
word. Ye are of *your* father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye
will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he
speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.

And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you
convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me?
He that is of God heareth God's words: ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God.

</div>

Then answered the Jews, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and
hast a devil? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

I have not a devil; but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me. And I
seek not mine own glory: there is one that seeketh and judgeth.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never
see death.

</div>

Then said the Jews, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead,
and the prophets, and thou sayest, If a man keep my saying, he shall

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

never taste of death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is
dead? and the prophets are dead: who makest thou thyself? Jesus
answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

If I honor myself, my honor is nothing: it is my Father that honoreth
me; of whom ye say, that he is your God: yet ye have not known him: but
I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a liar like
unto you; but I know him, and keep his saying. Your father Abraham
rejoiced to see my day; and he saw *it*, and was glad.

</div>

Then said the Jews, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen
Abraham? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Verily, verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.

</div>

They took up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out
of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[65:†](csj049.htm#fr_60.md) In the Revised Version
the account of this episode is enclosed in brackets. In the margin is
this: "Most of the ancient authorities omit John vii, 63-viii, 11. Those
which contain it vary much from each other."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLVII. “I Am the Light of the World”](csj050.md)
