[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj065)  [Next](csj067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXIII

### SIGHT RESTORED TO TWO BLIND BEGGARS—PARABLE: THE NOBLEMAN, THE SERVANTS, AND THE MONEY (POUNDS)

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jericho*.

Luke 18, 35-43; 19, 1-27: Mark 10, 46-52.

A MULTITUDE followed Jesus. Nigh <span id="fr_79"></span>[\*](#fn_76)
unto Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way side begging: and
hearing the multitude, he asked what it meant. They told him, Jesus of
Nazareth passeth by.

And he cried, Jesus, *thou* Son of David, have mercy on me.

Jesus commanded him to be brought; and asked him,

<div class="jesussaid">

What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?

</div>

And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. Jesus said unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

Receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved thee.

</div>

Immediately he received his sight. And Jesus entered and passed through
Jericho.

¶As he went out <span id="fr_80"></span>[\*](#fn_76) of Jericho with his
disciples, blind Bartimeus sat by the highway side begging. When he
heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, Jesus, Son of
David, have mercy on me.

Many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried the more,
*Thou* Son of David, have mercy on me.

Jesus commanded him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying,
Be of good comfort; he calleth thee.

Casting away his garment, he came to Jesus. He said unto the man,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?

</div>

The blind man said, Lord, that I might receive my sight. And Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole.

</div>

Immediately his eyes received sight, and he followed Jesus in the way.

¶Jesus \[had\] entered and passed through Jericho. And a man named
Zaccheus, which was the chief among the publicans, and rich, sought to
see Jesus who he was, and could not for the press, because he was little
of stature. He ran before, and climbed into a sycamore tree to see
Jesus: for he was to pass that *way*.

When Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw Zaccheus, and said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Zaccheus, make haste, and come down: for to day I must abide at thy
house.

</div>

He came down, and received Jesus joyfully. When they saw *it*, they
murmured, He was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner.

Zaccheus said unto the Lord: Behold, the half of my goods I give to the
poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I
restore *him* fourfold. Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

This day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as he also is a son
of Abraham.

For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

</div>

And he added a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and they
thought that the kingdom of God should immediately appear. He said
therefore,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_81"></span>[\*](#fn_77)A certain nobleman went into a far
country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return. And he called
his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them,
Occupy till I come.

But his citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We
will not have this *man* to reign over us.

And it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the
kingdom, then he commanded these servants to be called unto him, to whom
he had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained
by trading.

Then came the first saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds. And
he said unto him, Well, thou good servant: because thou hast been
faithful in a very little, have thou authority over ten cities.

And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds.
And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities.

And another came, saying, Lord, behold, *here is* thy pound, which I
have kept laid up in a napkin; for I feared thee, because thou art an

</div>

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

austere man: thou takest up that thou layest not down, and reapest that
thou didst not sow.

And he saith unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou
wicked servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up that I
laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow: Wherefore then gavest not
thou my money into the bank, that at my coming I might have required
mine own with usury?

And he said unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give
*it* to him that hath ten pounds. (And they said unto him, Lord, he hath
ten pounds.) But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

For I say unto you, That unto every one which hath shall be given; and
from him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[97:\*](csj066.htm#fr_80) Luke 18, 35-42: "As
Jesus was come nigh unto Jericho ." Mark 10, 46-52: "As Jesus went out
of Jericho . . . " The two narratives are enough alike to imply but one
blind beggar. Matthew, however, has two blind men, but sitting side by
side; pleading at the same time, and cured at the same time, the
dialogue being strikingly similar (Matthew 20, 30-34).

<span id="fn_77"></span>[98:\*](csj066.htm#fr_81) Compare this passage
(Luke 19, 12-27) with the similar passage in LXXIII of this book
(Matthew 25, 14-30).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXIV. Jesus Goes to Jerusalem](csj067)
