[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj058)  [Next](csj060.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LVI

### SERMON IN PARABLES (CONTINUED): THE NINETY AND NINE, THE LOST COIN, THE PRODIGAL SON

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Perea*.

Luke 15, 1-32.

THEN drew near unto Jesus the publicans and sinners for to hear him. The
Pharisees and scribes murmured, This man receiveth sinners, and eateth
with them.

Jesus spake this parable unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_70"></span>[\*](#fn_67.md)What man of you, having a hundred
sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the
wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when
he hath found *it*, he layeth *it* on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when
he cometh home, he calleth together *his* friends and neighbors, saying
unto them, Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost.

I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner
that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need
no repentance.

¶Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece,
doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till
she find *it?* And when she hath found *it*, she calleth *her* friends
and *her* neighbors together, saying, Rejoice with me: for I have found
the piece which I had lost.

</div>

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repenteth.

A certain man had two sons: and the younger of them said to *his*
father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth *to me*. And
he divided unto them *his* living.

And not many days after, the younger son gathered all together, and took
his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with
riotous living. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine
in that land; and he began to be in want.

And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent
him into his fields to feed swine. And he would fain have filled his
belly with the husks that the swine did eat; and no man gave unto him.

And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my
father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I
will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him.

And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in
thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son.

But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put
*it* on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: and
bring hither the fatted calf, and kill *it;* and let us eat, and be
merry: for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found. And they began to be merry.

Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the
house, he heard music and dancing. And he called one of the servants,
and asked what these things meant. And he said unto him, Thy brother is
come; and thy father hath killed the fatted calf, because he hath
received him safe and sound. And he was angry, and would not go in:
therefore came his father out, and entreated him.

And he answering said to *his* father, Lo, these many years do I serve
thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment; and yet thou
never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends: but as
soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with
harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.

And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is
thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[84:\*](csj059.htm#fr_70.md) This furnishes an
interesting likeness to the one from Matthew (18, 12-14) in XLIV of this
book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LVII. Sermon In Parables (cont.): “Ye Cannot Serve God and
Mammon”](csj060.md)
