[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj072)  [Next](csj074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXX

### GREEKS DESIRE TO SEE JESUS—HE FORESEES HIS DEATH: "NOW IS MY SOUL TROUBLED"—FAITH EXALTED, PRAYER EXTOLLED—"I AM COME A LIGHT INTO THE WORLD. . . . TO SAVE THE WORLD"

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem, in the Temple*.

John 12, 20-36; 42-50.

CERTAIN Greeks came up to worship at the feast: the same came to Philip,
saying, Sir, we would see Jesus.

Philip and Andrew tell Jesus. Jesus answered them, saying,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the
ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much
fruit. He that loveth his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his
life in his world shall keep it unto life eternal.

If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also
my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honor.

Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this
hour? but for this cause came I unto this hour.

Father, glorify thy name.

</div>

Then came there a voice from heaven, *saying*, I have both glorified
*it*, and will glorify *it* again.

The people that stood by, and heard *it*, said that it thundered: others
said, An angel spake.

Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes.

Now is the judgment of this world: now shall the prince of this world be
cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all *men*
unto me.

</div>

This he said, signifying what death he should die.

The people answered, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth
for ever; and how sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? Who is
this Son of man? Then Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light,
lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in darkness knoweth not
whither he goeth. While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may
be the children of light.

</div>

¶Among the chief rulers many believed on Jesus; but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess *him*, lest they should be put out of the
synagogue: for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.

¶Jesus cried and said,

<div class="jesussaid">

He that believeth on me believeth not on me, but on him that sent me.
And he that seeth me seeth him that sent me.

I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should
not abide in darkness. And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I
judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.

He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth
him: the word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last
day. For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he
gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I

</div>

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

should speak. And I know that his commandment is life everlasting:
whatsoever 1 speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I
speak.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXI. The Temple Doomed](csj074)
