[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj033)  [Next](csj035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXI

### JAIRUS’ DAUGHTER HEALED—THE WOMAN WHO HAD SPENT HER ALL ON PHYSICIANS—THE TWO BLIND MEN

A.D. 28. Age 31. *Capernaum*.

Luke 9, 41-42; 49-56; 43-48: Mark 5, 22-24; 35-43; 25-34: Matthew 9,
18-19; 23-26; 27-30.

AND, behold, there came one of the rulers of the synagogue, a man named
Jairus. He fell at Jesus’ feet: and he besought Jesus that he would come
to his house, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death: *I
pray thee*, come and lay thy hands on her: and she shall live.

He had one only daughter; she was *of the age* of twelve years.

Jesus arose and followed him, and *so did* his disciples: much people
thronged him.

There cometh one from the ruler's house, saying to Jairus, Thy daughter
is dead: why troublest thou the Master further? Jesus heard. He said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Be not afraid, only believe. Fear not, believe only, and she shall be
made whole.

</div>

Jesus came to Jairus’ house, and saw the tumult: the minstrels making a
noise, and them that wept.

He suffered no man to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, and the
father and the mother of the maiden. All wept, and bewailed her. When
Jesus was come in, he saith unto them,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

Why make ye this ado, and weep? Weep not. Give place. The damsel is not
dead, but sleepeth.

</div>

They laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. He put them all
out.

Jesus, and the father and mother of the damsel, and they that were with
them, entered in where the maiden was lying. He took her by the hand,
saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Maid, arise.

</div>

She arose straightway, and walked. Jesus commanded that something be
given her to eat.

¶Behold, a certain woman, which was diseased twelve years, and had
suffered many things from many physicians, and had spent all that she
had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse: she came in the
press behind, and touched the hem of Jesus’ garment: for she said within
herself, If I may but touch his clothes, I shall be whole.

Straightway she felt in *her* body that she was healed.

Jesus, knowing that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the
press, and said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Who touched me?

</div>

When all denied, Peter said, Master, the multitude throng thee and press
*thee*, and sayest thou, Who touched me? Jesus said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.
Who touched my clothes?

</div>

He looked about to see her that had done this thing. The woman fearing
and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and told him the
truth, before all the people: for what cause she had touched him, and
how she was healed immediately. Jesus said unto her,

<div class="jesussaid">

Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole. Go in
peace, and be whole of thy plague.

</div>

¶When Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying *Thou*
Son of David, have mercy on us.

When he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus
saith unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Believe ye that I am able to do this?

</div>

They said, Yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

According to your faith be it unto you.

</div>

And their eyes were opened. Jesus straitly charged them,

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

See *that* no man know *it*.

</div>

But they spread abroad his fame in all that country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXII. Home Again: A Prophet Without Honor](csj035.md)
