[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj079)  [Next](csj081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXXVII

### SAYING "I GO UNTO MY FATHER," CHRIST EXALTS PEACE, GOOD WILL, LOVE—"I AM THE WAY, THE TRUTH, THE LIFE"—REASSURES THE APOSTLES—THE COMFORTER: "PEACE I LEAVE WITH YOU"

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem: Upper Room*.

John 14, 5-31.

THOMAS saith unto Jesus, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how
can we know the way. Jesus saith unto him,

<div class="jesussaid">

I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father,
but by me. If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and
from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.

</div>

Philip saith, Lord, shew us the Father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus
answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me,
Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; and how sayest thou
*then*, Shew us the Father?

Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The
words I speak unto you, I speak not of myself: but the Father that
dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. Believe me that I am in the Father,
and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very works’ sake.

Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that
I do shall he do also; and greater *works* than these shall he do;
because I go unto my Father.

And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father
may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in my name, I will
do *it*.

¶If ye love me keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever;
*even* the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it
seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth
with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless; I will
come to you.

Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me:
because I live, ye shall live also. At that day ye shall know that I am
in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.

</div>

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me:
and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him,
and will manifest myself to him.

</div>

Judas, not Iscariot, saith unto him, Lord, how is it that thou wilt
manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. He that loveth
me not keepth not my sayings: and the word which ye hear is not mine,
but the Father's which sent me.

These things have I spoken unto you, being *yet* present with you.

But the Comforter, *which is* the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send
in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you.

Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Ye have heard
how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me,
ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is
greater than I.

And now I have told you before it come to pass, that, when it is come to
pass, ye might believe.

Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the prince of this world
cometh, and hath nothing in me. But that the world may know that I love
the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXVIII. Last Supper (cont.) “Greater Love Hath No Man Than
This”](csj081)
