[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj094)  [Next](csj096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

### XCII

### AFTER THE RESURRECTION (CONTINUED): CHRIST IN PERSON: APOSTLES' QUESTION ANSWERED

A.D. 35. *Mount of Olives*.

Luke: Acts 1, 2-9.

UNTO the apostles whom he had chosen Jesus shewed himself alive after
his passion: and, being assembled with *them*, <span
id="fr_111"></span>[\*](#fn_106.md) commanded them that they should not
depart from Jerusalem: *saith he*,

<div class="jesussaid">

Wait (tarry in Jerusalem) for the promise of the Father, which ye have
heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.

</div>

They asked him, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom
to Israel? He said,

<div class="jesussaid">

It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father
hath put in his own power. But ye shall receive power, after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost
parts of the earth.

</div>

When he had spoken, while they beheld, he was taken up.

### SAUL'S VISION—ANANIAS' VISION—SAUL'S CONVERSION, BAPTISM

Luke: Acts 8, 3; 9, 1-20. Damascus. A.D. 34-35.

SAUL <span id="fr_112"></span>[†](#fn_107.md) made havoc of the church,
entering into every house, and haling men and women to prison.

Breathing out threatenings against the [disciples](errata.htm#8.md) of the
Lord, he went unto the high priest, and desired of him letters to the
synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether men or women, he
might bring them bound to Jerusalem.

As he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined about
him a light from heaven: and he fell to the earth, and heard a voice
saying,

<div class="jesussaid">

Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

</div>

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Saul said, Who art thou? And the Lord said,

<div class="jesussaid">

I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: *it is* hard for thee to kick against
the pricks.

</div>

Saul astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? The Lord
answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must
do.

</div>

The men which journeyed with Saul stood speechless, hearing a voice, but
seeing no man. Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened,
he saw no man.

They led him by the hand into Damascus. And he was three days without
sight, and neither did eat nor drink.

¶There was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him
said the Lord in a vision,

<div class="jesussaid">

Ananias! Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight, and
inquire in the house of Judas for *one* called Saul of Tarsus: for,
behold, he prayeth, and hath seen in a vision a man named Ananias coming
in, and putting *his* hand on him, that he might receive his sight.

</div>

Ananias answered, Lord, much evil he hath done to thy saints at
Jerusalem.

But the Lord said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before
the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: for I will show him
how great things he must suffer for my name's sake.

</div>

Ananias entered into the house; and putting his hands on him said,
Brother Saul, the Lord, *even* Jesus, hath sent me, that thou mightest
receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.

Immediately there fell from Saul's eyes as it had been scales; and he
received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized.

Straightway Saul preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son
of God.

### SIMON PETER REMEMBERS

A.D. 41 *Cesarea*.

Luke: Acts 10, 44-45; and 11, 16.

WHILE Peter spake, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard, They of
the circumcision which believed were astonished, because that on the
Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost.

Then remembered Peter how that the Lord said,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

John indeed baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost.

</div>

And he commanded them to be baptized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[144:\*](csj095.htm#fr_111.md) On the mount of
Olives.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[144:†](csj095.htm#fr_112.md) Saul, a young Hebrew
of Cilicia, of the sect of the Pharisees, was so passionately devoted to
the religion and traditions of the Jews, that he undertook to seek out
and persecute converts to the new religion, the gospel and faith of
Christ. After his own conversion, Saul as the missionary and writer is
more familiarly known as Paul (supposedly his baptismal Gentile name).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XCIII. The Lord to Paul in a Vision—“I Am With Thee”](csj096.md)
