[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj081)  [Next](csj083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

### LXXIX

### THE COMFORTER, THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH: "BE OF GOOD CHEER, I HAVE OVERCOME THE WORLD"—"YOUR SORROW SHALL BE TURNED TO JOY"—CHRIST TO DEPART THIS LIFE

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem: Upper Room*.

John 16, 2-33.

<div class="jesussaid">

THEY shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that
whosoever killeth you, you will think that he doeth God service. And
these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, nor me.

But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you
at the beginning, because I was with you.

But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me,
Whither goest thou? But because I have said these things unto you,
sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless I tell you the truth; It is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And
when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness,
and of judgment: of sin, because they believed not on me; of
righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; of
judgment, because the prince of this world is judged.

I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.
Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into
all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, *that* shall he speak: and he will shew you things to come. He
shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew *it* unto
you.

All things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he
shall take of mine, and shall shew *it* unto you.

A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and
ye shall see me, because I go to the Father.

</div>

Then said *some* of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he
saith, A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, A little
while, and ye shall see me: and, Because I go to the Father?

Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and he said,

<div class="jesussaid">

Do ye inquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye
shall not see me: and again, a little while, and ye shall see me?

Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice; and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be
turned into joy.

A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come:
but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more
the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. And ye now
therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you.

</div>

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

And in that day ye shall ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give *it* you.
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full.

These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh,
when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall shew you
plainly of the Father. At that day ye shall ask in my name: and 1 say
not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: for the Father
himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God.

I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave
the world, and go to the Father.

</div>

His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest
no proverb. Now are we sure that thou knowest all things: by this we
believe that thou camest forth from God. Jesus answered,

<div class="jesussaid">

Do ye now believe? Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye
shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and
yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In
the world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have
overcome the world.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXX. Last Supper (cont.) “I Have Finished the Work”](csj083)
