[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj023)  [Next](csj025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXI

### THE SERMON IN THE PLAIN (CONCLUDED)—MORE PARABLES—"WHY CALL YE ME, LORD, LORD?"—ROCK FOUNDATION

A.D. 28. Age 31. *Near Capernaum*.

Luke 6, 39-49.

AND he spake a parable unto them,

<div class="jesussaid">

Can the blind lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the ditch?
The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect
shall be as his master.

And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Either how canst thou
say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine
eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then
shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother's
eye.

</div>

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit. For every tree is known by his own fruit.
For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they
grapes.

A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that
which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart
bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his
mouth speaketh.

¶And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?
Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I will
shew you to whom he is like:

He is like a man which built a house, and digged deep, and laid the
foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose, the stream beat
vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded
upon a rock. But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that
without a foundation built a house upon the earth; against which the
stream did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of
that house was great.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. The Centurion's Servant Healed](csj025)
