[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csj073)  [Next](csj075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027CSIX0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Complete Sayings of Jesus*, by Arthur Hinds, \[1927\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LXXI

### THE TEMPLE DOOMED—NATION TO RISE AGAINST NATION—"I WILL GIVE YOU WISDOM"—"IN YOUR PATIENCE POSSESS YE YOUR SOULS"—THE SON OF MAN COMING WITH POWER

A.D. 30. Age 33. *Jerusalem. Mt. of Olives*.

Matthew 24, 1-31: Mark 13, 1-27: Luke 21, 5-28.

AS Jesus went out from the temple, his disciples came for to show him
the buildings of the temple. One saith, Master, see what buildings *are
here!* Some spake of the temple how it was adorned with goodly stones
and gifts. Jesus answering said,

<div class="jesussaid">

 <span id="fr_88"></span>[\*](#fn_84)Seest thou these great buildings?
See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you, *As for* these
things which ye behold, the days will come, in the which there shall not
be left here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

</div>

¶As Jesus sat upon the mount of Olives, over against the temple, Peter
and James, John and Andrew asked him privately, What sign *will there
be* when these things shall come to pass? What *shall be* the sign of
thy coming, and of the end of the world? Jesus answering them began to
say,

<div class="jesussaid">

Take heed lest any *man* deceive you. For many shall come in my name,
saying, I am *Christ;* and shall deceive many; and the time draweth
near; go ye not therefore after them.

Take heed that ye be not deceived but when ye shall hear commotions, and
wars, and rumors of wars, see that ye be not troubled; be not terrified.
Such things must needs be: for all these things must first come to pass;
but the end *shall* not *be* yet (is not by and by).

Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there
shall be famines, and troubles, and pestilences, and great earthquakes,
in divers places; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from
heaven. All these things are the beginnings of sorrows.

¶But take heed to yourselves: for before all these, they shall lay their
hands on you, and persecute *you;* delivering you up to councils, and
into prisons, to be afflicted: and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten:
and ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for my name's sake. And
it shall turn to you for a testimony against them. Then shall they kill
you, and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake.

But the gospel must first be published among all nations.

</div>

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

And when they shall lead *you*, and deliver you up, take no thought
beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but
whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is not
ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost. Settle *it* therefore in your hearts,
not to meditate before what ye shall answer; for I will give you a mouth
and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor
resist.

And then shall many be offended, <span id="fr_89"></span>[\*](#fn_85)
and shall betray one another. And ye shall be betrayed both by parents,
and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends. Now the brother shall betray
the brother to death, and the father the son; and children shall rise up
against *their* parents, and shall cause them to be put to death; and
*some* of you shall they cause to be put to death. And ye shall be hated
of all *men* for my name's sake.

But there shall not a hair of your head perish. In your patience possess
ye your souls.

And many false prophets shall rise and shall deceive many. And because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that
shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. And this gospel of
the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all
nations; and then shall the end come.

¶When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place, where it ought not (let
him that readeth understand): and when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed
with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh; then let
them which are in Judea flee to the mountains: and let them which are in
the midst of it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries
enter thereinto. And let him that is on the housetop not come down into
the house, neither enter *therein*, to take anything out of his house;
and let him which is in the field not return back for to take his
clothes.

For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are written
may be fulfilled.

And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in
those days! for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath
upon the people. And pray ye that your flight be not in winter, neither
on the sabbath day: for in those days shall be great affliction,
tribulation such as was not since the beginning of the creation which
God created, unto this time; no, nor ever in the world shall be. And
except that the Lord had shortened those days, there should no flesh be
saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he hath chosen, those days shall
be shortened.

And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away
captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

</div>

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<div class="jesussaid">

And then if any man shall say to you, Lo, here *is* Christ; or, lo, *he
is* there; believe *it* not: for there shall arise false Christs and
false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, to seduce;
insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive even the very
elect.

But take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things.

Wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go
not forth: Behold, *he is* in the secret chambers; believe *it* not. For
as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west;
so shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For wheresoever the
carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

¶But immediately, in those days after that tribulation, there shall be
signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars: the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars of heaven
shall fall; and the powers that are in the heavens shall be shaken: and
upon the earth \[shall be\] distress of nations, with perplexity; the
sea and waves roaring: men's hearts failing them for fear, and for
looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers
of heaven shall be shaken.

And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then
shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of
man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.

And then shall he send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and
they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from the
uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of heaven; from one
end of heaven to another.

And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[110:\*](csj074.htm#fr_88) The text here of the
three narrators furnishes phrasings so varied that the interested reader
will be repaid by an attentive perusal of all three (book, chapter, and
verse designated above).

<span id="fn_85"></span>[111:\*](csj074.htm#fr_89) . . . be offended:
stumble, fall away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LXXII. “My Words Shall Not Pass Away”—Wise and Foolish
Virgins.](csj075)
