[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl011)  [Next](cohl013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE MESSAGE OF THE FOUR BEINGS

"Now the messengers spoke to me and said that they would now tell me how
things ought to be upon the earth. They said: 'Do not allow any one to
say that you have had great fortune in being able to rise again. The
favor of the four beings is not alone for you and the Creator is willing
to help all mankind.'

"Now on that same day the Great Feather <span
id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21) and the Harvest dances were to be
celebrated and at this time the beings told me that my relatives would
restore me. 'Your feelings and spirits are low,' they said, 'and must be
aroused. Then will you obtain power to recover.' Verily the servants of
the Creator (Hadio<sup>n</sup>yâ?'geono<sup>n</sup>) said this. Now
moreover they commanded that henceforth dances of this same kind should
be held and thanksgiving offered whenever the strawberries were ripe.
Furthermore they said that the juice of the berry must be drunk by the
children and the aged and all the people. Truly all must drink of the
berry juice, for they said that the sweet water of the berries was a
medicine and that the early strawberries were a great medicine. So they
bade me tell this story to my people when I move upon the earth again.
Now they said, 'We shall continually reveal things unto you. We, the
servants of him who made us, say that as he employed us to cure unto you
to reveal his will, so you must carry it to your people. Now we are they
whom he created when he made the world and our duty is to watch over and
care for mankind. Now there are four of us but the fourth is not here
present. When we called you by name and you heard, he returned to tell
the news.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

This will bring joy into the heaven-world of our Creator. So it is that
the fourth is not with us but you shall see him at another time and when
that time is at hand you shall know. Now furthermore we must remind you
of the evil things that you have done and you must repent of all things
that you believe to have been evil. You think that you have done wrong
because of O?gi'we:, Ye'ondâ'thâ and Gone'owo<sup>n</sup> <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) and because you partook of strong drink.
Verily you must do as you think for whatsoever you think is evil is
evil.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[25:2](cohl012.htm#fr_21) The Osto'wä'go:'wa:,
the chief religious dance. See Morgan, p. 279.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[26:1](cohl012.htm#fr_22) See notes, p. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ganiodaiio Commanded to Proclaim the Gaiwiio](cohl013)
