[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl160)  [Next](cohl162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

### HADIGO<sup>n</sup>'SA SHO<sup>n</sup>O\`, THE FALSE FACE COMPANY

This organization is one of the better known societies of the Iroquois,
and its rites have often been described, though not always correctly
interpreted. There are three divisions of the False Faces, and four
classes of masks--doorkeeper or doctor masks, dancing masks, beggar
masks, and secret masks. The beggar and thief masks form no part of the
paraphernalia of the true society, and the secret masks are never used
in public ceremonies in the council house at the midwinter ceremony. The
False Face ceremonies have been well described, though by no means
exhaustively, by Morgan <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112) and
Boyle <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113). The main features are
generally known.

The paraphernalia of this society consist of the masks previously
mentioned, turtleshell rattles (snapping turtles only), hickory bark
rattles, head throws, a leader's pole upon which is fastened a small
husk face, a small wooden false face, and a small turtle rattle, and a
tobacco basket.

There are two Seneca legends setting forth the origin of the False
Faces, and three with the Mohawk story. These stories, however, explain
the origin of different classes of masks. Each mask has a name. One
story relates that the False Faces originated with the Stone Giants.
However this may be, the writer obtained in 1905, from a woman claiming
to be the keeper of the secret masks, a mask representing the Stone
Giant's face. With it was a mask made of wood, over which was stretched
a rabbit skin stained with blood. This mask was supposed to represent
the face of a traitor as he would look when drowned for his infamy.
Chief Delos Kettle said it was used to cure veneral diseases.

There is some dispute as to the antiquity of the False Face Company.
Doctor Beauchamp, in his History of the Iroquois, <span
id="fr_114"></span>[3](#fn_114) says it is comparatively recent. From a
study of the Seneca society, however, the writer is inclined to believe
that it is quite old with them,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

although it may be more recent with the other Iroquois. Early explorers
certainly could not have seen everything of Iroquois culture, especially
some of the secret things, and their lack of description may be regarded
as negative testimony rather than as positive evidence of the
nonexistence of certain features which later students have found. It is
quite possible that the author of "Van Curler's" journal of 1634-35
mentions a false face when he writes: "This chief showed me his idol; it
was a head with the teeth sticking out; it was dressed in red cloth.
Others have a snake, a turtle, a swan, a crane, a pigeon for their
idols. . . ." The Seneca at present drape their false faces when they
hang them up for safe keeping, and use them as well as turtle and snake
charms as bringers of good fortune. Some pipes from seventeenth-century
graves seem to represent blowing masks. Mr M. R. Harrington and the
writer found one in 1903 while excavating a seventeenth-century site,
since learned to be of Seneca occupancy, on Cattaraugus creek, near
Irving. The counterpart of this pipe was found by R. M. Peck on the
Warren site, near West Bloomfield, N. Y. The Indians say it is a False
Face blowing ashes, and such it may represent. Mr Harrington, and the
writer as well, have found what may be false face eye-disks, as well as
turtle-shell rattles, in Seneca and Erie graves.

The principal False Face ceremonies are: Ganoi\`'iowi, Marching Song;
Hodigosshos'ga, Doctors' Dance, and
Yea<sup>n</sup>sê<sup>n</sup>dâdi'yas, Doorkeepers' Dance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[127:1](cohl161.htm#fr_112) Morgan, Fifth
Annual Report New York State Cabinet (Museum), 1852, p. 98.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[127:2](cohl161.htm#fr_113) Boyle,
Archaeological Report, Provincial Museum, Toronto, 1898, p. 157.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[127:3](cohl161.htm#fr_114) N. Y. State Mus.
Bul. 78, p. 141.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tobacco Throwing Ceremony](cohl162)
