[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl014)  [Next](cohl016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION 2

"Now spoke the beings and said, 'We now speak of the second word. This
makes the Creator angry. The word is Got'go<sup>n</sup>?. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[3](#fn_25)

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Witches are people without their right minds. They make disease and
spread sickness to make the living die. They cut short the numbered
days, for the Creator has given each person a certain number of days in
which to live in this world.

"'Now this must you do: When you have told this message and the witches
hear it they will confess before all the people and will say, "I am
doing this evil thing but now I cease it. forever, as long as I live."
Some witches are more evil and can not speak in public so these must
come privately and confess to you, Handsome Lake, or a preacher of this
Gai'wiio\`. Now some are most evil and they must go far out upon an
abandoned trail and there they must

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

confess before the Creator alone. This course may be taken by witches of
whom no one knows.

Now when they go they must say:

"Our Creator, O listen to me!  
I am a miserable creature.  
I think that way  
So now I cease.  
Now this is appointed  
For all of my days,  
As long as I live here  
In this earth-world.  
I have spoken."

"'In this manner all must say and say truly, then the prayer will be
sufficient.'"

So they said and he said. Eniaiehuk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[27:3](cohl015.htm#fr_25) A certain number of
the Seneca Iroquois still cling to the belief in witchcraft although
they are loath to admit it to any one in whom they have not implicit
confidence. While they assert that witchcraft was introduced among them
by some Algonquin tribe which they had adopted, their early legends and
traditions contain many allusions to witches and witchcraft. There are
at least two distinct methods employed by witches to accomplish their
ends. The first, it is claimed, is the older way and is the employment
<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> of what is described by informants as
analogous to "malific mental suggestion," either verbal or telepathic.
Such witches were able to assume the form of ancient monsters, the
nia?'gwahe: or *mammoth bear* being the favorite form. They had power of
transforming people into beasts, of imprisoning them within trees
without destroying the human nature or sensibilities of their victims.
Many stories are related of how chivalrous young men fresh from the
dream fast were able to release the unhappy prisoners from the spells
that bound them.

The second and modern class of witches work their evil spells by
introducing into the bodies of their victims by supernatural means a
small needlelike splinter pointed on either end and having a central eye
to which was tied the hair of the witch, a splinter of bone from the
fibula of a deer, a worm or some like object. Instances where such
things have been drawn from bewitched persons are commonly reported.

A witch can work fearlessly and successfully as long as she remains
unknown to the victim and under some circumstances even when known. A
"witched" person is often able to see as in a vision the witch wherever
she goes and is likewise able to tell when she is about to approach the
house. Witches fear the threat of an angry person to kill them. Such a
threat if an earnest one is an effectual charm against further
annoyance. To burn the object that a witch has introduced into one's
body will torture the witch and kill her. Such objects are not often
burned. If revenge is desired the victim, if sufficiently angry, can
throw the object through space and injure the witch wherever he wishes.
A person who successfully resists and destroys another witch's power may
become a witch if so desired.

To torture a witch, force a confession and exact a promise of
repentance, take a living bird, black in color (a hen is now usually
employed) and carry it into the woods at midnight. Here build a fire and
then split open the bird's body, extract its beating heart and hang it
by its chords over a small fire to roast slowly. The witch will then
exert every possible means to reach the spot and beg that the heart be
taken from the fire before it is consumed. At such a time any promise
may be exacted, for the witch is powerless. If the heart is consumed the
witch will die of a "burnt heart." Witch poison may be extracted by
putting fine sifted ashes on the afflicted part and <span
id="page_29">p. 29</span> staying in bed until the poison comes out. The
charm will then be found in the ashes. The spirits of great witches are
able to return and possess another witch. A witch who has such a
"friend" is especially favored, for in time of need the spirit-witch
will direct her to money, goods or food. Witches do not always injure
people who have offended them but more often their children or other
near relatives. This is done that the person they desire to punish may
see an innocent person suffer for their offense and so be tortured the
more.

"Witch doctors" are of two classes: witches who are willing to pit their
powers against other witches; and medicine men who have made a special
study of the charms that will offset witch spells. This class may also
be divided into two divisions, those who make a regular profession of
dispelling witch influences, of discovering the cause of mysterious
ailments, of extracting the object that causes the trouble and of
identifying witches, and those who by reason of some special service
they have rendered some spirit of nature have been rewarded with magical
powers, great wisdom and immunity from malific influences. This class
renders its services gratuitously. Small false faces worn on the person
and frequent invocations of the Thunder spirit with liberal offerings of
sacred tobacco are potent charms against witches. The False Face company
has an annual ceremony in which witch spirits are expelled from the
community. The I?'dos company (q. v.) is said to be the survival of the
older witch society introduced among the Seneca by the Nanticoke. Its
members are reputed to possess magic powers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](cohl016)
