[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl141)  [Next](cohl143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

# PART 2

### FIELD NOTES ON THE RITES AND CEREMONIES OF THE GANIO\`DAI'IO\` RELIGION <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97)

### GÄNÄ?YASTA\`

The midwinter festival of the Iroquois, commonly called Indian New Year.

On the third day of what the Seneca term Niskowûkni ne\`' Sade:'goshä or
the moon of midwinter, a council of head men is called and officers
elected to officiate at the Gänä?yasta\` or midwinter thanksgiving
ceremony to be held two days later. Officers are chosen from each of the
two brotherhoods <span id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98) of clans.

On the first day of the ceremony officers called Ondeyä, dressed in
buffalo skins, meet and lay out a route of houses which each pair of
Ondeyä is to visit. This settled, they draw the buffalo heads over their
heads and start out.

There are three excursions of Ondeyä from their lodges, one at about 9
a.m., one at about 12 p.m. and one at about 3 p.m. Two Ondeyä, carrying
corn pounders painted with red stripes, knock at the door of a house and
entering intone:

Hail, nephews. Now also the cousins with you. Now also you see the big
heads.

Ye he:! Gwäwandê!  
One<sup>n</sup>\`'dîq wodewê'noye: ne\` ne:\`se:so gwäwamê!  
One<sup>n</sup>\`'dîq i:swa:ge<sup>n</sup>' noîwane\`!

This is repeated and the Ondeyä depart.

At noon the Ondeyä repair to their meeting place and emerging again go
over the same route. Their message as they enter a lodge at this time
is:

Hail. Be clean! Do not he confused, O nephews. Do not tread upon things,
nephews, cousins, when you move.

Yêhe! Jokweho<sup>n</sup>! sänon'di gwä'wandî! dänondodädê, gwä'wandî
nene'se:so nänondo\`'yäno\`!

At 3 p.m., returning to the same lodge, the message is:

Yêhe:! Oise<sup>n</sup>dase\` susniun'nano ne?' swaisê\`' dûgayio\`
sä<sup>n</sup>do.' One?' dîq îtchigaine\`so<sup>n</sup> nongwûk'sado\`
nenwande\` sä'no<sup>n</sup> dîq îtch'nonadoktê\` ongwûkädo\`. One?' dîq
nêkho\`' non'jiyê.

 

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

After one has intoned this message or announcement the other pokes up
the ashes with a basswood paddle and sings a song.

The first day is spent in this way, formal announcements being given by
the officers.

On the morning of the second day all the lodges are visited by officers
called Hade:yäyo\`. Later, say 9 a.m., clan officers, known as
Hana'sishê, begin their round of visits. Two men and two women are
chosen from the phratries and going in couples to the various houses
conduct a thanks or praise service. The burden of their words is a
thanksgiving to God for the blessings that have been received by that
house during the past year.

When this ceremony is over these officers throw up a paddle
(Wadigusä'wea) signifying that the ceremony is over. At this time a
chief makes a long thanksgiving speech in the council house.

At noon the "big feather" dancers visit every lodge and dance the sacred
dance. Two women at least must participate. On entering a lodge the
leader of the feather dancers must say:

Onê<sup>n</sup>\`''dîq' hodo\`'issoin'yûnde sedwa:'â'wûk
gäo<sup>n</sup>'ya?ge? honoñ'ge\`. Ne:kho\`'nai'
hodo'issho<sup>n</sup>go<sup>n</sup>oindi ne\`' häwo<sup>n</sup>n'.
Hodawisa'sse:\` Osto'wägowâ.

Onê<sup>n</sup>\`'dîq'dji'wûsnowät nê\`' gissä<sup>n</sup> äyêno:gwe:\`
Osto'wägowâ. Gagwe:go<sup>n</sup>,' onê<sup>n</sup>\`' dîq,' djiwûsnowät
heniyo<sup>n</sup>\` swao'iwayando<sup>n</sup>\`!

Da'neho\`'!

At about 2 p. in. public dances begin in the "long house."

The Society of Bears, which during the early afternoon had been holding
a session in the house of some member, enter the long house and dance
publicly. The same is true of the False Face Company.

Other dances are the Pigeon song dance (Tcä'kowa) and the Gâda:'ciot.
The only dance in which physical contact is permitted is the
Yêndonîssontâ\` or "dance of the beans." Dancers hold each other's hands
as they circle around the singers. This is to represent the bean vine as
it clings to a sapling or corn stalk.

On the morning of the third day the priest arises before daylight and
standing at the door of the council house begins his song of thanks. The
song is sung until dawn appears and then the priest ceases. Should a
fierce wind be blowing it is believed that when the words of the song
float upward the Great Spirit will say, "Cease your movements, Oh wind,
I am listening to the song of my children."

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

The first verse is as follows:

Onê<sup>n</sup>\`' dîq' okno'wi, Onê<sup>n</sup>\`' dîq', dasênni\`'
dottonde:  
Gâo'yä gütc i'ja\`! Yoändjâ:?gê igê<sup>n</sup>'s  
Onê<sup>n</sup>\`' dîq' o\`gai'wayi\` onê\`'  
Dêawên'nissê no\`gowês  
Saisisa\`honio\`  
Onê<sup>n</sup>\`' dîq' wadi'waye:îs.

The song begins with the singer's face to the west; he turns and sings
in all directions, that all may hear his voice.

A legend relates that this song originated ages ago. An old woman is
said to have been with child and before her son was born, from the
heavens came this song.

Only one or two Indians sing this now, no others being able for some
reason. After the song the priest calls upon the Great Spirit in these
words:

Ye, ye-e, ye:e:!  
Dane\`'agwa none\`'ne<sup>n</sup>gä' ne:'wa  
Onê<sup>n</sup>\`' dîq dasa\`'tondat' gäogê\`gê\`tci'ja', etc., etc.

At about 9 a.m. another officer of religion enters the long house and
sings the Ganio\`dai'io\` song:

Translation:

I love my world, I love my time, I love my growing children, I love my
old people, I love my ceremonies.

At noon various societies and companies which have been holding sessions
in private lodges adjourn to the council house to engage in public
ceremonies. The great feather dance is celebrated at noon. Afterward
nearly all the common dances are given, among which is the woman's
football game and dance.

The morning of the third day is greeted as the previous day, by the song
and prayer of the priest.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

At 9 a.m. of the fourth day the Gonio\`dai'io\` song is chanted again.
Meanwhile the company of harvest dancers hold their dances at private
houses going to the long house (gano<sup>n</sup>'sûsge<sup>n</sup>?) at
noon. Soon after the Bird Society or Gane\`'gwäe: enters the council
house and begins its dance. Two dancers are chosen from each phratry, as
are also two speakers. The evening is devoted to the Trotting, Fish,
Pigeon, Bear, False Face, Buffalo and other dances. At 10 p.m. the
ceremonies cease.

On the fifth day the dawn ceremony is repeated and at 9 a.m. the
Ganio\`dai'io\` song is sung. Societies hold meetings in their own
lodges.

At about 1 p.m. a company of women dancers visit each house, dance and
sing and return to the long house. False Face beggars also roam from
lodge to lodge in search of sacred tobacco. In the afternoon and evening
various dances are held in the long house. At about 11 p.m. the Husk
Face Company enters the long house and engages in their public ceremony.
After this dance the people are dismissed by a chief.

The morning of the sixth day is devoted to the dog sacrifice and the
tobacco offering. Afterward the Ado<sup>n</sup>'we\` are sung. This song
may be translated: I am now going home, I step upon another

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

world, I turn and extend my arms for a friend to lead me, I pray all may
go where I go. Now the earth is smoky and none can see the other world
\[as I do\].

On the seventh day the Honon'diont hold a morning dance and then proceed
to cook the feast. Costumed feather dancers enter the long house and
dance. The "wind is open for names," or opportunity is now given to
bestow names. At this point if a boy is to be named the priest rises and
says, "Hio\`gêne:\`', dji'wagä ne-e!

"Hu\`', hu\`', hu\`'hu\`'-a:!" respond the people.

If a girl is to be named there is no ceremony other than the mere
announcement of the name. A speech is now made by a chief bidding people
make ready for the sacred bowl game.

Honon'diont visit each lodge exacting from every person stakes for the
sacred gamble. Each phratry is to play against the other The Honon'diont
then meet and match articles, value for value.

The night previous every person endeavors to have a prophetic dream,
whereby they may know the result of this game. No one must cheat in this
game for "it is God's."

The great feather dance is repeated and names bestowed on this day. At
night the Husk Faces return and give a. grand final dance.

The ninth day is the last one of the midwinter's ceremony. Early in the
morning the priest gives a thanksgiving "sermon." At 5 p.m. occurs the
dance in honor of the "three sisters," Diohe:\`'ko, (these-we-live-on).
Afterward the woman's dance is held, alternating with the following
men's dances, Trotting, Pumpkin, Pigeon and Beans. The feast is then
distributed and the people disperse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[81:1](cohl142.htm#fr_97) Taken at Newtown,
Cattaraugus reservation, January 1905, by A. C. Parker.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[81:2](cohl142.htm#fr_98) See Phratries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The White Dog Sacrifice](cohl143)
