[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl104)  [Next](cohl106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION 94

"So they proceeded on their journey and it happened that a vision
appeared unto them. They seemed to be advancing toward an approaching
man. Soon they met him and passed. Now when they were a distance apart
they turned and he was facing them. So they greeted each other. Then
said the man, 'Sedwa:go'wanê, I must ask you a question. Did you never
hear your grandfathers say that once there was a certain man upon the
earth across the great waters who was slain by his own people?' That was
what he said when he spoke.

"Then answered Sedwa:go'wanê, 'It is true. I have heard my grandparents
say this.'

"Then answered the man, 'I am he.' (Sega<sup>n</sup>'hedûs He who
resurrects). And he turned his palms upward and they were scarred and
his feet were likewise and his breast was pierced by a spear wound. It
appeared that his hands and his feet were torn by iron nails.

"All this was true. It could be seen and blood was fresh upon him.

"Then said the man, 'They slew me because of their independence and
unbelief. So I have gone home to shut the doors of heaven that they may
not see me again until the earth passes away. Then

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

will all the people cry to me for succor, and when I come it will be in
this wise: my face will be sober and I shall turn it to my people. Now
let me ask how your people receive your teachings.'

"He answered, 'It is my opinion that half my people are inclined to
believe in me.'

"Then answered he, 'You are more successful than I for some believe in
you but none in me. I am inclined to believe that in the end it will
also be so with you. Now it is rumored that you are but a talker with
spirits (djîs'gä<sup>n</sup>dâtâha\` <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82)). Now it is true that I am a spirit and
the one of him who was murdered. Now tell your people that they will
become lost when they follow the ways of the white man.'"

So that is what he said. Eniaiehuk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[68:1](cohl105.htm#fr_82) See Spiritism, [p.
126](cohl158.htm#page_126).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 95](cohl106)
