[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl005)  [Next](cohl007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

## NOW THIS IS GAIWIIO

The beginning was in Yai?'kni \[May\], early in the moon, in the year
1800.

It commences now.

### A TIME OF TROUBLE

The place is <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) Ohi'o\` \[on the Allegany
river\], in Diono?sade'gî \[Cornplanter village\].

Now it is the harvest time, so he <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6)
said.

Now a party of people move. They go down in canoes the Allegany river.
They plan to hunt throughout the autumn and the winter seasons.

Now they land at Ganowoñ'go<sup>n</sup> \[Warren, Pa.\] and set up camp.

The weather changes and they move again. They go farther down the river.
The ice melts opening up the stream and so they go still farther down.
They land at Dione:gâ \[Pittsburgh\]. It is a little village of white
people \[literally, "our younger brethren" <span
id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7)\]. Here they barter their skins, dried meat
and fresh game for strong drink. They put a barrel of it in their
canoes. Now all the canoes are lashed together like a raft.

Now all the men become filled with strong drink (gonigä'nongi). They
yell and sing like demented people. Those who are in the middle canoes
do this. <span id="fr_8"></span>[4](#fn_8)

Now they are homeward bound.

Now when they come to where they had left their wives and children these
embark to return home. They go up Cornplanter creek,
Awe'gäo<sup>n</sup>.

Now that the party is home the men revel in strong drink and are very
quarrelsome. Because of this the families become frightened and move
away for safety. So from many places in the bushlands camp fires send up
their smoke.

Now the drunken men run yelling through the village and there is no one
there except the drunken men. Now they are beastlike

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

and run about without clothing and all have weapons to injure those whom
they meet.

Now there are no doors left in the houses for they have all been kicked
off. So, also, there are no fires in the village and have not been for
many days. Now the men full of strong drink have trodden in the
fireplaces. They alone track there and there are no fires and their
footprints are in all the fireplaces.

Now the dogs yelp and cry in all the houses for they are hungry.

So this is what happens. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[20:1](cohl006.htm#fr_5) The present tense is
always used by Chief Cornplanter.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[20:2](cohl006.htm#fr_6) The narrator, Handsome
Lake.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[20:3](cohl006.htm#fr_7) The Seneca term is
Honio?'o<sup>n\`</sup>, meaning "our younger brother."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[20:4](cohl006.htm#fr_8) The intoxicated men were
put in the middle canoes to prevent their jumping into the water. The
more sober men paddled from the outer canoes. This debauchery was common
among the Six Nations at the beginning of the 19th century.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[21:1](cohl006.htm#fr_9) See plate 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sick Man](cohl007)
