[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Iroquois](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cohl015)  [Next](cohl017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION 3

"Now the beings spoke again saying, 'This is the third word. It is a sad
one and the Creator is very sad because of this third word. It seems
that you have never known that a great pile of human bodies lies dead
because of this word, Ono'ityi'yende, the nigâ'hos'sää\`, the secret
poisons in little bundles named Gawênnodûs'hä

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (compelling charms <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)). Now the Creator who made us commands
that they who do this evil, when they hear this message, must stop it
immediately and do it nevermore while they live upon this earth-world.
It matters not how much destruction they have wrought--let them repent
and not fail for fear the Creator will not accept them as his own.'"

So they said and he said. Eniaiehuk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[30:1](cohl016.htm#fr_26) Charms. Should a
person die holding a secret, one may discover it by sleeping upon the
ground with a handful of the grave dirt beneath his head. Then, *if all
conditions are perfect*, the dead person will appear in three successive
visions and reveal its mystery.

A young man, wishing to become a swift runner, may add to his powers by
concealing in his belt a bone from the grave of some celebrated runner
of the past. It is said that most famous runners of the League carried
these charms.

A warrior who wishes to guard against sudden attack from behind may make
an unfailing charm by cutting three slits in the back of his neck and
rubbing into the wounds the oil extracted from the scalps of enemies. A
peculiar soft white flesh will fill up the cuts and when completely
healed will protrude. Should an enemy then approach these protruding
scars will quiver and warn the warrior of danger.

The most effective charm for drawing riches is the tooth of a
nia?gwahe:.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4](cohl017)
