<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](bok00)  [Next](bok02) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Kells*, by Edward Sullivan, \[1920\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFATORY NOTE

THE Editor desires to acknowledge his indebtedness to the late Rev. Dr.
Abbott, Librarian of Trinity College, Dublin, who kindly gave permission
and every facility for the reproduction of the pages from the Book of
Kells which appear in this volume. Special thanks are due to the
Sub-Librarian, Mr. Alfred de Burgh, whose invaluable assistance and
untiring pains in revising the reproductions at various stages of the
work reduced very considerably the difficulties with which the engravers
were faced. As mentioned by Sir Edward Sullivan towards the end of his
Introduction, the compound letters shown in the last five plates are
from remarkably clever copies made by the late Mrs. John R. D’Olier. Her
son, the late Mr. Isaac D’Olier, kindly placed the copies at the
disposal of the Editor for reproduction in the present volume.

To those who have not examined the Book of Kells two features in the
plates may require explanation; viz., the cut margins, which in some
cases have damaged the designs; and the variation in the tones of the
backgrounds. Both these defects are present in the original manuscript.
The first, as explained on page 6 of the Introduction, is due to the
ignorance of some incompetent binder to whom the priceless volume was
entrusted about one hundred years ago; and the second is caused by
discolouration, for which age and the fact that the Manuscript was for
some time buried under the soil are probably responsible.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to Second Edition](bok02)

</div>
