[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma08)  [Next](oma10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FETISHES

When hunters go on a big hunt they get fetishes from Eagle Man which
they bring along. When the hunter takes the heart out, the fetish is
made to drink blood from the heart. These fetishes are kept in each
family. Iatiku made the first one for Eagle Man and he taught

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the others how to make them. They should be made of a hard stone, flint,
or gypsum, with eyes of turquoise set in pitch. Small ones are carried
for protection and because they represent the prey animals. Any man can
make a fetish, which he may call wolf, lion, or whatever he pleases. He
then brings it to the Eagle Man of the Hunters' society. The Eagle Man
and the society then pray to it and sing over it, putting into it the
spirit and the power of the lion (north), wolf (west), lynx (south),
wildcat (east). The power of the fetish is drawn from all these equally.

The head man holds the fetish in the palms of his hands, swinging it to
the four directions to the following song:

It comes alive  
It comes alive, alive, alive.  
In the north mountain  
The lion comes alive  
In the north mountain, comes alive.  
With this the prey animal  
Will have power to attract deer, antelope;  
Will have power to be lucky.

\[paragraph continues\] (Repeat for wolf of the west, lynx of the south,
and wildcat of the east.) With each verse the Eagle Man faces the
direction indicated, swinging his hands in that direction. The man who
holds the fetish (head man) is praying another way and does not sing
with the other singers. When the song is finished the fetish is laid in
front of the altar beside the fetishes of the society where it remains
over night. During this time it becomes alive. The next day it is given
to its owner. When the new fetish has been placed in front of the altar
each member of the society in turn approaches it and says, "Drink the
blood of the lion (or whatever it has been named)."

In the kiva is one large, fetish representing each of the four beasts of
prey: múkaiĭtchă, "lion" (n); kakan, "wolf" (w); shohóna, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) "lynx" (s); gyat "wildcat" (e). These
names are preceded by Shaiyaika (Hunters' society) to indicate that they
are fetishes. Each fetish is placed in its proper direction in front of
the altar. The fetish to be given life is placed alongside the one for
which it is named. The head man, when he places it in front of the
altar, places it by its "mother" from which it draws its power, and it
leaves as offspring of

, quoting from S. F. Baird, Mammals of the Mexican Boundary, 1857, pp.
7-8. See, also, Bailey, 1937, pp. 283-284). Coronado's letter to Mendoza
of August 3, 1540, sneaks of lions and tigers \[jaguars\] (Winship,
1896, p. 560).}

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the "mother." When the fetish is returned, it still has a connection
with the one on the altar. It may be recalled from the owner if the
society wants to use it. This is often done when the owner has been
lucky in the hunt. When the society finishes with it, it is returned to
the owner. These fetishes are handed down in the family. <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

When a hunter kills an antelope or a deer he brings it into the
[pueblo](errata.htm#0). The father or mother of the \[hunter's\] house
comes out with some corn meal in her hand with which she makes a "road"
into the house and up the ladder, if they live above. Then they help the
hunter with his pack, and lay the deer on the floor with its head toward
the fireplace, about 10 feet from the fire. Beads are laid on the neck.
(Beads of lignite are preferred, as the hoofs of the deer are supposed
to be made of this substance.) The deer would wear these back. They are
taken away when they think the spirit has left, in about an hour. If
relatives of the hunter come in, they go up to the deer and touch it and
then rub their hands over their faces because they say the deer is
pretty and not lazy. They say, "We are glad you have come to our home
and have not been ashamed of our people." A dish of corn meal is placed
near by and all visitors feed a little to the deer asking him to come
next to their house, as they believe the deer will be reborn.

When the beads are taken off, they blow them into the other room. (Beads
are supposed to have power to attract; women wear beads to attract men.)
They then start to skin the animal up to the neck. The skin is all taken
off. The head is boiled in a pot without taking the horns off. In the
pot is placed corn, pumpkin seeds, and piñon nuts. These are called the
deer's ear rings. Before they eat this the hunter would call the clan of
his father (not mother) to come and help eat the head. The mother of the
hunter's father, if still living, takes the eyes and eats them. If she
is not there, the oldest female relative in the father's clan does this.
The hunter, or any man, is supposed not to eat the eyes of a deer lest
he always have water in his eyes (tears) and not be able to see far. The
hunter must not eat the tongue as this will make him thirsty. Nor may he
eat the udder lest his teeth not be strong.

After the meat is all eaten from the head, it will be placed on top of
the house to dry. When he has time, the hunter takes it back into the
mountains where he prays that it will come alive again. First it must be
painted as the deer was originally. A black line is painted down the
middle of the face; under the jaw is white. Balls of cotton are stuffed
in the eye sockets and the centers painted black. Then a string is tied
across the antlers and to this feathers are attached. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

\[paragraph continues\] All large game is treated like the deer:
mountain sheep, elk, buffalo, also lions, lynx, bear. Rabbit skulls are
treated in the same way except that they are not painted or prepared in
any way.

This is the way Iatiku made the first hunting society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_56"></span>[23:57](oma09.htm#fr_56) The word co·ho·'nα
(Boas, 1928, pt. 2, p. 42, l. 2), eastern Keres: ro'hona, is difficult
to identify; it has been rendered lynx, weasel, jaguar. I am strongly
inclined to believe that this animal is the jaguar. In a Santa Aria myth
ro'hona is distinguished front mountain lion and front wildcat, and he
is large enough to kill an antelope. One Santa Ana informant identified
ro'hona as a jaguar from a colored picture in a manual on mammals of
North America. In Boas' Laguna myth, "The origin of hunting customs,"
co·'ho·na is distinguished from mountain lion and from wildcat and is
large enough to knock down a mountain sheep. Therefore this animal must
be fairly large and powerful.

Moreover, the co·'ho·na is assigned to the south, the direction of the
home of the jaguar, with reference to the Pueblos.

The jaguar was formerly found occasionally as far north as the Pueblo
Indian country although his customary haunts are farther south. On April
10, it is reported that a jaguar killed four men in a convent at Peña
Blanca (Seton, 1929, vol. 1, pt. 1, pp. 28-29

<span id="fn_57"></span>[24:58](oma09.htm#fr_57) Cf. Laguna (Parsons,
1920, p. 127, fig. 20).

<span id="fn_58"></span>[24:59](oma09.htm#fr_58) This corresponds
closely with a recent account from Santa Ana (White, ms). Deer skulls
and horns, with feathers attached to the antlers, could be seen in great
numbers on the roofs of houses at Sia a few years ago.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanderings, Part I](oma10)
