[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](oma04)  [Next](oma06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE

The following information was obtained in September and October of 1928
from a group of Pueblo Indians from Acoma and Santa Ana visiting
Washington.

The Acoma origin and migration myth is presented as it was learned by
the chief informant during his initiation in youth into the Koshari, the
group of sacred clowns to whom theoretically all religious secrets are
divulged. With this myth, according to Acoma ideology, everything in the
culture must harmonize. When new practices are adopted, there is an
attempt to fit them into the general scheme, although in recounting the
tradition, the informant was careful to differentiate between
contemporary practice and what was given in the tradition. Frequently
after his dictation, when I would question him to bring out concrete
instances, he would say, "It is not done so any more." The tradition is
couched in archaic language so that in many places the younger
interpreters were unable to translate and the elderly informant would
have to explain in modern Acoma phraseology. This may account in part
for certain obvious paraphrases of Pueblo or even of merely Indian ways
of speaking. Other paraphrases may have been made for the benefit of the
White man or as interpretation of Acoma religion by one who is an
exceptionally good Catholic and no longer a participant in the
ceremonial life of Acoma.

Nevertheless, the rendition does present a coherent picture of the
religion in a way not accomplished by the fragments of the Keresan
origin myth heretofore recorded. The sequential and comprehensive
character of this version has given fresh meaning to various concepts
and rituals of Keresan religion.

Dr. C. Daryll Forde, who was in Washington at the time, worked with the
writer during the recording of the early part of the myth, a section of
which was published by him in Folk-Lore, with my permission. The
complete manuscript was also utilized by Dr. Parsons in her monograph on
Pueblo Religion.

The illustrations were made in water colors by one of the younger Acoma
men, under the direction of the chief informant.

Approximately 70 songs were collected. Some of them were recorded from
the chief Acoma informant, but the majority were sung by the Santa Ana
man who was looked upon as the best singer of the group. Phonographic
recordings were made for the Bureau by Mr. Anthony Wilding and later
transcribed by Miss Frances Densmore.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

All the material recorded, the songs excepted, has been annotated and
generally edited by Dr. Leslie A. White, who for many years has been a
student of the Keres. Dr. White's first study of Acoma was published by
the Bureau in 1932 and two later studies by Dr. White will be included
in Bulletin 136, shortly to go to press. The correlation of all the
Acoma information, through bibliographical and other references, adds
much to the value of the present publication. We are greatly indebted to
Dr. White for his collaboration; also to the late Dr. Elsie, Clews
Parsons, who took part in the editing.

M. W S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin Myth](oma06.md)
