[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma13)  [Next](oma15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WANDERINGS, PART V

For a long time after this all was well, these two groups of chaianyi
did well by the people, but there came another sickness on the people
which the chaianyi failed to cure. (Iatiku was still with the people.)
So Oak Man thought of making another order of medicine men to be called
Flint Chaianyi to help him. It was left to Oak Man from now on to
initiate the other orders of medicine men but Iatiku, instructed him to
come to her for their names.

Flint Chaianyi was to heal any sickness brought by clouds and
lightning. <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101) It was to be called
Flint but was to combine the power as well of clouds and
lightning,--flint is the tangible projectile of the lightning which
comes from the clouds.

Three men came to be made chaianyi by Oak Man. So these were to be
initiated and given the Flint altar, one exactly like the Fire medicine
altar. But the name would be Flint and the songs would be different. But
the initiation was not to be different. Everything

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

was followed like getting sticks, etc., from where lightning had struck,
4-day fast, and the meeting was begun in the same way. Each initiate was
given honani with the same rites as in the Fire society. These honani
were all alike. The fetishes were given life by songs as before. There
was initiation with hot coals, as in the Fire society. (Nowadays this is
done outdoors.)

The sickness had been caused by a big flood which had made the people
ill. The medicine at this altar is mixed in the same way as the other in
the ceremony, but is made out of the "heart" of clay concretions that
are formed by the wind rolling clay in the arroyos. The centers are
removed and ground up with the roots of pŭtru 'ĭst \[lightning\] (a root
which is braided as it grows, representing the lightning). They were
also instructed how to paint clouds on the kiva walls ([pl. 10, fig.
1](oma43.htm#img_pl10a)). <span id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102) (Acoma
is the only pueblo that has these wall paintings.) <span
id="fr_103"></span>[4](#fn_103) Then they were instructed how to get
power from these paintings. <span id="fr_104"></span>[5](#fn_104) They
were to rub their backs against these paintings--against the north wall
first. (Nowadays a chaianyi does this before sucking a sick person. Also
they sometimes go into the fire to get more power; they dance on the
coals.)

Added to the altar was a putruist \[lightning stick\] representing the
lightning. In initiation, Oak Man took this and struck the initiates
first on the heart and then on the back giving them the power of
lightning. This is added to the hot-coal ceremony. The putruist is made
from lightning-blasted pine or spruce.

Flint Chaianyi has a longer bear paw on the left hand than Fire
Chaianyi. It reaches to the elbow. One of the three men was made the
head chaianyi of the altar and each was to care for his own fetish.
Everything was done as before; the people brought food to break the
4-day fast of the chaianyi and the people were cured of their sickness.
The Flint society, it must be remembered, is just a help to the Fire
society to carry its power further through the power of the clouds and
lightning.

When Fire Altar Man was getting his first instructions from Iatiku he
was told that he would have the power to take a new-born child and
present it to the Sun and give it a name 4 days after birth. This power
was given to each successive medicine man. On the fourth day after
birth, the father of the child would go to any medicine man, bringing
him corn meal with a prayer asking him to present the child to the Sun.
On the fourth day, at about 3 a. m., the medicine man comes to the house
of the baby. He brings his honani and makes a

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

sand painting <span id="fr_105"></span>[6](#fn_105) on the north side of
the room, a painting like the one on his altar. The honani is placed on
the "heart" of the altar. He sings prayers as he sets this up and mixes
medicine for the child and the family. When the sun is about to come up,
he takes the child outdoors, holding it where the sun will shine on it,
as it comes up. As the sun rises he prays, gives the baby its name and
its clan name. He asks in prayer that the baby may have a long healthy
life. He then motions four times from the sun toward the child, bringing
the strength of the sun into the child, saying, "Now you have become a
member of such and such clan." Then the chaianyi turns to the left (as
in kiva leaving) and brings the child back to its home. (It is now a
rule that when a man is in a mask dance or in ceremony he always turns
to the left.)

When the medicine man gets back to the baby's house, he calls out, "Here
comes (whatever name has been given)." The parents reply, "Oh, yes, let
him come in." Chaianyi says, "He is coming in, he is bringing food,
beads, game, and a long life into his house." As soon as he steps in,
the mother takes the child and with four gestures waves inside the food,
pots, beads, game, etc., that the child is bringing figuratively to the
house. The parents always have food prepared to offer to the altar and
to feed the chaianyi. The chaianyi and all of the family come in and
eat. Following this the chaianyi makes a departing speech and prayer. He
is given some food as a present to take home.

The Giant society was the next to be formed. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[7](#fn_106) Thus there were the following medicine
societies and in the following order: Fire, Kapina, Flint, Giant. At
Acoma there were also Ant society and Eagle society, but these two are
not covered by the tradition.

Iatiku was much pleased with her people and the way the various officers
and medicine men were functioning. A long time passed and the people
were behaving in such a secret way and it was all so solemn, Iatiku
thought they should have something public that everyone could enjoy
without fasting. So she thought of the clothes that had been presented
to the people by the katsina. She called Country Chief to council and
told him her plans. She said to him, "Why not call the people to a dance
of thanksgiving for the crops and game they have had?" This idea pleased
Country Chief much (especially as it came within his province), so he
told the people to meet in the kiva. They all met and he instructed them
how this affair was to be carried out. (Each person had a katsina
costume that had been presented to him.) This dance was to be called
paashko. <span id="fr_107"></span>[8](#fn_107) The idea was to get the
people away from the continuous solemnity of the secret ceremonies.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Country Chief told the people to make their own songs, that this dance
was to be danced by everyone who wanted to dance--boys, girls, men, and
women. Katsina dance with just one foot so when the people suggested
that they dance like katsina--which was the only dancing they had ever
seen--Country Chief said, "No! this is your dance and you must do it a
different way." <span id="fr_108"></span>[9](#fn_108) But he knew no way
to do it. (This dance is in no sense sacred.) <span
id="fr_109"></span>[10](#fn_109) They decided to spend 4 days preparing
for the dance, making up the songs and rehearsing. Everyone was happy,
full of anticipation; the whole pueblo was stirred up.

So the War captain \[Country Chief\] kept suggesting that they call
Koshari, that he was going to call him. This was because he knew of no
new way to dance and he wanted to leave it to Koshari to arrange the
dance and instruct the people in it. Koshari had power to do this.
Country Chief said to his two helpers, "I'll try out Koshari and see if
he will come. He talks a lot and seems to know everything." So he made a
prayer stick and prayed and made a cigarette for him. This prayer stick
reached Koshari at hakuaich. On the morning of the fourth day Koshari
arrived, still painted in stripes, with his hair tied up on top of his
head. He asked for Country Chief, "Am I needed here? I have been called
to this place." He was brought to the kiva where Country Chief was.
Country Chief said, "Yes, I want you here. I believe now that you are
real and have power. My people are going to have a dance and I am
leaving it all to you to arrange as you may wish." He explained to
Koshari the purpose of the dance. Before he had stopped telling him
about it, Koshari knew all about it and said, "Yes, I will arrange it
for you." So Country Chief told the people that they were to obey
Koshari. <span id="fr_110"></span>[11](#fn_110)

Koshari went out, going from house to house telling the people to hurry
up and come out. They were much interested in him and obeyed him. He
said, "All who want to dance come on to the kiva." He was the one to
show them how to paint themselves and put on their costumes. While going
from house to house, Koshari spied the drum belonging to the chaianyi.
(The drum, of course, was only for a very sacred purpose, <span
id="fr_111"></span>[12](#fn_111) but without asking permission Koshari
took it.)

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He also took the chaianyi's rattle, saying,
"This is needed." He was going to have a rehearsal inside the kiva, so
he chose two dance leaders, giving to one the rattle, and to the other,
who was to sing, he gave the drum.

All the men were lined up. Behind each man he placed a woman and behind
each boy, a girl. Then he showed them how to dance, standing in front,
lifting both feet, saying, "This is how you will dance (to the men)." He
showed the women how to wave their arms in time with the drum, saying,
"You will dance thus."

The people who were to be spectators were anxiously waiting outside.
Koshari told the drummer to go out first and beat the drum. This he did,
all the spectators watching. The singers were sent out next; then the
dancers. After they were all up \[i. e., out of the kiva\] Koshari lined
them up in the order they were to proceed to the plaza. Everyone was
happy because Koshari made a lot of fun while lining them up, talking
backward--everything he said meant the opposite. (When you talk to a
Koshari today this is true: tell him to bring something back and he
won't.)

The dance went on all day, though Koshari dismissed them at noon to go
home and eat, telling them to come back after eating, which they were
only too glad to do, as they were enjoying it very much.

The dance went on all day. When the sun was going down they came out for
the last time. For this dance Koshari showed them a new way to dance.
This consisted of an arm motion as if pushing aside; this is called
kawispăts. "You must always use this when you finish your dances,"
Koshari told them.

Iatiku was there at the dance. She was much pleased and thought that
this public dance was a fine thing. When it was over, Country Chief made
a talk. "Koshari has made this dance for us," he said, "This is the way
we are to enjoy ourselves and have pleasure." So he thanked Koshari and
told him to go home, that he had done well. Koshari said, "Yes, any time
you call me I will come. But next time make a much bigger drum and have
a lot of rattles." So Country Chief told the people to make bigger drums
and more rattles. Koshari called the ones who were going to sing
mătaiik, "grapes"; he had pushed them together in a bunch to sing with
no order. <span id="fr_112"></span>[13](#fn_112)

Iatiku was pleased that her people were happy. But she wanted to give
them still more to enjoy. She knew Flint Chaianyi had a prayer stick
dawak \[kick stick\], which represented the power that makes the Clouds
move. She decided to borrow this prayer stick

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

and have the men dance with it. So Iatiku told Flint Man to make this
prayer stick and to pray to the Shiwana, "the Clouds," to invite the
katsina for their pleasure. (She was thinking the katsina too needed
some pleasure.) So Flint Man made a prayer stick and gave it to Iatiku,
who gave it to Country Chief, who selected some men to run a race.
Iatiku showed them how they were to race with it. They were to kick it
along and never to touch it with their hands. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[14](#fn_113) First they were to go to the north,
then turn to the left to the west, then to the south, then to the east
to where they had started in the plaza. The Clouds came up (with the
katsina in them) to watch the race. Afterward it rained. The Clouds
travel with two of these kick sticks; one with black stripe in middle
called tsoyu (belted), the other called k’ash<sup>i</sup> (white) <span
id="fr_114"></span>[15](#fn_114) ([pl. 14, fig. 2](oma47.htm#img_pl14b),
*a*). Flint Chaianyi and Country Chief waited at the goal. The first to
enter the plaza would be the winner. So Country Chief took one of these
oak prayer sticks and the chaianyi the other. They took them out to the
arroyos and prayed. They found this was a very good game and that it
brought rain as they expected. (Rain clouds usually come from the west
at Acoma.)

Nowadays, at Acoma, the race is run by two teams, chosen from any two
kivas. <span id="fr_115"></span>[16](#fn_115)

The medicine man found out the katsina were glad that it had rained and
had enjoyed the game. So the men began practicing running. Flint
Chaianyi told the runners how to prepare themselves and train. He told
them in April to take the leaves from any hard wood and to make a tea to
drink, then to take eagle down and tickle their palate so as to vomit
the tea, and the medicine would stay inside and make them strong <span
id="fr_116"></span>[17](#fn_116) and hardy like the tree. (Nowadays the
racers sweat themselves. Water mixed with medicine as above is poured on
hot rocks. The medicine man is present and he sprinkles the water while
they sing with blanket over door.) All their things

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

were bet on the race: blue, white, and black blankets, etc. They would
race every afternoon over a 15-mile course.

Then Iatiku thought of making another game for them called
toki<sup>a</sup>moti ([pl. 14, fig. 2](oma47.htm#img_pl14b), b). She
thought of making this game because she wanted to use the wooden balls.
These balls were used by the katsina for making thunder and lightning by
striking them together. When they hit, lightning shoots; the rolling is
thunder. The game was to be held in the pueblo in the kakati (middle).
So Iatiku told Country Chief to ask the katsina next time they came to
bring these balls, which they did and gave them as a present to Country
Chief. These were presented by Gomaiowish, who taught Country Chief how
to play the game. This game was for gambling. <span
id="fr_117"></span>[18](#fn_117) They bet one turquoise bead on a game.
They found this game very interesting because it was the first game of
chance. <span id="fr_118"></span>[19](#fn_118)

Now the men invented a game for themselves to play in kiva. They
duplicated the sticks as used in the kicking race, making four such. The
sticks are hollow at the end; a pebble is to be hidden in one of the
sticks. Two teams are chosen. The team holding the sticks sings a song.
The other team then guesses which stick contains the pebble. A couple of
referees hold 100 straws each. Rules:

|                                                                    |                           |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Pick up one stick, an empty one, before picking up one with pebble | Lose five.                |
| Pick up three empty ones                                           | Lose two.                 |
| Pick up stick with pebble first                                    | Lose ten.                 |
| Pick up two empty ones, then the one with pebble                   | Guesser gets the sticks.. |

 

The one to get all the straws wins. The game is called aiawakutee.

Some of the old men objected to this game, as they had had no
instructions to make it. Iatiku did not like it either. The young men
made up their own songs with the game and began making up songs about
the women and referring humorously to men's wives. The young men got
more interested in playing this game in kiva than in attending the
ceremonies. They got worse and worse and finally made songs making fun
of Iatiku. So Country Chief advised them to stop this. They pretended to
do so when he was there, but resumed playing as soon as he was gone.
Some of the boys had said that the game was more sure of gaining
something for the player than were the ceremonies of Iatiku. This
angered Iatiku and she said, "All right, I'll let you go on your own,
and see if it is not due to my instructions that all has been going
well." She told them she was going to keep quiet and they would not hear
from her any more. On saying

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

this, Iatiku disappeared. She told Country Chief that he was to watch
his people, that even if the people had made fun of her way of doing,
was still going to be their mother and was going to stay at Shipapu and
wait for them to come back to her at the end of their lives. This was
the first mention of death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[40:2](oma14.htm#fr_101) The Shiwana tcaianyi
are the ones who treat lightning shock in Acoma today (White, 1932, p.
107). The Flint society is a witch-sickness curing society; it also has
close associations with the O·pi, or Warriors' society (White, 1932, pp.
90, 107, ftn. 94). See also Bandelier, 1890, pp. 68-69, 385, for war
functions of the Flint society.

Among eastern Keres the Flint society is very closely associated with
the Koshari (White, 1935, p. 54P 1932 a, p. 41; Goldfrank, 1927, p.
143).

<span id="fn_102"></span>[41:3](oma14.htm#fr_102) see white 1932, pls.
11 and 12.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[41:4](oma14.htm#fr_103) Kiva walls are painted
on First Mesa, at Isleta, and from early days in Jeddito Valley and
elsewhere.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[41:5](oma14.htm#fr_104) Informant's note: They
paint anything they want to get power from. Next time there might be
other paintings \[i. e., they change the designs for any ceremony\].

<span id="fn_105"></span>[42:6](oma14.htm#fr_105) See White 1932, pl.
16; also pp. 133-34. Cf. Laguna (Boas, 1929, pt. 1; pp. 201-203;
Parsons, 192.1, pp. 180-81).

<span id="fn_106"></span>[42:7](oma14.htm#fr_106) The informant did not
know much about the Giant society, as the altar had been taken to
another pueblo before he was born.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[42:8](oma14.htm#fr_107) pa·ck‘<sup>u</sup>
(Boas, 1928, pt. 2, p.338, l. 6); Backo (White, 1935,p. 159, ftn. 90).
Cf. Spanish pascua, "festival."

<span id="fn_108"></span>[43:9](oma14.htm#fr_108) Informant's note: When
Iatiku had instructed the people about the katsina, she said that they
were sacred and were not to be imitated in any way.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[43:10](oma14.htm#fr_109) Nevertheless, it is
the dance now held in honor of the patron saint of Acoma, San Estevan.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[43:11](oma14.htm#fr_110) At Santa Ana,
Koshari, or Kwiraina, usually the former, have charge of the feast for
the saint (cf. Parsons, 1923 c). It is likely that this picture prevails
at other Keresan pueblos.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[43:12](oma14.htm#fr_111) Informant's note: The
drum invokes and wakes up the Clouds and the rain and cheers the people.
Drums can be heard 10 miles or more. The drummer is a special man
classed apart from the dancers. Drummers must care for the drums, keep
them painted, and dry them before the ceremony. The drum is taken good
care of always. The drummer remains continent 4 days before a dance. As
soon as they start making the new songs, the drummer must observe the
purge. They think if you don't beat a drum with a good heart you get
paralyzed. If you have the right heart, the drum will be light,
otherwise it will be heavy and your arm will get numb.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[44:13](oma14.htm#fr_112) The informant said
that this dance "had nothing to do with getting min or any purpose other
than pleasure." Although this dance is now held at Acoma on September
2nd, Saint Stephen's day, the tradition states that it should be held
about harvest time.

For dances In honor of patron saints in Keresan pueblos: White, 1932,
pp. 102-106; Bourke, 1884, pp. 10-53 (for the dance at Santo Domingo
which Bourke witnessed in 1881); White, 1935, pp. 159-160; Parsons, 1923
c; Bandelier, 1890 a, 136 ff.; Goldfrank, 1923.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[45:14](oma14.htm#fr_113) This is the "kicking
game," generally called the kick stick race. See White, 1942; Parsons,
1923, p. 219; Culin, 1907, p. 668.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[45:15](oma14.htm#fr_114) See White, 1942.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[45:16](oma14.htm#fr_115) The informant stated
at this point that there are five "society" kivas at Acorns. There are,
he said, "two sacred chaianyi kivas; one is for medicine man, the other
for Country Chief, religious and political."

The kiva question at Acorns is a perplexing one. Both Bandelier (1890,
p. 268) and Mindeleff (1897, pp. 116, 207) state that there are six
kivas at Acoma. This would coincide with the 6-kiva system of Zuñi, a
kiva for each of the six directions. But White's informants stated
(White, 1932, pp. 30-31) that there were five kivas, one for each of the
five katsina dancing groups. Then there is Mauharots, the "head estufa
\[kiva\]," which is the chamber for the cacique and the Antelope clan.
Then there is the ceremonial chamber of the Fire society, also called
k’a·'latc‘, as are the other six. Thus, at Acoma, there are seven
chambers which are designated by the word k’a·'latc‘, kiva.

Since the Antelope clan, of which the cacique is the head, is the "head
of the katsinas; the cacique being the father of the katsinas," it seems
reasonable to include Mauharots as one of the six kivas associated with
the katcina cult, The Fire society chamber, on the other hand, belongs
to an entirely different cult and organization. Thus it seems
justifiable to say that "Acoma has six kivas." But what the informant
means here by "one religious and one political" kiva is hard to say. It
seems likely that the Fire society's chamber is the "religious"
kiva--the one for the medicine man. And, perhaps, Mauharots is the
"political" kiva, for the war chief, since be is initiated there and
reports to this kiva after returning from his night trips to rings
(White, 1932, pp. 45-50).--L. A. W.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[45:17](oma14.htm#fr_116) Informant's note:
Neshăats, "strength, power," nikunăts, "to get power, to prop up, to
brace."

<span id="fn_117"></span>[46:18](oma14.htm#fr_117) The game is played
today at Santo Domingo during Eastertide (Goggin, 1940). Possibly it was
played on First Mesa in Stephen's day, although he did not see it or
learn the significance of the miniature implements be describes as used
in Niman Kachina (Stephen, 1936, pp. 529, 570, 573, figs. 320-322).

<span id="fn_118"></span>[46:19](oma14.htm#fr_118) Informant's note: In
the court 2 stakes are placed about 6 inches apart, Just wide enough
apart to let the ball pass through. The players stand about 75 feet
away. They use a broad stick \[cf. Stephen, 1936, fig. 320\] or paddle,
which is from 12 to 16 inches, to shove the ball. Two men play. each has
2 balls and 1 paddle. The game is to roll the ball between the stakes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanderings, Part VI](oma15)
