[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma15)  [Next](oma17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WANDERINGS, PART VII

All was going well for a long time until again some one who had the game
brought it back, and the young people began again to play, although the
old folks scolded them. Now one time the katsina came to visit, bringing
presents and rain. That night after the katsina left, one of them stayed
on in the village, while the boys returned to the kiva to play their
game. There were many players in the kiva. So the katsina went in
without being noticed, back of the crowd, and watched them play and
heard them talk and sing. One of the gamblers got more fresh and started
to sing a song which grew more and more disrespectful, and some men
started to dance like katsina. They burlesqued the dances and they
mocked <span id="fr_125"></span>[26](#fn_125) the peculiarities of some
of the katsina (some were bow-legged, some had off-set lips). Finally
one said, "Is this the way the clouds look?"

Finally the katsina went out and called to the other katsina. When the
people heard it they were startled, saying, "Who was that went out?" But
they found it was a real katsina. Some said they thought they had seen
the real katsina go out. They were frightened, saying, "A katsina has
seen us mock the katsina." This katsina took the story back to Wenimats.
There was a man who was not in the kiva

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

at the time they were mocking. He was on his way in when he met the
katsina on the roof of the kiva. When he entered he asked, "What was
that katsina doing here?" They kept quiet when they found this was a
real katsina, and, knowing they had made a mistake, they kept quiet. So
they quit playing and went home, feeling heavy-hearted.

When the katsina got back to Wenimats, he yelled and everyone was filled
with excitement and rushed out. He told the katsina chief what he had
seen and other katsina were listening and even before he finished
telling, some of them began to get angry. Katsina Chief tried to calm
them, saying, "Wait, don't get excited!" But they were all enraged.
Gomaiowish took the lead on the side of the angry ones. He said, "I am
going to tell them that we are coming to visit them." Katsina chief told
him not to go, but he went anyway. Katsina Chief urged that there be no
hasty action and tried to get them to settle the matter by discussion,
if possible, without harming anyone.

Just after midnight that night in the pueblo, the people heard
Gomaiowish crying out in the plaza, saying, "I have brought you a
message. The katsina are going to visit you and they will bring you
presents. They will bring you everything you need, hunting sticks,
clubs, so wait for them, make prayer sticks and be prepared for them and
prepare a feast for them." Everyone got up, not knowing what was
happening. They heard Gomaiowish giving a strange yell they had never
heard before. However, they understood his instructions. His yell
sounded like crying. The people were frightened, wondering why
Gomaiowish was so different. Those who had been in the kiva mocking were
the only ones who could guess the reason. They got together and decided
that their burlesque must have been the cause. No one went to bed, but
stayed up, questioning one another. Gomaiowish left but returned just
before sun-up.

When be came the second time they saw that he had clubs and hunting
sticks in his hands. Antelope Man (head chaianyi <span
id="fr_126"></span>[27](#fn_126) and Father of the katsina) painted
himself up and put on the full costume in which he had always met the
katsina. The Country Chief and his officers did likewise, and went forth
to meet Gomaiowish. Antelope Man said to Gomaiowish, "Have you come, my
son?" Gomaiowish replied, "Yes, my father, I have come. I have come to
tell you that the katsina are anxious to come and visit you. They will
be here a little after noon. They are going to bring presents to your
people." Antelope Man tried to talk with Gomaiowish as usual; all the
other people were looking on, but Gomaiowish would not come near them.
So Antelope Man asked why he did not step up and tell him why the
katsina were coming. He told Gomaiowish to stop, and offered him a
cigarette. 'But Gomaiowish made excuses, saying he did not want to smoke
because

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

tobacco made one lazy, made the joints crack, and made the eyes water so
one could not see a deer when hunting. They tried other ways to get him
to stop and talk and to placate him. But Gomaiowish, being the leader of
the angry katsina, would not be placated. So Antelope Man asked
Gomaiowish to give him the stick he had brought: "Was he not going to
give it away? You are my friend, why don't you present it to me?"
Country Chief came near and tried to calm Gomaiowish. He caught, hold of
him, but Gomaiowish got very angry and hit him with the club. Other men
jumped on Gomaiowish and grabbed him. Antelope Man ordered them to bring
him to the kiva, hoping that there they could humor him and quiet him
down. But Gomaiowish broke loose. He was faster than any of the men, who
pursued him in vain. They had taken away his clubs and hunting sticks.

So Gomaiowish went back to Wenimats and brought added complaint, telling
that the people had taken away his clubs and sticks. He exaggerated what
they had done. He persuaded the other katsina that the people were very
wicked, and added fuel to their anger. The katsina leader Tsitsanits
tried again to quiet them but they would not listen. All the katsina
left in a large band although Tsitsanits tried to stop them and send
them back. The people at White House knew there was something wrong, and
they all got busy making prayer sticks and praying to the katsina. But
the prayer sticks, even when they reached the katsina, were not
received. The katsina ran right over Tsitsanits, who was injured trying
to stop them; they were on the war path. Before long the people at White
House could hear the katsina coming, yelling in the same way they had
heard Gomaiowish yell. Country Chief called all the men together. He
told the people not to do anything to the katsina. "If they are going to
harm us, let us do as they like. Maybe this is to be our punishment. I
know that we have been doing wrong." The two sons of the Sun man
\[Masewi and Oyoyewi\] were present as common men; they did not think
anything serious was due to happen.

The katsina brought clubs and they had picked up sticks of hard wood,
and broken branches off the trees. They were all very angry. They did
not pause as they came to the village but came right in by the back way,
all in a bunch, and began striking the people with their clubs and
killing many of them. The Sun twins rushed to their house. They saw that
things had become very serious. They saw their people were being rapidly
killed and they got angry toward the katsina. So they started putting on
the costumes their father had given them and painted each other as their
father had shown them, and put on their quiver with bow and arrows. They
intended to fight back at the katsina. The people had made no attempt to
defend themselves. The Twins selected the largest bunch of katsina in
the plaza and gave the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

yell their father had taught them (through which they were to get power
from the Sun). They knew they were not to use the hunting stick
ordinarily, but they decided this was the necessary occasion. After
giving their yell, each one let fly a hunting stick at the katsina in
the plaza. The sticks killed all the katsina in the plaza, decapitating
them and scattering the others in every direction. The Twins killed all
the katsina but Tsitsanits the leader, who was with Country Chief,
trying to calm down the katsina. They then captured Gomaiowish, berating
him: "It is because of you that our people have been killed. you are
looking for trouble, so you will have it." Whereupon they tied him and
castrated him. Then Gomaiowish confessed and said, "Oh, it is you!
Please forgive me!" He knew who the Twins were from their prayers.

When the katsina leader saw that all the katsina had been killed, all of
a sudden he became afraid and said, "I think we have done something
wrong, else by whose power has this been done?" By that Tsitsanits meant
that both sides had been wrong. This was the first time they had seen
death. When Tsitsanits asked by whose power it had been done, the Twins
stepped forward, saying, "We are the ones. It had to be done. We stood
up for the people. We confess that we understand that the katsina are
sacred to us. But it has been held also that the katsina on their part
should care for the people." All the rest of the people were
terror-stricken, as what had happened was very mysterious. They came out
from where they were hiding and gathered where Country Chief was, with
the Twins and Tsitsanits and Gomaiowish.

As soon as the elder twin finished telling why they had fought back,
Tsitsanits understood and knew that it was their father Masewi. So
Tsitsanits stepped up to him and put his arms around him and confessed
for the katsina that they had done wrong. So Country Chief stepped up to
Masewi and said, "You have performed this miracle. Why should it be so
hard and so serious as all this? Forgive us all! Can you bring the
katsina back to life for our sake? We all understand that it is also by
them that we have lived and been happy." So the elder twin spoke to the
katsina leader, asking him if what Country Chief had said was true. If
they brought them back alive, there was not to be any more killing and
they should not become angry. The katsina leader said that he had
confessed for them and Country Chief had said what was true. So the
elder Twin said, "I also understand that this should never have
happened. We also feel very sorry for the katsina, whom we have depended
upon. We are going to try to do what you have asked. If our power works,
maybe they will be with us again."

So the Twins went among the scattered katsina and, picking up their
heads, placed them back in place. Their father (Sun) had given

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

them "jackrabbit ears" (peschwipen), an herb. They rubbed this medicine
on the necks of the katcina to connect their heads again and on their
chests they placed their staff with the arrowhead (as they had been
instructed to do to bring animals back to life). Some of them came back
to life after this and quickly got strong, others recovered slowly, and
a few did not come to life at all. The Twins worked over them all day
till sundown. Country Chief sent the people away while they were doing
this, telling them it was not good for them to see what was happening.
The chaianyi helped the Twins, but all they did was to follow the Twins'
instructions. So after they had done the best they could and had brought
back to life all those they could bring back, Country Chief confessed to
the katsina that it was the people's fault that this trouble had
happened. Tsitsanits replied that the katsina had also made a mistake,
and were equally at fault. So to protect both sides he decided that the
katsina should not come any more, as they might get angry again. "You
will not see us any more, but we will still help you from Wenimats and
we will always be waiting for you there. You have received presents of
the costume of the katsina. From now on you are going to imitate us. In
that way we will help you from Wenimats. You have seen how we, are
painted up, you have seen how we are dressed ([pl. 12, fig.
2](oma45.htm#img_pl12b)). You know how to make our prayer sticks. Go
through the ceremony like this and we will help you spiritually. When
you have picked out the costume of the katsina you are to represent, his
power will come to you and attach itself while you represent him."

So Country Chief replied, saying, "How can this be made real? We are not
appointed to do this." Tsitsanits replied, "Well, I guess you will have
to be initiated. In this way you will really represent the katsina." So
Tsitsanits laid down the word that he was to be called to teach them how
to carry this out and to initiate the people so they could learn to be
katsina. Then Masewi asked if this was all. The kachina leader said,
"Yes." Masewi said, "This is not all for you yet. You will receive
punishment and you will have to fast for three 10's of the times the sun
comes up. At the end you will all become really reborn. After this is
done we will regard you as we have done before." The elder Twin said
that at the end of this time he would come with his brother to Wenimats.
Everyone felt sorry for each other and felt very bad. So they gathered
and the people brought prayer sticks to the katsina and both sides
confessed their wrongdoing and said prayers for each other. Then the
katsina left. When they got back to Wenimats, they all died again. For
these 30 days they were just alive enough to be able to realize their
punishment. <span id="fr_127"></span>[28](#fn_127) Tsitsanits took care
of them during this time.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Country Chief asked Masewi and Oyoyewi if they could bring the people
alive, and they said, "Yes, we can." So all the bodies were brought into
the plaza. They did with them as they had done with the katsina, but
none of them came to life. The Twins had also made a mistake. Their
father had seen what they had done and had [taken](errata.htm#2) away
all the power of their medicine staff and arrowhead after they had
finished with the katsina. And the hunting sticks had no more power.
This is why they could not bring any of the people back to life. So
Masewi and Oyoyewi said, "Well, we have failed. What is to be done now?"
Country Chief and the chaianyi said that it had been laid down that, if
anything like this happened, certain rules were to be followed. "Iatiku
said that at some time we would come to the end of life. Maybe this is
what has happened." So the medicine men said that they would take care
of that. So they painted ([pl. 15, fig. 2](oma48.htm#img_pl15b), *a*)
the faces of the men and the women <span
id="fr_128"></span>[29](#fn_128) \[i. e., the medicine men  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[30](#fn_129) prepared the dead for burial which was
to take place the day after death, thus inaugurating the funeral
ritual, <span id="fr_130"></span>[31](#fn_130) part of which is
described at this point in the narrative, as follows.\] Before the
chaianyi leaves, as many different kinds of food as possible are
procured and offered. A fire stick (poker) and an arrow point are placed
on the floor and for 4 days after death the soul of the dead person is
fed a little after each meal. After 4 days a medicine man is called in
to put the family through the forgetting <span
id="fr_131"></span>[32](#fn_131) ceremony

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

([pl. 15, fig. 2](oma48.htm#img_pl15b), *b*). <span
id="fr_132"></span>[33](oma17.htm#fn_132) He is given prayer sticks by
the family. He sweeps up the sand painting, and takes out the fire stick
and the arrow point and buries them, <span
id="fr_133"></span>[34](oma17.htm#fn_133) so the breath <span
id="fr_134"></span>[35](oma17.htm#fn_134) of the dead person is removed
from the house.

The medicine men remembered how Iatiku had showed them the sand painting
of the figure of the earth, with the head to the east, so they thought
that probably meant the body should be returned to the earth with the
head in that direction, and the feet in the direction the sun goes down.
So this is the way the medicine men planted the bodies of their people,
so that they would be reborn. The word "plant" is used in this sense in
burials.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[50:24](oma15.htm#fr_123) At Santo Domingo,
spectators are not allowed to leave the plaza during a masked dance for
any reason. (White, 1942 ).

<span id="fn_124"></span>[50:25](oma15.htm#fr_124) This is not my
impression. Although it is true that officers and priests are not
infrequently pictured in myths as powerless to bring rain, or wicked,
and although it is not infrequently a "common man" who saves the day *in
mythology*, I have received the distinct impression that the people
place their trust in their priests and officers and their fetishes. If
they can do nothing, there is little that a sicti (common person) can
do.--L. A. W.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[50:26](oma16.htm#fr_125) See White, 1932, pp.
148-50.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[51:27](oma16.htm#fr_126) This is the first
statement that Antelope chief was a medicine man. The cacique (Antelope
chief) at Acoma recently was not a medicine man (While, 1932, pp. 41-42)

<span id="fn_127"></span>[54:28](oma16.htm#fr_127) A hint here of
purgatory; the whole paragraph has a Catholic tone: punishment, penance,
confession, prayer for somebody. Nor is "soul" (see below) a term
generally used by Pueblos.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[55:29](oma16.htm#fr_128) Cf. White 1932, p.
137; also White, 1942. At Laguna the deceased had their faces painted
with their respective clan designs (Parsons, 1923, p. 216); the shaman
"will make \[the deceased\] so that he may be recognized" (Boas, 1928,
pt. 1. p. 203). Common people at Sia are not painted at death, but
"official members of cult societies" are painted (Stevenson, 1894, p.
144). The same practice is observed at Santa Ana (White, ms.) and at
Cochiti (Goldfrank, 1927, p. 65). At Santo Domingo the deceased are said
to be unpainted (White, 1935, p. 85), and there is no mention of face
painting at San Felipe (White, 1932 a, pp. 60-61).

Apparently face painting of common people at death is practiced only at
Laguna and Acoma.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[55:30](oma16.htm#fr_129) Informant's note:
Women have their hair cut like Iatiku with hair parted to represent the
Milky Way over the forehead, and cut with four corners to represent the
ceremonial 4-day period. This is done so Iatiku will recognize them. The
face is painted yellow with pollen to indicate a female. The red spots
are fox looks; they point thus when dressed up for the dance. Necklace,
because Iatiku wears one. Downy eagle feather in hair. (See White,
1942.)

A chaianyi is prepared as for a ceremony. The bangs are drawn up in a
topknot. The black and white face Paint was prescribed by Iatiku.
(Chaianyi work at night so they can see far like an owl.) The two chin,
stripes are made by scratching away the paint. The turkey feathers at
sides of head are painted green. Bear-claw necklace; arrowhead
represents heart.

The ordinary man is painted with the red stripes of warrior or hunter.
His haircut also represents the Milky Way. Abalone pendant. The feathers
are chiutika \[sparrow hawk, ctc‘oTika', Boas, 1928, pt. 1, pp.
292-293\]. Every man kills one, spreads out the tail feathers, and keeps
them to be used when he dies. The corn husk in his hair shows he belongs
to Iatiku, he has been initiated into the katsina. \[Katsina initiates
are referred to as G’uiraina (White, 1932, p. 71, ftn. 57) although this
Keresan society is not found at Acoma. Elsewhere the sparrow-hawk
feather is used by this society. At Laguna this society was closely
associated With the katsina. Possibly the society once functioned at
Acorns and possibly the dead wear sparrow, hawk feathers to indicate
that they are to become katsina. On First Mesa and at the Laguna colony
at Isleta deceased adult males are arrayed as katsina.--E. C. P.)

<span id="fn_130"></span>[55:31](oma16.htm#fr_130) Cf. Acoma (White,
1932, pp. 137-38; Parsons, 1918, pp. 176-180; White, 1942 ). Laguna
(Parsons, 1920, pp. 128-29; 1923, pp. 216-19; Boas, 1928, pt. 1, pp.
203-204). Santo Domingo (White, 1935, pp. 83-87). San Felipe (White,
1932 a, pp. 60-61). Sia (Stevenson, 1894, pp. 143-46). Cochiti
(Dumarest, 1919, pp. 166-170; Goldfrank, 1922, pp. 65-66).

<span id="fn_131"></span>[55:32](oma16.htm#fr_131) Here and elsewhere,
the informant appears to use the term "forget" where the ethnologist
would say "exorcise" or "cleanse," or, as Spanish Indians elsewhere
would say, "limpiarse."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanderings, Part VIII](oma17)
