[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](oma20)  [Next](oma22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WANDERINGS, PART XII

While they were living at Washpashuka, the Twins, Masewi and Oyoyewi,
traveled around the country a great deal. During their wanderings they
found a group of katsina belonging to the Corn clan and these katsina
had different names. So when Masewi and Oyoyewi came back and reported
that they had found some real katsina, the Corn clan stepped up and
said, "They will belong to us, they are our relatives. We will be their
friends." So the Corn clan nawai (head man), not knowing how to call
these katsina, went to a chaianyi and asked him for advice, should he
make an altar for them? Chaianyi said, "Why not? They are real katsina,
they have to have an altar." Thus the chaianyi told Corn clan man that
he would have to have an altar for himself, for without it he could not
call the katsina. So the chaianyi instructed the Corn clan man how to
make an altar, and told him to get young sprouts of oak about a year
old.

Masewi and Oyoyewi said that these katsina carried canes, so the
chaianyi told him to bend these oak sprouts like a cane (crook). The
Twins described them and they made several like them. The chaianyi made
four honani to be with this altar, but they were to lie flat (as corn is
piled) and not set up on end.

One of the katsina always had fire with him. He was called
Shura'cha <span id="fr_154"></span>[55](#fn_154) ([pl. 1, lower
right](oma34.htm#img_pl01f)). He was small and he also had a little
canteen, always miraculously full of water. So they thought of calling
him to bring some of this water to place in the jar belonging to
Antelope Man so the people would never be out of water, and to bring
some of his fire, so that they could have him build a fire with it in
the center of the plaza, from which the people could all light their
hearths and in this way always have fire.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

Corn clan man finished his altar and decided to try it out. He asked all
of the Corn clan to make prayer sticks and to bring them to the altar.
They did as Antelope Man had done, went out and buried the prayer sticks
and prayed for the katsina to come. It happened that the katsina
received the prayer sticks and the prayer. In the prayer they asked for
the water and fire, and the katsina understood. So they knew they were
to expect these katsina on the fourth day.

All the Corn clan prepared. They washed their heads so they would look
clean and neat. During the 4 days they had purified themselves \[by
vomiting, probably\]. The fourth day was very hot, from early in the
morning. Corn clan nawai had told the Corn clan they were to fast on
this day. A little after sunrise they saw Shuracha in the distance with
smoke around him. He built a series of fires as he approached the
pueblo. There were three other katsina with him, Shu'naata, <span
id="fr_155"></span>[56](oma22.htm#fn_155) Shumaashka <span
id="fr_156"></span>[57](oma22.htm#fn_156) ([pl. 7, fig.
2](oma40.htm#img_pl07b)), and Kumootina. <span
id="fr_157"></span>[58](oma22.htm#fn_157) The latter was a
berdache. <span id="fr_158"></span>[59](oma22.htm#fn_158) They were very
slow and took some time to approach. They were not at all lively and
poked along. When they came near the pueblo, the Corn clan went out to
meet them. Country Chief and his officers acted as guards, keeping other
people away. They made a path with corn meal into the plaza. The Corn
clan had already built a fireplace in the middle of the plaza and
Country Chief had a jar to receive some of the water. Corn clan nawai
asked Shuracha to make a fire for them so their people would always have
fire, and to put some water in the jar so they would always have water.
This katsina was very skillful in making fire and, after the katsina
left, the people gathered the fire. The katsina danced four times (the
usual ceremony) and about noon they left. (Nowadays at Acoma they bring
them into the Corn clan house.)

These katsina dance very slow and sluggishly. They went away like real
katsina. These katsina lived west of Washpashuka.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[69:52](oma20.htm#fr_151) The impersonator of
the Kopishtaiya draws four lines on the ground with a flint between
himself and his mask at the conclusion of the ceremony (White, 1932, p.
87). This is a common Pueblo way of separating one's self from something
sacred or injurious.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[69:53](oma20.htm#fr_152) Informant's note:
This method of getting rid of disease is still followed. When another
village is visited the visitor on leaving brushes sickness off and
leaves it behind. No sand painting is used.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[69:54](oma20.htm#fr_153) Cf. White, 1932, p.
145. Stevenson renders wash'pa "cactus" (Stevenson, 1894, p. 19);
Bandelier, "buffalo grass" \[*Bulbilis dactyloides*\] (Bandelier, 1940,
vol. 2, p. 216); a Sia informant identified it with the Spanish
*chamiso* or saltbush (*Afriplex canescens*) (White, ms.). Saltbush is
commonly called "sagebrush" by many, especially newcomers, in the
Southwest. Cŭkŭ means "corner," as in koamicŭkŭ, "southeast corner," the
winter solstice (White, 1932, p. 85). (See Washpa, Washpashuka, in
Handbook of American Indians.)

<span id="fn_154"></span>[69:55](oma21.htm#fr_154) Cf. White, 1932, p.
79, pl. 2, *c*, pp. 94-96; 1942: Represented at Acoma today by a boy
about 10 years 1932, p. 94). He carries a little pottery canteen and a
firebrand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wanderings, Part XIII](oma22)
