[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Southwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](oma27)  [Next](oma29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

# THE BIRTH OF THE WAR TWINS

After the famine at White House there was a woman living with her
daughter. This girl and her mother were hated by everyone. They took
care of their own field and no one spoke to them or invited them to
their house. But the katsina were very fond of them, as they always made
offerings to them.

It was customary for the people to go out to pick prickly pears, piñons,
and yucca fruit. One season there was plenty of piñons so the daughter
asked her mother if she could go and gather some, but her mother said,
"There is no one to take care of you." The girl insisted, saying she
could go alone. So she took a lunch and followed the other people. She
came to where the people were camped; no one invited her in, so she
camped alone. She passed the night and the next day went out picking
piñons all alone. At noon suddenly someone met her. He was Oshach
Paiyatiuma, Sun Youth, <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197.md) spirit and
ruler of the Sun ([pl. 1, center left](oma34.htm#img_pl01c).md). He spoke
to the girl saying, "Are you picking piñons?" (Such greeting is applied
to what anyone is doing.) "Yes," she said, "but you frightened me." Sun
said, "I will help you pick piñons, but I have brought you two piñons; I
want you to eat them." She asked who he was. He told her, "I am Sun."
She asked where he lived. He said, "Hakuoikuchaha (where the sun
rises)." She thanked him for the piñons.

She ate the piñons after he left, and became pregnant. He had promised
to help her pick piñons, so whenever she picked piñons they increased in
her basket. Seeing that she had more than she could carry, she decided
to return home. So she put the load on her back, but it was not heavy.
When she got home her mother praised her, saying, "You have certainly
gathered lots of piñons." They noticed the others drying piñons on the
roofs of houses, so they did the same. When they spilled out the piñons
they grew into a large pile. The mother and the girl were astonished to
see how many she had brought. The girl told her mother how Sun Youth had
promised aid. She also said that he had given her two piñons to eat and
maybe that explained what had happened. She did not know that she was to
have children from these piñons.

Time passed and her pregnancy became noticeable. Her mother noticed it
and asked if she were pregnant. She said, no, for she knew she had met
no man. The other people noticed her condition too

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

and said she was pregnant. Soon she gave birth to two children. After 4
days they were presented to the Sun and given names. Their names were:
Masewi (the elder) and Oyoyewi (the younger). She wondered how she had
gotten that way and then she remembered eating the two piñons of Sun
Youth.

The babies were very small and did not look handsome, but they grew
rapidly. They were soon crawling and before long began to walk. They
started to speak very early. They began leaving the house and were not
afraid to go out. Their grandmother cautioned them not to go too far
from the village as the animals would get them, but they paid little
attention. They grew very fond of hunting, starting with birds and
rabbits, and when they came home they would speak of the animals they
had seen. They spoke of seeing an animal with horns (rabbit) and asked
grandmother if it was something to eat. Their grandmother told them it
was a rabbit, so they asked how to kill it. They would wander off,
remaining all day away. So their grandmother said, "I'll make you
something to kill it with." She had an old basket she was no longer
using. She took the circular stick forming the rim of the basket and cut
it in two. She tied sinew connecting each end of the two segments.
Giving one of these bows to each boy she said, this is ostiaha, "bow."
(She got the word from the rainbow.) <span
id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_198.md)

The grandmother got some stirring sticks from a bundle for stirring
corn. She took two of these sticks, giving one to each boy, saying, "You
are to use this with the bow. These are istoa, "arrows." She showed them
how to use it. (They had said they had tried to catch the rabbit but it
was too fast.)

Then they went out with their new weapons to hunt. Their father, the
Sun, was always watching them and helped them. It was he who made them
grow fast and mature quickly. So he watched to see how they would use
the bow and arrow. When they saw a rabbit they crawled up to it and shot
at it. The arrow just touched the rabbit, but the rabbit fell. They ran
up and caught the rabbit. It was by the power of the Sun that they had
done this. <span id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_199.md) They took it home and
their grandmother and mother were much pleased. They were so pleased
with their success they were anxious to do more hunting. Sometimes they
played with other children, but they were mean to the other children and
being stronger made them cry. However, they preferred to go alone to the
country to hunt. With the help of the Sun they began to kill larger
game. They easily found deer and antelope which the Sun made come to
them.

Any large animal they killed was too heavy to carry, so they would come
back for their grandmother. She taught them to skin game with

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

obsidian. Grandmother feared they would wander too far, so she tried to
scare them by telling them the lions and bears, <span
id="fr_200"></span>[4](#fn_200.md) would take them off. Instead of being
scared, each time she would name a new fierce animal, they would go out
and look for it, after she described it for them. They kept their
grandmother very busy making buckskin. Soon they began killing large
animals like lions and bears and kept their grandmother busy making
rugs. Once their grandmother told them the bear would eat them, so they
went out to find the bear and see if it was true a bear would try to eat
them. They invented a stick with which to fight if the bear should prove
dangerous. They got a stick of hard wood about 9 inches long and
sharpened at both ends, saying, "With this we will overpower you." They
came to two cubs, so they started to play with them, running them around
till the cubs whined and cried as the boys teased them, poking sticks in
their eyes. But the boys kept watch for the mother. Soon they heard her
coming. The bear charged at them, but they stood their ground. Masewi
was in front and poked the two-pointed stick in the bear's mouth as it
bit at him. The bear stopped and started to paw at its mouth while the
boys stood by and laughed. It was great fun for them. After they had
laughed as much as they wanted, they killed the bear. They had learned
from their grandmother that the chaianyi used bear paws, so they thought
they would take them off as presents for the chaianyi. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[5](#fn_201.md) (This is what Koshari would have done,
as paws for chaianyi may not be taken this way.)

After they grew a little older they heard other children speak of their
fathers. So they went to their mother and asked her why they did not
have someone to know as father, like the other children. So their mother
told them their father did not live there. The boys asked where he lived
and the mother told them at Hakuoikuchaha. They asked how far it was to
that place and how many times the sun would come up before they could
reach it. Their mother said she did not know, that it was where the sun
came up. The boys asked their mother if they could go to visit their
father. She told them they could never get there and it was no use
trying. She did not think they would try. They had always gotten up
early before sunrise. They always prayed early in the morning; they were
well instructed in religious practices. So next morning they got up
early and, after discussing it, they decided to start out to visit their
father. When they saw the sun come up they said, "It's not far, just on
the other side of the mountain." So they started that way, walking fast
so as to get there quickly. They came to the top of the first range and
saw another as far beyond as the first had been.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

While they were talking about this someone spoke to them. It was
kamashku koya (Spider Woman). She said to them, "My grandchildren, are
you going to visit your father?" They were startled and said, "Did
someone speak? Who is it? Who are you?" Spider Woman said, "Here I am."
They looked in that direction and saw a spider on a bush. "Oh, is that
you, Spider? Do you speak?" Spider Woman said, "Yes." So the boys told
her they were going to visit their father. Spider Woman told them they
were not to go yet, but to go tomorrow. Sun knew they were coming so he
sent Spider Woman to meet them and instruct them how to reach him. So
Spider Woman told the boys to follow her. When they came to her house,
Spider Woman said, "This is my house, come on down." So they saw the
spider go in and asked how they could ever go into such a small hole.
Spider said, "Put your foot in, it will be large enough." So the older
boy stepped in and the hole got large and they could see a stairway. He
went on down and called to his brother, saying, "Come on, it is large
enough." When they reached the bottom, there was a room and in it were
many young spiders climbing around on the walls. They were afraid of the
boys. Spider Woman fed the boys. She had just one boy in her family, so
she asked this boy to collect webs from the other spiders, then to spin
them into a ball so that it would reach to the house of Sun Man. Spider
Boy brought back the ball. Spider Woman told the boys to rest for the
night and to get to bed early for they were to start right after
midnight, as they had far to go. So they went to bed early.

At midnight Spider Woman awoke Masewi and Oyoyewi and told Spider Boy to
take the small basket (web) and to put the two boys in it and take them
to their father's house, and to take good care of them and not to leave
them till they arrived. So Spider Boy put them in the basket. The woman
held one end of the ball of spun web and Spider Boy dropped down with
the other, unwinding as they went. The boys were completely lost and did
not know where they were, but they did not care much about that. Before
the sun rose they reached the place where they were going. Spider Boy
took them out of the basket and asked Masewi to let him crawl behind his
ear where he could talk to him. Spider Boy gave them some roots to chew
and rub on their bodies. This medicine was to protect them. "I will be
along also to advise you," said Spider Boy. "You will spit toward the
house where the Sun lives." Sun Youth knew his sons were coming, so he
told his sisters who were with him that they were to arrive. He told
them to wait for them.

The boys came to the base of the house and started to climb up the
ladder. The women saw them and said, "Two boys are coming up. They look
poor and dirty." One of the women said, "Maybe they are our brother's
sons," but the others said," No, they can't be; our brother's

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

children would be much better cared for." When the boys reached the top,
they went right in (like Koshari) without ceremony. Sun Youth had a
kiva, and one of the women went to tell him two boys had arrived, "Maybe
they are your boys. Come up and see them." When the boys got in they
asked for their father. By that time Sun Youth came in saying, "You have
come, my sons." He picked them up and brought them down into the kiva.
Sun Youth had brothers in the kiva and he spoke to them, saying, "My
sons have come here." They laughed at the boys, saying, "Is that the
kind of sons you have?" So one of the men asked if it was true that
those boys were his sons. "If that is so, place them in the north den
where the lions are and see if they come out alive."

So their father put them in with the lions. The boys were used to lions
and were not afraid. Soon the lions began to lick them and act friendly.
The boys played with the lions. One of the men got up to see if they had
been eaten, and reported, "No, they are playing with the lions." So they
were brought out. The man said, "Put them in the west den where the
wolves are--they are always hungry." They did so and nothing happened to
them; they came out alive. They were then placed in the south den with
the lynx, <span id="fr_202"></span>[6](#fn_202.md) with the same result.
Then they were placed in the east den with the bumblebees. The bees got
all over them. One of the boys happened to open his mouth, one of the
bees got in and he bit it, saying, "Oh, brother, they are good, they
taste sweet." So they gathered others, breaking them open and sucking
out the honey.

When the man came to see them he saw no harm had come to them and told
them to come out. He reported the boys had killed a lot of their bees.
They also had in the kiva a tsiwaimitiima <span
id="fr_203"></span>[7](#fn_203.md) filled with hot coals. This is where the
sun got its heat. Other kivas have their altars in this place. They were
going to give the boys a final test. They grabbed the two boys and throw
them into these coals, instead of being burned the boys came out full
grown men, as handsome as their father. Now everyone was convinced that
they were really children of the Sun. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[8](#fn_204.md) They said they would send them back the
next day, but in the meantime they would fix them up to be still more
handsome. The boys had brought their bows and arrows. So the men took
these and improved them. They put sinew backs on the bows and shaped
them better. They put arrowheads and feathers on the arrows and made
lion-skin quivers. They also made sticks (staffs) for them and: told
them they were going to be Country Chiefs. They put this staff in

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

a special pocket in the quiver. They were told that with this staff they
would be made strong and would be protected. (This is still a part of
the quiver. It holds the quiver in shape.) This staff is called
yapi <span id="fr_205"></span>[9](#fn_205.md) ([pl. 16, fig.
1](oma49.htm#img_pl16a).md).

They were told they were to be strong rulers as representatives of the
Sun. So their father also made for them a curved rabbit stick. He told
them not to use it just anytime as it had so much power that they might
destroy something. To use it only when it seemed necessary. If they
killed something and felt sorry about it, they could place the stick
(yapi) or an arrowhead (which was given them) on it and it would come to
life. Their father also made for them eight arrows, four in each bunch,
pointing out the ones they were to use only in an emergency. The other
four could be used for hunting. He told them they were to be allowed
everywhere, in the North, South, West, and East, even in the most sacred
places, <span id="fr_206"></span>[10](#fn_206.md) and they would be
listened to. "Whenever you want to come back to my house, the doors will
be open to you." Then he said, "Now I will give you costumes which will
make you handsome." So he gave them beaded moccasins, girdle, and sash
(bokaι' yo). He gave them arm bands decorated with feathers. He gave
them each a wrist band made of buffalo skin, that they were to wear
always as a protection; they were never to take it off, as their heart
would be in it. He gave them bead necklaces of turquoise and shell.
"With all of these you will look handsome and will have power to
attract." Then he painted them around the eyes with red paint, saying,
"This is the way you will paint up for bravery."

All of this time Spider was coaching them, telling them not to be afraid
in the different tests. Their father also made for them a headdress
called heyeashuni to hang on the back of their hair. They were made a
pouch to be carried by a strap \[bandoleer\] over the shoulder ([pl. 16,
fig. 2](oma49.htm#img_pl16b).md). In this pouch Sun placed a number of
fetishes. <span id="fr_207"></span>[11](#fn_207.md) They were always to
wear this. Finally Sun Youth looked them over and saw they appeared very
handsome. "I have given you all that you need for bravery, good luck,
and power," he said. He said they would stay overnight and go back the
next day, when they were to accompany him with the sun. Spider Boy told
them to agree. So they were taken from the kiva into the other room and
given food. They passed the night there.

The next day Sun Youth took his sons and put them high in the sun. The
sun began to rise and came over the horizon. Their father was talking to
them and pointing things out to them as they looked

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

down. They asked many questions, so that nothing would puzzle them. So
their father said, "Now we are near your house." Sun Youth knew how they
had come and knew that Spider Boy was still with them. So Spider Boy put
them in a basket and their father held the other end of the web and it
hung down. They told their father that they would do all that he had
asked them and would follow his advice. As before, the boys were lost,
not knowing how far they had come. They came right to the house of
Spider Woman. The boys thanked Spider Woman and told her they had seen
their father. So they said a prayer for her and left.

They returned to their house. Their grandmother and mother had been
praying for them and feared they were lost and the lions had gotten
them. They looked everywhere for them but could not find them. They were
not recognized by their mother as they were now handsome grown men.
Their grandmother did not believe they were the same boys, but they told
how they had met their father and how he had given them names. After
their grandmother and mother heard this they believed. The boys took off
their costumes and hung them up, for they had been told not to wear them
until they needed them. They made up ordinary costumes for themselves,
and they continued to live as common people in the village.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_197"></span>[92:1](oma28.htm#fr_197.md) There are several of
these Ocatc Paiyatyamo, anthropomorphic sun gods, brothers, who live at
Sunrise Place. Each day one of them takes the sun across the
heavens.--L. A. W.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[93:2](oma28.htm#fr_198) Ho·ctya·'ka (bow.md);
k’acT<sup>y</sup>a·'tsi (rainbow).--L. A W.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[93:3](oma28.htm#fr_199.md) Acoma hunters pray to
the Sun to help them (White, 1932, p. 102).

<span id="fn_200"></span>[94:4](oma28.htm#fr_200.md) Variant: "There are
lots of cko·yo \[giants\] roaming around this country," she would tell
them, might catch you and eat you." "Oh, we're not afraid!" the boys
would say.--L. A. W.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[94:5](oma28.htm#fr_201.md) The war god twins in a
Sia myth skinned a bear's paws (Stevenson, 1894, p. 47). See also White,
1942, for an account of a medicine man skinning a bear.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[96:6](oma28.htm#fr_202.md) Variant: In the west
den were wolves that are always hungry, in the south den, snakes. some
of them rattlesnakes. "The Twins made pets of the snakes, too. When the
Paiyatyamos came back they found the rattlesnakes crawling around the
boys' necks and faces and not hurting them at all.".--L. A. W.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[96:7](oma28.htm#fr_203.md) See [p.
19](oma07.htm#page_19.md).

<span id="fn_204"></span>[96:8](oma28.htm#fr_204.md) Variant: When the
Twins stood up with their father the other "Sun Youths tried to pick
their own brother out from among the three, but they looked so much
alike they could not do it. Finally they said, "All right! These boys
are your sons!"

<span id="fn_205"></span>[97:9](oma28.htm#fr_205.md) Each officer in a
Keresan pueblo has a little staff, a stick or cane of office, called
ya·'Bi (White, 1932, p. 129, 4, 4, c; 1935, pp. 38, 47).

<span id="fn_206"></span>[97:10](oma28.htm#fr_206.md) The War chiefs are
allowed anywhere, in any ceremony, in the pueblo.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[97:11](oma28.htm#fr_207.md) Informant's note: The
pouch (koskatuna) contains ant gravel and a few hairs from scalps. The
gravel keeps away the disease and bad luck that the hair might carry. A
fighting ant never goes back, and is very strong. (The Ant chaianyi uses
a bat dried out. The bat is laid on the ant hill. The ants eat the flesh
of the bat, then they grow wings and fly away.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Selection of Officers](oma29.md)
