[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm037)  [Next](etm039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI.

§ 1. All sacred writings are to be saved out of a conflagration,

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

whether they be read in \[on the Sabbath\] or not, <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151) and in whatever language they be
written, they must be taken care of. Why are they not read in? In order
not to neglect \[miss\] the discourse in the Medrash. The cover of a
book is to be saved along with the book, and the cover \[case\] of the
Tephilin, even though there be money in it. Whither may they be carried
for safety? Into any place that is completely inclosed. Ben Bethera
saith, "Even if the place be not completely, inclosed \[but is partly
open on one side, they may carry it in and save it out of a
conflagration\]."

§ 2. Food for \[the\] three \[Sabbath\] meals is to be saved; for man,
that which is fit for human food; and for beasts, that which is fit for
animal \[food\]. How is this to be understood? If the fire broke out on
the Sabbath-evening, food for three meals is to be saved; if in the
morning, food for two meals is to be saved; and if at noon, food for one
meal is to be saved. R. José saith, "At all times food for three meals
is to be saved.

§ 3. A basket filled with loaves may be saved, even though it contain
\[food sufficient for\] one hundred meals; also a \[large\] fig-cake,
and a cask of wine. It is lawful to call to others, "Come and save for
yourselves \[whatever you can\];" if those who save are knowing, <span
id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_152) they will settle accounts with the owner
after the Sabbath. <span id="fr_153"></span>[3](#fn_153) Whither may
they \[the articles saved\] be carried for safety? Into any court that
is combined by Erub; <span id="fr_154"></span>[4](#fn_154) Ben Bethera
saith, "Even into one that is not so combined."

§. 4 Thither he may carry out all vessels required \[for his meals that
day\]. He dresses \[himself\] in as many \[garments\] as he can put on,
and girds round him as much as he can gird. R. José saith, "\[He must
not put on more than\] eighteen \[pieces of ordinary\] wearing-apparel;
and he may go back and again dress in, and put on \[as much as he can\]
and carry it out, and call to others, 'Come, and save with me' \[help me
to save\]."

§ 5. R. Simeon ben Nonos saith, "They may spread a goat-skin

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

over a chest, or a box, or a cupboard, which has caught fire, as it will
only get singed. It is also lawful to erect a partition with any kind of
vessels, be they full \[of water\] or empty, to prevent the fire from
spreading. R. José forbids this being done with new crockery-ware filled
with water, as this \[kind of vessels\] cannot stand the heat, but would
burst, and extinguish the fire.

§ 6. If a heathen comes to put out the conflagration, he is not to be
told, "extinguish," or "do not extinguish," because it is not obligatory
on them \[Israelites\], to make him observe the Sabbath-rest. But if a
minor \[an Israelitish child\] wishes to extinguish \[the
conflagration\], they must not allow him \[so to do\], as it is
obligatory on them \[Israelites\] to make him observe the Sabbath-rest.

§ 7. A dish may be put over the light, to prevent the beam \[of the
roof\] from catching fire; also \[a dish may be put\] over the ordure
\[of poultry\], \[on account of\] children; and over a scorpion, that it
may not bite. R. Jehudah said, "It happened that such a case was brought
before R. Jochanan ben Sachai, at Arob, when he remarked, 'I doubt
whether I ought not to have inflicted a sin-offering' \[on the
accused\]." <span id="fr_155"></span>[5](#fn_155)

§ 8. If a heathen has lighted a candle, an Israelite may use the light;
but if \[the heathen has lighted it\] on purpose for the Israelite, it
is prohibited \[to use it\]; if a heathen has drawn water to give to his
cattle to drink, the Israelite may give his cattle to drink after him;
but if \[the heathen has drawn the water\] on purpose for the Israelite,
it is prohibited \[to use it\]. If a heathen has made a step to descend
\[from a ship\], an Israelite may descend \[thereon\] after him, but if
\[the heathen has made it on purpose\] for the Israelite, it is
prohibited to use it. It once happened that Rabbon Gamaliel and the
elders arrived in a ship, and a heathen made a step by which he
descended, and Rabbon Gamaliel and the elders descended after him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[59:1](etm038.htm#fr_151) All the books of the
Bible \[except the Pentateuch\] are here designated: those read on the
Sabbath are the Prophets; those not read, the Kethubim (Hagiographa).

<span id="fn_152"></span>[59:2](etm038.htm#fr_152) Alive to their own
interests.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[59:3](etm038.htm#fr_153) They sell him at a
low rate the articles of food which he abandoned, and they saved; thus
they obtain a compensation, which they could not claim for assistance
rendered on the Sabbath; and his loss is lessened.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[59:4](etm038.htm#fr_154) Vide Treatise Erubin.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[60:5](etm038.htm#fr_155) Because he caught, on
the Sabbath-day, a scorpion, that did not actually threaten him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](etm039)
