[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm085)  [Next](etm087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

§ 1. If a witness was unknown, others were sent with him to testify
concerning his character. Formerly, evidence as to the appearance of the
new moon was received from any one; but when the heretics corrupted
\[the witnesses\], <span id="fr_479"></span>[1](#fn_477) it was
ordained, that evidence should be received only of those whose good
character was well known.

§ 2. Formerly fires were lighted on the tops of the mountains \[to
announce the appearance of the new moon\]; but when the Samaritans led
the nation into error, <span id="fr_480"></span>[2](#fn_478) it was
ordained that messengers should be sent out.

§ 3. In what manner were these mountain fires lighted? They brought long
staves of cedar wood, canes, and sticks \[or branches\] of the olive
tree, also the coarse threads, or refuse of flax, which were tied on the
top of them with twine; with these they went to the top of the mountain,
and lighted them; and kept waving them to and fro, upward and downward,
till they could perceive the same repeated by another person on the next
mountain, and thus on the third mountain, &c.

§ 4. Whence did these mountain fires commence? From the Mount of Olives
to Sartaba, <span id="fr_481"></span>[3](#fn_479) from Sartaba to
Grophinah, from Grophinah to Hoveran, from Hoveran to Beth Baltin; they
did not cease to wave the flaming brands at Beth Baltin to and fro,
upward and downward, until the whole country of the captivity <span
id="fr_482"></span>[4](#fn_480) appeared like a blazing fire. <span
id="fr_483"></span>[5](#fn_481)

§ 5. There was a large court in Jerusalem called Beth Yangzek, where all
the witnesses met, and where they were examined by the Beth Din. Great
feasts \[or treats\] were made for them there, in order to induce them
to come often. At first they did not stir from

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

that place all day \[on the Sabbath\], <span
id="fr_484"></span>[6](#fn_482) till the elder Rabbon Gamaliel ordained
that they might go 2000 cubits \[amoth\] on every side; <span
id="fr_485"></span>[7](#fn_483) and not only these, but also the
midwife, going to give her professional assistance, and those who
proceed to another . place to assist the inhabitants in case of fire,
attack of enemies, inundation, or to save people from under the ruins of
fallen buildings, are considered as inhabitants of that place, and may
go from thence \[on the Sabbath\] two thousand \[amoth\] cubits on every
side.

§ 6. In what manner was the examination of the witnesses conducted? The
first pair were always examined first. The eldest of them being
introduced first, the following questions were put to him: "Tell us in
what form you saw the moon; was it with her horns turned towards the
sun, or away from it? To the north or to the south \[of the sun\]? What
was her elevation on the horizon? Towards which side was her
inclination? What was the width of her disk?" If he said towards the
sun, his evidence went for nothing. The second witness was then brought
in, and examined; if the evidence was found to agree, their testimony
was received as valid. The remaining pairs of witnesses were then
superficially examined, not because there was any necessity for their
evidence, but only not to disappoint them, <span
id="fr_486"></span>[8](#fn_484) and also to encourage them to come
another time.

§ 7. The chief of the tribunal \[‏בית דין‎\] then said, the feast of the
new moon is mekoodash \[consecrated\]; and all the people said after
him, "Mekoodash, mekoodash." Whether the new moon had been seen at the
proper time or not it was consecrated. R. Eleazar, son of Zadok, said,
"If it had not been seen at its proper time, it was not consecrated,
because it had already been consecrated in heaven."

§ 8. Rabbon Gamaliel had, on a tablet, and on the walls of his room,
various delineations of the figure and aspect of the moon, which he
shewed to ignorant witnesses, asking them, "Was it of this figure, or of
that?" It happened once, that two witnesses came and said, "We saw the
moon in the eastern part of the heavens in the morning, and in the
western part in the evening." R. Johanan ben Nourri declared them to be
false witnesses; but when they came to

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jamnia \[‏יבנה‎\],
Rabbon Gamaliel received their evidence as valid. Two other witnesses
came and said, "We saw the moon on its proper day, <span
id="fr_487"></span>[9](#fn_485) but could not see it on the next evening
of the intercalary day;" <span id="fr_488"></span>[10](#fn_486) and R.
Gamaliel received them: when R. Dosah, son of Arkenaz, said, "They are
false witnesses; for how can they testify of a woman being delivered
\[on a certain day\], when, on the next day, she appears yet with every
sign of pregnancy?" <span id="fr_489"></span>[11](#fn_487) Then R.
Joshua said unto him, "I approve your opinion."

§ 9. Upon this Rabbon Gamaliel sent him \[R. Joshua\] word, saving, "I
order you <span id="fr_490"></span>[12](#fn_488) to appear before me on
the day of Atonement, according to your computation, with your staff and
\[purse of\] money in your hand." <span id="fr_491"></span>[13](#fn_489)
R. Akivah went to him \[R. Joshua\], and found him grieving, he said
then to him, "I can prove that all Rabbon Gamaliel has done is \[well\]
done, for it is said, 'These are the feasts of the Lord, holy
convocations which *ye* shall proclaim,' either at their proper time, or
not at their proper time, *their* convocations are to be considered as
holy festivals." When he \[R. Joshua\] came to R. Dosah ben Arkenaz, the
latter told him, "If we are to reinvestigate the decisions of the
tribunal of Rabbon Gamaliel, we must also reinvestigate the decisions of
all the tribunals of justice which have existed from the time of Moses
till the present day; for it is said, (Exod. xxiv. 2), 'Moses, Aaron,
Nadab, Abihu, and seventy elders went up \[to the Mount\].' Why were not
the names of the elders also specified? To inform us, that every three
men in Israel that form ‏בית דין‎ \[tribunal of justice\] are to be
respected in an equal degree with the tribunal of Moses." Then did R.
Joshua take his staff and money, and went to Jamnia, to Rabbon Gamaliel,
on the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

very day on which the Atonement would have been, according to his
computation; when Rabbon Gamaliel arose, and kissed him on his \[fore\]
head, saying, "Enter in peace, my master and disciple! My master—in
knowledge; and my disciple—since thou didst obey my injunction."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_477"></span>[159:1](etm086.htm#fr_479) Bribing them to give
false evidence to mislead the Sanhedrin.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[159:2](etm086.htm#fr_480) By their lighting
these firebrands or beacons on the mountains at wrong times, to make a
mockery of, or to mislead, the Jews.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[159:3](etm086.htm#fr_481) This and the
following are the names of the various mountain stations.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[159:4](etm086.htm#fr_482) Babylon.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[159:5](etm086.htm#fr_483) As every Jew used to
go on his roof waving a blazing torch.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[160:6](etm086.htm#fr_484) If they arrived on
that day, when, according to law, they could only go four "amoth."

<span id="fn_483"></span>[160:7](etm086.htm#fr_485) See Treatise Erubin,
chap. IV.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[160:8](etm086.htm#fr_486) As it would afflict
them to be sent away without being examined by the Beth Din, and to have
taken their journey in vain.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[161:9](etm086.htm#fr_487) On the night of the
thirtieth day of the month.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[161:10](etm086.htm#fr_488) The thirty-first
day since the first of last month, and the second or intercalary day of
the feast of the new moon.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[161:11](etm086.htm#fr_489) In the original,
"with her belly up to her teeth."

<span id="fn_488"></span>[161:12](etm086.htm#fr_490) Rabbon Gamaliel was
prince of the Captivity, and chief of the Sanhedrin.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[161:13](etm086.htm#fr_491) It is unlawful to
carry a purse on the day of Atonement; but, according to the computation
of R. Joshua, the day of Atonement would be a day too late; for, as he
rejected the evidence of the witnesses because they assigned \[in his
opinion\] too short a time for the appearance of the moon after its
conjunction with the sun, he would be obliged to add an intercalary day,
which would cause the day of Atonement to happen a day later than its
proper day; as Rabbon Gamaliel knew, from astronomical observations,
that the period between the conjunction and appearance of the moon
occurs sooner at one time than at another; and that, therefore, the
evidence of the witnesses might he true, and ought not to be rejected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](etm087)
