[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm014)  [Next](etm016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

§ 1. A *bald plot* of vineyard must, according to Beth Shammai, "measure
twenty-four square amoth;" and, according to Beth Hillel, "sixteen
square amoth of any other kind of seed is to be sown therein." The
*exterior space* of the vineyard \[independent of the plot in
question\], must, according to Beth Shammai, "measure sixteen;" and,
according to Beth Hillel, "twelve square amoth." What is \[understood\]
by \[the expression\], a *bald plot* of vineyard? Such

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

part of the vineyard as is bare of vines. If it be less than sixteen
square amoth, no other kind of seed may be sown therein; but if it
measure that superficies, a sufficient vacancy is allowed for the
cultivation of the vines growing near it, and the rest \[of the ground\]
may be sown on.

§ 2. What is \[meant by the expression\], the *exterior space* of the
vineyard? The space between the vineyard, \[the ground on which the
vines are set\], and the fence \[hedge which surrounds it\]. If that
space be less than twelve square amoth, no other seed is to be sown
therein; but if it measure that superficies, a vacant space must be
allowed for the cultivation of the vines growing near it, and the rest
\[of the ground\] may be sown on.

§ 3. R. Jehudah saith, "This \[last-mentioned space\] is only the
*fence* of the vineyard. What then does actually constitute the exterior
space \[in question\]? The angle between two vineyards. What is
understood by the expression, a fence? A hedge ten hands high, or a
trench \[ditch\], ten hands deep and four wide."

§ 4. A partition \[wall\] of canes is considered a fence, provided the
space between each cane be less than three hands wide, so that a young
kid cannot pass through the opening. If there be a breach in the fence
to the extent of ten amoth, it is considered as a gate \[entrance\].
Should a greater portion of the fence be broken down \[than ten hands
wide\], it is unlawful to sow or plant towards \[in\] the breach. If
there are several breaches in the fence, should the portion still
standing \[erect\] be greater than that broken down, it is permitted;
but should the portion broken down be greater than that standing
\[erect\], it is prohibited \[to plant or sow in or towards the
breaches\].

§ 5. If a man set five vines in a single row, that, according to Beth
Shammai, "forms a vineyard;" whereas, according to Beth Hillel, "a
vineyard is not formed by less than two rows." \[Consequently\], if a
man sow \[any kind of seed\] within the four amoth \[next adjoining the
vines\], Beth Shammai hold, "that he has consecrated \[rendered the
produce unlawful\], if there be one row of vines;" whereas Beth. Hillel
hold "that he has not consecrated \[rendered the produce unlawful\]
unless there be two rows of vines." <span id="fr_54"></span>[3](#fn_54.md)

§ 6. If two vines be set so as to face two vines, and the fifth to form
a tail, \[point or angle\], (thus, <span id="img_02100"></span>
![](img/02100.jpg)), they constitute a vineyard.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Two vines facing
two vines, and one vine between three, (thus, <span
id="img_02200"></span> ![](img/02200.jpg)), or two facing two, and one
in the middle, (thus, <span id="img_02201"></span> ![](img/02201.jpg)),
do not constitute a vineyard, as that can only be formed by two facing
two, and the fifth \[vine\] standing out \[as a tail or angle\].

§ 7. If a man have planted one row of vines on his own ground, and there
be another row on the adjoining field of his neighbour, should there be
\[between the two rows\] a private footpath or a public thoroughfare, or
a fence less than ten hands high, the two rows must be \[considered as\]
joined, \[forming one vineyard\]; but if the fence be higher than ten
hands, the two rows are not to be \[considered as\] joined. R. Jehudah
saith, "If the vines be trained above the fence they must be
\[considered as\] joined \[forming one vineyard\].

§ 8. If a man plant two rows of vines, \[two in each row\], he must not
sow any seed in the clear vacant space between them, unless that be
eight amoth wide. If he has planted three \[such\] rows, he must not sow
any seed in the clear vacant space between them, unless that be sixteen
amoth wide. R. Eleazar ben Jacob said, on the authority of Hananiah ben
Hakinai, "Even though the central row should have been destroyed, man
must not sow any seed in the clear \[vacant space\] between the
remaining \[two\] rows, unless it be sixteen amoth wide; although, had
but two rows been planted at first, the vacant interval need only have
been eight amoth wide."

§ 9. If a man have planted his vineyard at intervals of sixteen amoth,
he is at liberty to sow any kind of seed in it. R. Jehudah said, "It
happened at Zalmon, that a man had set his vineyard at intervals of
sixteen amoth. One year he trained the branches of every two rows in one
direction, and sowed in the opposite direction; and the next year he
trained the branches in another direction, and sowed on the ground that
had lain fallow: The matter was brought before the sages, and they
sanctioned \[his manner of proceeding\]." R. Meir and R. Simeon say, "He
who sets his vineyard at intervals of eight amoth, is also at liberty to
sow in it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[21:3](etm015.htm#fr_54.md) This difference of
opinion arises from the circumstance, that single vines require no
greater allowance of ground than a square of six hands, whereas, in a
vineyard, each vine requires an allowance of four square amoth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](etm016.md)
