[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm063)  [Next](etm065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI.

§ 1. The following acts necessary for the sacrifice of the paschal
offering, supersede the command of abstaining from work on the Sabbath,
namely, the slaughtering thereof, the sprinkling of its blood, the
removal of its entrails, and the burning of them with incense; but the
roasting of it, as also the washing of its entrails, do not supersede
the Sabbath. To carry and bring it beyond the Sabbatical limits, or to
remove a tetter \[or spreading eruption\] thereon, are acts which do not
supersede the Sabbath. R. Eleazar says they do supersede it.

§ 2. For, said R. Eleazar, this is surely a logical sequence—if
slaughtering an animal which is prohibited on the Sabbath on account of
‏מלאכה‎ <span id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_303) is allowed in this
instance \[of the passover\], and does supersede the Sabbath; does it
not follow that these, <span id="fr_304"></span>[2](#fn_304) which are
only acts disallowed on account of ‏שבות‎ <span
id="fr_305"></span>[3](#fn_305) should also be permitted? R. Joshua
answered and said, "The laws concerning the festival shall prove the
contrary; for many things prohibited on the Sabbath, as ‏מלאכה‎, are
nevertheless permitted on the festival: <span
id="fr_306"></span>[4](#fn_306) whilst those which}

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

are prohibited on account of infringement of Sabbatical rest \[‏שבות‎\]
are also prohibited on the festival." <span
id="fr_307"></span>[5](#fn_307) R. Eleazar replied, "How is this,
Joshua? What sort of proof is it to infer from purely voluntary
acts <span id="fr_308"></span>[6](#fn_308) to one which is enjoined by
the express command of the Holy Law?" Then R. Akivah answered, "The
sprinkling <span id="fr_309"></span>[7](#fn_309) shall prove it; for
that also is an express law, and is not otherwise prohibited on the
Sabbath, than on account of ‏שבות‎, it does not, however, supersede the
Sabbath; do not, therefore, wonder that these, which also are express
commands of the law, and are prohibited on the Sabbath, only on account
of ‏שבות‎, should also not supersede the Sabbath." Then R. Eleazar
replied, "I also draw the same conclusion with respect to the
sprinkling, <span id="fr_310"></span>[8](#fn_310) and say, if
slaughtering, which as ‏מלאכה‎, or work prohibited by the Holy Law to he
done on the Sabbath, is here allowed to supersede that command, <span
id="fr_311"></span>[9](#fn_311) does it not follow that the sprinkling
of an impure person, which is only prohibited on account of ‏שבות‎
should also be prohibited thereon?" But R. Akivah replied, "Rather
conclude the reverse, for if the sprinkling, which is only prohibited on
account of ‏שבות‎ does nevertheless not supersede the Sabbath, does it
not follow that slaughtering, which is prohibited, as ‏מלאכה‎ should
also \[*a fortiori*\] *not* supersede the Sabbath?" Then R. Eleazar said
to him, "Akivah! thou wouldst thus annul that which is written in the
Holy Law, <span id="fr_312"></span>[10](#fn_312) 'between the evenings
at its appointed season,' whether that be a week or Sabbath day." R.
Akivah then said, "My honoured teacher! pray, adduce a text of the law
which prescribes a particular and appointed time for these acts, <span
id="fr_313"></span>[11](#fn_313) even as it does in respect to the
slaughtering of the paschal sacrifice." The following rule did R. Akivah
\[therefore <span id="fr_314"></span>[12](#fn_314)\] lay down—every work

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[‏מלאכה‎\] done
in respect to the paschal sacrifice, which could or might he done to it,
previous to the Sabbath, does not supersede the Sabbatical laws, but as
the slaughtering of the paschal sacrifice could not have been done on
any preceding day, it does supersede the Sabbath.

§ 3. When is it allowed to bring a festive offering \[in addition\] to
the paschal sacrifice? When it \[the paschal offering\] is sacrificed on
a week-day: when those that offer it are in a state of legal
cleanliness, and when it is insufficient for the number of those that
are appointed to eat it. But when it is sacrificed on a Sabbath, when it
is sufficient for the persons appointed to eat it, or when these are in
a state of legal defilement, <span id="fr_315"></span>[13](#fn_315) no
festive offering may be brought in addition to the paschal sacrifice.

§ 4. The festive offering might be brought of the flock, of cattle,
lambs, or goats, and might be brought either of male or female
\[cattle\]; it might also be eaten during two days and one night.

§ 5. When a person has brought on the Sabbath a paschal sacrifice not as
such, he is bound to bring a sin-offering in expiation. If he did
slaughter other sacrifices as a passover-offering, if they are of a
nature so as not to be a proper paschal sacrifice, <span
id="fr_316"></span>[14](#fn_316) he is guilty; <span
id="fr_317"></span>[15](#fn_317) but if they are proper for that
purpose, R. Eleazar declares him guilty, but R. Joshua absolves
him. <span id="fr_318"></span>[16](#fn_318) For thus R. Eleazar argues,
"If a person, when he has changed the name of the paschal sacrifice,
which sacrifice he may slaughter on the Sabbath, is deemed to be guilty;
does it not follow that when he had changed the names of other
sacrifices which are *already* prohibited to be offered thereon as such,
that he must *a fortiori*, be considered guilty?" To this R. Joshua
answered, "You cannot apply what is affirmed in respect to the
sacrifice, when it was changed to that which it is *un*lawful to offer
on the Sabbath, to other sacrifices where the name has been changed to
what *i*s lawful." R. Eleazar replied, "The offerings brought for the
whole congregation \[of Israel\] shall prove \[my assertion,\] for it is

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

lawful to offer them on the Sabbath under their proper name; yet whoever
brings other offerings under their denomination is declared to be
guilty." Then R. Joshua answered, "You cannot apply what is affirmed in
respect to the offerings of the whole congregation which have a
determinate number, to the paschal sacrifice which has no determinate
number." R. Meir said, "He also who offers on the Sabbath other
offerings under the name of those of the congregation is absolved."

§ 6. If a person slaughtered the paschal sacrifice for those who may not
eat thereof, or for persons who are not numbered and appointed to eat
it, and for uncircumcised or unclean persons, he is guilty; but if he
had slaughtered it for those who may, and also for those who may not eat
thereof; for those who are numbered to eat, and for those who are not;
or for circumcised as well as for the uncircumcised; or for clean as
also for unclean persons, he is absolved. If he has slaughtered it, and
a blemish was found, he is guilty; <span
id="fr_319"></span>[17](#fn_319) but if, after being slaughtered, it was
found to be ‏טריפה‎ \[prohibited to be eaten on account of inward
blemishes\], he is not guilty. If, after slaughtering it he became
acquainted that the owners had withdrawn themselves from it, or had
died, or become polluted, he is absolved, because when he slaughtered
it, it was under lawful circumstances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[110:5](etm063.htm#fr_300) On which it is not
lawful to use these sticks.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[110:6](etm063.htm#fr_301) See Leviticus iii.
*passim*.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[110:7](etm063.htm#fr_302) This was the open
space between the walls of the court of women, and the ‏סורג‎, or
trellis work in the Temple.—See Treatise Middoth, c. II. § 3.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[110:1](etm064.htm#fr_303) It is essential to
bear in mind here the difference between ‏מלאכה‎ and ‏שבות‎, as all the
arguments pro and con turn on that difference. By the first expression
is understood all *work* which is prohibited on the Sabbath, by direct
authority of the Holy Law; and by the second, the laws which the Rabbins
have instituted for the better preservation of Sabbatical *rest*.—See
farther, Treatise Sabbath.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[110:2](etm064.htm#fr_304) Namely, the acts
mentioned in the preceding section.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[110:3](etm064.htm#fr_305) See note 1.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[110:4](etm064.htm#fr_306) Such as cooking,
lighting a fire, splitting wood, &c.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[111:5](etm064.htm#fr_307) Such as the
prohibition of moving from one ‏תחום‎ into another, excepting by means
of Erub, as mentioned in Treatise ‏ביצה‎, which prohibition is of
Rabbinical origin.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[111:6](etm064.htm#fr_308) The cooking of food
on the festival.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[111:7](etm064.htm#fr_309) Of a person who had
contracted legal pollution by contact with a dead body, whose seventh
day, when he was to be sprinkled for his purification happened on
Sabbath the 14th of Nissan, and who could not eat of the passover
sacrifice before he had been thus rendered clean.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[111:8](etm064.htm#fr_310) That is, I dispute,
by the same mode of argument and syllogism, your inference, and say,
that this sprinkling *ought* to supersede the Sabbatical command in
respect to this work, in order that the unclean person may be purified
by means of the sprinkling, to enable him to partake of the paschal
sacrifice.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[111:9](etm064.htm#fr_311) For it is agreed
that the slaughtering of the paschal sacrifice, if the 14th happen on
the Sabbath, is a lawful act.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[111:10](etm064.htm#fr_312) See Numbers xii.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[111:11](etm064.htm#fr_313) Mentioned § 1. of
this chapter.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[111:12](etm064.htm#fr_314) Since there is no
command which prescribes a fixed time, either for the <span
id="page_112">p. 112</span> cases mentioned in the preceding § or for
the sprinkling of the defiled person, the talmudical decision is
therefore like R. Akivah's. Compare c. XIX. § 1. of Treatise ‏שבת‎; c.
IV. § 8. of Treatise Rosh Ashana; and c. XI. of Treatise ‏מנחות‎.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[112:13](etm064.htm#fr_315) This may be done
under certain circumstances enumerated in the next chapter, § 6.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[112:14](etm064.htm#fr_316) If, for instance,
the sacrifice consisted of a calf, ox, or female of any kind of cattle;
because the Holy Law orders the paschal sacrifice to be of a male lamb
or kid of one year old.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[112:15](etm064.htm#fr_317) And is obliged to
bring a sin-offering as expiation.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[112:16](etm064.htm#fr_318) From bringing the
said offering.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[113:17](etm064.htm#fr_319) For as it is an
express command of the Holy Law that the paschal sacrifice should be
"perfect and without blemish," he ought to have had it examined
previously. This, of course, relates to external blemishes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](etm065)
