[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm096)  [Next](etm098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

§ 1. Inhabitants of a town who have sold the open \[or marketplace\]

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

of the town, <span id="fr_591"></span>[1](#fn_588) may buy for that
money a synagogue. The money obtained by the sale of a synagogue, they
may apply to the purchase of an ark \[to keep the rolls of the Holy Law
in\]; for that obtained by the sale of such an ark, cloaks or wrappers
for the rolls of the Holy Law may be purchased; for the produce of such
wrappers, sacred books <span id="fr_592"></span>[2](#fn_589) may be
purchased; for the produce of sacred books, a roll of the Holy Law may
be purchased; but if they had sold a roll of the Holy Law, it will not
be lawful to apply that money for the purchase of \[other\] sacred
books, nor wrappers for the proceeds of sacred books, nor an ark for the
proceeds of wrappers, nor a synagogue with the proceeds of an ark, nor
an open \[or market\] place with the money obtained by the sale of a
synagogue, <span id="fr_593"></span>[3](#fn_590) and even so in respect
to any surplus fund. According to R. Meir, it is unlawful to sell sacred
public property to private individuals, because its sanctity becomes
thereby lowered: but the sages replied, "If so, it would be also
prohibited for a large town to sell sacred things to a smaller one."

§ 2. A synagogue may, according to R. Meir, only be sold on condition
that it may at any time be repurchased by the original owners; but the
sages permit it to be sold permanently, only it may not be sold to be
applied to the following occupations: namely, as a bathing-house, as a
tanning place \[or pit\], as a diving-bath, and as a laundry. R. Jehudah
says, "It may be sold on the condition that it be made an open court,
and then the purchaser is at liberty to turn it to what purpose he
pleases."

§ 3. R. Jehudah teaches also, that no funeral orations may be delivered
in a synagogue which had become ruinous, nor may it be used as a
rope-walk, <span id="fr_594"></span>[4](#fn_591) nor to spread nets
therein \[to dry, &c.\], nor to spread fruit on its roof, nor to use it
as a short cut, <span id="fr_595"></span>[5](#fn_592) as it is said
(Lev. xxvi. 31), "I will bring your sanctuaries into desolation," that
is, they remain sanctuaries even in their desolation. If grass

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

spring up therein, it may not be pulled up, that the view may contribute
to the affliction \[of the beholder\].

§ 4. When the new moon of Adar happens on a Sabbath, the section
Shekalim (Exod. xxx. 11), is to be read; if it happen on any other day,
that section must he read on the preceding Sabbath, and nothing
additional is read on the following Sabbath. On the second, the section
‏זכור‎ (Deut. xv. 14), is to be read; on the third, that of the red
heifer, ‏פרה‎ (Num. xix); on the fourth, that of ‏החדש‎ (Exod. xvii); on
the fifth, they return again to the regular order. <span
id="fr_596"></span>[6](#fn_593) The regular order \[of Aphtoroth\] is
also to be interrupted on the feast of new moon, on that of dedication,
on Pureem, <span id="fr_597"></span>[7](#fn_594) and on public
fast-days, also on the fast of the standing men. <span
id="fr_598"></span>[8](#fn_595)

§ 5. On \[the first day of\] Passover, the section in Leviticus relative
to the festival must be read; on the feast of weeks, that commencing,
"Seven weeks shall ye count," &c. (Deut. xvi); on the feast of new year,
the section commencing, "In the seventh month, on the first day of the
month" (Num. xxix. 1); on the day of atonement, that of ‏אחרי מות‎ (Lev.
xvi.); on the first day of the feast of tabernacles, the section in
Leviticus relative to the festivals must be read; and on the other days
of that festival, the offerings for each day (Num. xxix. 17).

§ 6. On the feast of dedication, the section of the offerings of the
princes (Num. vii.) must be read; on Pureem, that of ‏ויבא עמלק‎ (Exod.
ix. 8); on the feast of new moon, ‏ובראשי חדשיכם‎ (Num. xviii. 11); on
the fast-days for the standing men, the history of the creation (Gen.
i., &c.); <span id="fr_599"></span>[9](#fn_596) on fast-days, the
section containing the blessings and maledictions (Lev. xxvi. 3), the
denunciations therein contained must be read without interruption,
namely, one man must read the whole \[chapter\]. On Mondays and
Thursdays, and on the Sabbath afternoon, they shall read the section of
the law in its regular order, but these readings are not available to
reduce the regular number: <span id="fr_600"></span>[10](#fn_597) for it
is said, Lev. xxiii. 44, "Moses declared

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

unto the children of Israel the appointed festivals of the Lord," whence
it is inferred, that each section must be read on the appointed festival
to which it refers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_588"></span>[186:1](etm097.htm#fr_591) Which is
occasionally used to pray in (see Treatise Taanith, c. ii. § 1), and
which, therefore, has some degree of sanctity.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[186:2](etm097.htm#fr_592) Under this term are
comprehended all the Sacred Writings, the Pentateuch excepted.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[186:3](etm097.htm#fr_593) The rule is, that
the money must be applied to the purchase of an object having a higher
degree of sanctity than that possessed by the object from the sale of
which the money was derived.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[186:4](etm097.htm#fr_594) Nor indeed for any
other work; but the Mishna mentions a rope-walk as a business most
likely to be carried on in a large ruinous building.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[186:5](etm097.htm#fr_595) That is, passing
through it to save ground.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[187:6](etm097.htm#fr_596) Of the Aphtoroth;
which, on other occasions, must be connected with the subject of the
first section read, but during the mentioned weeks, the subject of the
Aphtorah is that of the last, or additional sections.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[187:7](etm097.htm#fr_597) Which *formerly*
might happen on the Sabbath: compare our Note 5, [p.
181](etm095.htm#page_181).

<span id="fn_595"></span>[187:8](etm097.htm#fr_598) Vide Treatise
Taanith.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[187:9](etm097.htm#fr_599) See the last chapter
of Taanith.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[187:10](etm097.htm#fr_600) That is, the three
men then called, and the section read to them, are not to be deducted
from the section of the following week, as having already been read, but
the section is to be recommenced on the following Sabbath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](etm098)
