[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm092)  [Next](etm094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV.

§ 1. At three periods of the year, the priests shall raise their hands
\[to bless the people\], in each prayer, \[and\] four times \[in one of
them\], in the morning, additional, afternoon, and closing \[or
concluding\] prayers. \[The three mentioned periods are\] on the
fast-days, on the fast of the standing men, <span
id="fr_546"></span>[1](#fn_543) and on the day of atonement. <span
id="fr_547"></span>[2](#fn_544)

§ 2. These are ‏מעמדות‎, standing men \[and this is the cause of their
institution\]. It is written (Numb. xxviii. 2), "Command the children of
Israel, and say unto them, My offering, viz. my bread," &c. How can an
offering be brought for a person without his standing near it \[at the
time of its being sacrificed\]? <span id="fr_548"></span>[3](#fn_545)
Therefore did the elder prophets institute twenty-four "mishmaroth" \[or
divisions of orders\]; each mishmarah had always a "mahamad" \[or
section of standing men\], composed of cohanim \[priests\], Levites, and
Israelites, stationed at Jerusalem. <span
id="fr_549"></span>[4](#fn_546) When it came to the turn of each
mishmarah to go up \[from their cities to the Temple\], the priests and
Levites went up to Jerusalem, and the Israelites who belonged to that
mishmarah, <span id="fr_550"></span>[5](#fn_547) assembled in \[the
synagogues of\] their cities to read the history of the creation \[viz.
the 1st chapter of Genesis\].

§ 3. The standing men used to fast four times in the week, viz. from
Monday till Thursday \[inclusive\], but they did not fast on Friday, on
account of the honour due to the Sabbath, nor on Sunday,

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

that they might not \[suddenly\] pass over from repose and pleasure to
weariness and fasting, which might endanger their lives. On Sunday they
read \[the sections\] ‏בראשית‎ and ‏יהי רקיע‎ (Gen. i. 1, &c. and *v*.
6, &c.); on Monday ‏יהי רקיע‎ (*v*. 6, &c.) and ‏יקוו המים‎ (*v*. 9,
&c.); on Tuesday ‏יקוו המים‎ (*v*. 9, &c.) and ‏יהי מאורות‎ (*v*. 14);
on Wednesday ‏יהי מאורות‎ (*v*. 14) and ‏ישרצו המים‎ (*v*. 20); on
Thursday ‏ישרצו המים‎ (*v*. 20) and ‏תוצא הארץ‎ (*v*. 24); on Friday
‏תוצא הארץ‎ (*v*. 24) and ‏ויכלו‎ (ii. 1–4). A long section was read by
two persons, and a short one by one only; that is to say, in the morning
and additional prayers, but at the afternoon prayers they entered \[the
synagogue\] and read the mentioned sections by heart, even as the
"Shemang" is read. On Friday \[afternoon\] they did not go \[to the
synagogue\] at all, in honour of the Sabbath.

§ 4. On those days on which "Hallel" is sung, the standing men used not
to attend during the morning prayer \[in Jerusalem\]. When there was an
additional offering ‏קרבן מוסף‎, they did not assemble at the time of
the closing prayer. When a wood-offering <span
id="fr_551"></span>[6](#fn_548) was brought, they did not assemble
during the afternoon prayer. Thus saith R. Akivah; but Ben Azzai said to
him, "Rabbi Joshua taught as follows: When there was an additional
offering, the standing men did not assemble during the afternoon
prayers; when a wood-offering was brought, they did not assemble at the
time of the closing prayer." Then R. Akivah changed \[his opinion\] and
taught like Ben Azzai.

§ 5. The times \[of the delivery\] of wood \[for the altar\] by priests
and people, were on nine appointed days; on the 1st of Nissan, the
family Arah ben Jehudah \[delivered\]; <span
id="fr_552"></span>[7](#fn_549) on the 20th of Tamuz, the family of
David ben Jehudah; on the 5th of Ab, the family of Parhos ben Jehudah;
on the 7th, the family of Jonadab ben Rechab; on the 10th, the family of
Sinha ben Benjamin; on the 15th, the family of Zatoo ben Jehudah, and
with them priests and Levites, and all those who did not know from what
tribe \[they were descended\], also the family of Gonebé Eli, and that
of Kosehai Kesignot; and on the 20th, the family Pachat Moab ben
Jehudah; on the 20th of Elul, the family Adeen ben Jehudah; on the 1st
of Tebet, the family Parhos, for the second time. There was no meeting
of the standing

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

men on the 1st of Tebet; because "Hallel" was sung, and an additional
sacrifice and wood-offering were brought \[on that day\].

§ 6. Five \[calamitous\] events happened to our ancestors on the 17th of
Tamuz, and five on the 9th of Ab. On the 17th of Tamuz, the tables of
the Holy Law were broken; <span id="fr_553"></span>[8](#fn_550) on that
day the continual sacrifice ceased, <span
id="fr_554"></span>[9](#fn_551) and the city of Jerusalem was stormed;
on it Opostamos burned the Holy Law, and placed an idol in the Temple;
on the 9th of Ab, it was decreed that our ancestors should not enter the
Holy Land; <span id="fr_555"></span>[10](#fn_552) on the same day the
first and second Temples were destroyed <span
id="fr_556"></span>[11](#fn_553) the city of Bethar was taken, <span
id="fr_557"></span>[12](#fn_554) and the site of \[Jerusalem\] was
ploughed \[like a field <span id="fr_558"></span>[13](#fn_555)\]. From
the 1st of Ab a person is bound to lessen his participation in joyous
occasions \[till after the fast on the 9th\].

§ 7. During the week in which the 9th of Ab happens, it is prohibited to
a person to shave himself, or to wash \[his clothes <span
id="fr_559"></span>[14](#fn_556)\], but on Thursday it is allowed in
honour of the Sabbath. <span id="fr_560"></span>[15](#fn_557) On the day
before the 9th of Ab, a person may not partake of two \[different
kinds\] of cookeries \[or dishes\], eat meat, or drink wine thereon.
Rabbon Simeon ben Gamaliel says "\[It is sufficient to\] alter \[from
one's customary mode of living\]." R. Jehudah considers it obligatory to
turn over the bed places, <span id="fr_561"></span>[16](#fn_558) but the
sages do not agree in this.

§ 8. Rabbon Simeon hen Gamaliel says, "Never were more joyous festivals
in Israel than the 15th of Ab and the day of atonement, for on them the
maidens of Jerusalem used to go out dressed in white garments—borrowed
ones, in order not to cause shame to

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

those who had them not of their own;—these clothes were also to be
previously immersed, <span id="fr_562"></span>[17](#fn_559) and thus
they went out and danced in the vineyards, saying, Young men, look and
observe well whom you are about to choose \[as a spouse\]; regard not
beauty \[alone\], but rather look to a virtuous family, for
'Gracefulness is deceitful, and beauty is a vain thing, but the woman
that feareth the Lord, she is worthy of praise' (Prov. xxxi. 3); and it
is also said (v. 31), 'Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her
own works praise her in the gates.' And thus is it said \[in allusion to
this custom\], 'Go out, maidens of Jerusalem, and look on King Solomon,
and on the crown wherewith his mother has encircled \[his head\] on the
day of his espousals, and on the day of the gladness of his heart'
(Cant. iii. 11); 'the day of his espousals,' alludes to the day of the
gift of the law, and 'the day of the gladness of his heart,' was that
when the building of the Temple was completed." <span
id="fr_563"></span>[18](#fn_560) May it soon be rebuilt in our days.
Amen!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_543"></span>[176:1](etm093.htm#fr_546) See our seventh
note, [p. 172](etm091.htm#page_172), and the following section of this
Mishna.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[176:2](etm093.htm#fr_547) The wording and
collocation of sentences in this section of the Mishna is so obscure as
to appear contradictory and unintelligible, without much interpolation
and alteration of the collocation of the sentences. The following
appears to be its true sense:—"At three periods of the year, which are
the fast-days, the fasts of the standing men, and on the day of
atonement, the priests shall raise their hands thrice in each prayer,
viz. in the morning, afternoon, and closing prayer, and in one of these
\[viz. the day of atonement, on which the ‏מוסף‎, or additional prayer
is said\] *four* times."

<span id="fn_545"></span>[176:3](etm093.htm#fr_548) To pray that the
sacrifice may be favourably accepted.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[176:4](etm093.htm#fr_549) To officiate in the
temple, each in their proper station and appointed service.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[176:5](etm093.htm#fr_550) Namely, the
remainder, to whom, owing to the distance of the towns in which they
lived, from Jerusalem, it was inconvenient to leave their places to go
to Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[177:6](etm093.htm#fr_551) See the next
section.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[177:7](etm093.htm#fr_552) The families here
mentioned had the privilege of furnishing wood for the altar of
burnt-offerings, having, at the rebuilding of the Temple after the
Babylonian captivity, spontaneously supplied the altar with wood of
their own. Compare Nehemiah vi.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[178:8](etm093.htm#fr_553) See Exod. xxiv. and
xxxii. from whence it appears that Moses must have descended after his
forty days’ stay on the mountain on the 17th of Tamuz, because that is
the exact number of days from the 7th of Sivan.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[178:9](etm093.htm#fr_554) For want of cattle,
the city being then closely besieged.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[178:10](etm093.htm#fr_555) See Numbers xiv.
27, &c.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[178:11](etm093.htm#fr_556) The first Temple by
Nebuchadnezzar, and the second \[also on the 9th of Ab\] by Titus.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[178:12](etm093.htm#fr_557) By the Emperor
Adrian, when many thousands of Jews \[580,000\] were massacred.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[178:13](etm093.htm#fr_558) As predicted
(Jeremiah xxvi. 18), this took place about the same time as the
preceding, when T. Rufus, governor of Judea, under Adrian, ploughed up
the site of the Temple \[and the city of Jerusalem\]. See Jost's History
of the Israelites, vol. iii. book x. chap. 10, p. 240.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[178:14](etm093.htm#fr_559) Till after the
fast.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[178:15](etm093.htm#fr_560) This is when the
9th of Ab happened on a Friday, which cannot now happen in our present
calendar.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[178:16](etm093.htm#fr_561) It was customary
among the ancient Israelites to turn over the couches on which they sate
in the day and slept on at night, on an occasion, and as a sign, of
mourning.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[179:17](etm093.htm#fr_562) For fear of
pollution of ‏נדה‎, being borrowed clothes.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[179:18](etm093.htm#fr_563) Moses brought down
the second tables, and the Temple was dedicated by Solomon on the day of
atonement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](etm094)
