[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm059)  [Next](etm061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

§ 1. As long as it is lawful for the priests to eat of the
heave-offering, <span id="fr_255"></span>[1](#fn_255) \[the Israelite\]
may give \[non-consecrated articles of leaven\] to his domestic or wild
animals, or to fowls; he may also sell it to strangers, <span
id="fr_256"></span>[2](#fn_256) or derive benefit from it in any other
way; but when that time is passed, it is unlawful to derive any benefit
whatever from it, not even to use it as fuel, or to light therewith an
oven

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

or stove. <span id="fr_257"></span>[3](#fn_257) R. Jehudah says, "The
removal of leaven must be effected by its being burned:" but the sages
say, "It must be crumbled into small particles, cast forth to the wind,
or thrown into the sea."

§ 2. Leaven belonging to a stranger, which has been in existence during
the Passover, may be used after that festival, but not when it belonged
to an Israelite, because it is said (Exod. xiii. 7), "Neither shall
there be any leaven seen in all thy quarters."

§ 3. When a stranger has lent money to an Israelite upon the security of
leavened articles, they may be applied to use after the Passover; but
when an Israelite has lent money to a stranger upon leavened articles,
they may not be applied to use after the Passover; leaven that has been
covered by fallen ruins, must be considered as banished and removed;
Rabbon Simeon ben Gamaliel says, "Only then, when it is so much covered
that a dog cannot drag it out."

§ 4. If any person should eat leavened heave-offering during the
Passover through error, he shall pay the principal, and the fifth part
in addition; but if he did it wilfully, he is free of the obligation of
repayment, and of paying for the value of the wood <span
id="fr_258"></span>[4](#fn_258) in case of the heave-offering being
unclean.

§ 5. A person discharges his obligation <span
id="fr_259"></span>[5](#fn_259) with the following articles on
Passover:—with cakes made of wheat, barley, spelt, oats, and rye; also
with ‏דמאי‎ \[corn which it is doubtful whether it was tithed\], with
the first tithe, of which the heave-offering has been taken, and with
the second tithe, and consecrated things which have been redeemed.
Priests,—with the cake of the dough \[‏חלה‎\], and the heave-offering,
but not with that which is yet mixed or untithed \[‏טבל‎\], nor with the
first tithe of which the heave-offering has not been taken, nor with
unredeemed second tithe, and consecrated things not ransomed; also, not
with the cakes of thank-offering, and the thin cakes of the Nazarite's
offering, if they had prepared them for their own use; but if for public
sale, they may discharge their obligation therewith.

§ 6. The obligation of eating bitter herbs on the Passover, may be
discharged with the following herbs: namely, with lettuce, wild

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

endive, and garden endive, <span id="fr_260"></span>[6](#fn_260) with
‏חרחבינה‎, <span id="fr_261"></span>[7](#fn_261) and bitter
coriander, <span id="fr_262"></span>[8](#fn_262) either fresh or in a
dried state, but not if pickled, boiled, or cooked in any way: they may
also be combined to the size of an olive, and the obligation is
discharged if the stalks of them only had been used; and also when it is
doubtful whether they were tithed, or are of the first tithe of which
the heave-offering was taken, or of the second tithe, or of redeemed
consecrated things.

§ 7. It is prohibited to soak bran on the Passover to feed fowls; but it
is permitted to pour boiling water thereon; a woman may not soak the
bran which she takes with her to the bath, but must use it in a dry
state to rub her body therewith. A person may not masticate grains of
wheat to put it \[as a poultice\] on his wound, because they will become
leavened.

8\. It is unlawful to put flour in ‏חרוסת‎, <span
id="fr_263"></span>[9](#fn_263) or in mustard, but if it were done, it
must be immediately eaten; but R. Meir prohibits it. The paschal
sacrifice may not be boiled in any liquid, or juice of fruit; but it is
permitted to moisten it \[after it has been roasted\], or to dip it \[in
any liquid when eaten\]. Water which a baker uses \[to cool his hands
while kneading ‏מעות‎ unleavened-cakes\] must be thrown away
immediately, because it becomes leaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_255"></span>[99:1](etm060.htm#fr_255) This is according to
the opinion of R. Gamaliel, mentioned above, chap. I. § 5.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[99:2](etm060.htm#fr_256) Wherever the word
"strangers" is mentioned in this chapter, it refers to those who are not
Israelites.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[100:3](etm060.htm#fr_257) That is, when used
to prepare food in. The word ‏כירים‎ signifies "open ovens" or ranges,
and ‏תנור‎ "closed ovens."

<span id="fn_258"></span>[100:4](etm060.htm#fr_258) This will be
understood by comparing chap. VI. of Treatise Terumoth, or of
Heave-offerings.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[100:5](etm060.htm#fr_259) Of eating
unleavened-bread on the first night of the Passover.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[101:6](etm060.htm#fr_260) Original, ‏תמכה‎.
According to De Pomis in "Zemach David," it is the *cardus marrubium;*
others consider it to be the green tops of the horseradish.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[101:7](etm060.htm#fr_261) A kind of nettle;
*urtica*, according to Landau's Dictionary.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[101:8](etm060.htm#fr_262) Or, according to De
Pomis, *lactuca agrestis*, or the wild lettuce.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[101:9](etm060.htm#fr_263) This is a mixture of
vinegar, almonds, and spice, which the ancients used to dip their food
in; flour was sometimes added to thicken it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](etm061)
