[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm000)  [Next](etm002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> circumstances which gave rise to the
translation of the following portions of the Mishna, deserve a brief
record in the annals of Jewish History, and are as follows:—

During one of the public discussions that took place at the vestry hoard
of the Sphardim Synagogue, on the subject of revising the liturgy used
in that Synagogue, and for improving its Public Worship, the opponents
to alteration took shelter under the authority of the Mishna, and this
led the advocates of improvement to express their long entertained
doubts as to the divinity of the Oral Law. These gentlemen, on being
taunted with using arguments derived from partial extracts furnished by
Christian writers, urged the necessity of being supplied with an English
translation from persons of their own faith. In consequence of this
application, the meeting passed a resolution authorising the Rev. D. A.
De Sola to translate the Mishna. Mr. De Sola having at the same time
been empowered to call in a coadjutor, made choice of the Rev. M. J.
Raphall, and the following translation (comprising such parts of the
work as more immediately relate to Israel in their present dispersion)
is the production of their joint labours. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

There can be no doubt that to the Israelite, who believes in the
divinity of an Oral Law—who thinks the salvation of his

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

soul depends on such belief—but to whom the Mishna in the Hebrew is a
sealed book—there can be no doubt that to such a man, if he be
*rational* as well as pious, the present translation must be highly
acceptable, as mere belief in the contents of a book not understood can
confer no claim to heavenly reward. To his co-religionist, equally
unacquainted with the Hebrew, who thinks that a doctrine involving the
soul's salvation or perdition should rest, not on presumptive but on
demonstrative proof, and whose scepticism is grounded on the
*expressive* silence of God, of Moses, and of the Prophets, as to the
existence of *two* divine codes—equally acceptable to him must be a
publication which throws light on a subject of such deep spiritual
interest. And as the entire Mishna has been translated by our
continental brethren into German, it is to be hoped that the whole will
be rendered into English for the enlightenment of the British Jew, who
will thereby be enabled to read a book said to contain God's explanation
of the Written Law. We find the holy pages of the Pentateuch, the
Prophets, and the Hagiography, open for his instruction, comfort, and
consolation; and the same free access should be given to pages
containing so large a portion of the Oral Law, for which a Divine origin
is also claimed.

<span class="small">*Tebet*, 5603.—*December*, 1842.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[iii:1](etm001.htm#fr_0) The Treatise Nidda not
being suited to the refined notions of the English reader, has not been
printed; and for the same reason the Hebrew in some places has been
substituted for the English. In Treatise Yebamoth it has been deemed
necessary to omit, for similar reasons, chapters VI. and VIII., as well
as several sections in the same Treatise; the omissions being indicated
by asterisks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](etm002)
