[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm134)  [Next](etm136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER I.

§ 1. It is necessary that a messenger who, from a foreign country, <span
id="fr_982"></span>[1](#fn_977) brings a Get \[from a husband to his
wife\], should declare, "This document was written and signed in my
presence." <span id="fr_983"></span>[2](#fn_978) Rabbon Gamaliel saith,
"\[It is necessary that this declaration should be made\] even \[when it
was brought\] from \[the villages\] Rakam and Chagar." R. Eleazar saith,
"Even from the village of the Luddites to Lud \[Lydda\]." <span
id="fr_984"></span>[3](#fn_979) But the sages hold, "That only when a
person brings a Get from a place beyond sea, or carries it thither, that
he is bound

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

to declare, 'It was written and signed in my presence.' And the same
must be declared by a messenger who, in a country beyond sea, brings a
Get from one province to another." Rabbon Simeon ben Gamaliel saith,
"Also by one who only brings it from one lordship \[jurisdiction\] to
another \[jurisdiction\]."

§ 2. R. Jehudah \[considers as beyond the limits of Palestine\] from
Rakam and beyond \[Rakam included\] all places towards the east, from
Ascalon and beyond \[including that place\] every part towards the
south. From Acco and beyond \[Acco included\] every place towards the
north. <span id="fr_985"></span>[4](#fn_980) But R. Meir is of opinion
"That Acco must, in respect to Get, be considered as an integral part of
the Holy Land."

§ 3. Whoever brings a Get within the limits of the Holy Land, need not
declare, "It was written and signed before me," but if any demur is
made, its validity must be proved by the signatures \[of the attesting
witnesses\]. Should a messenger bring a Get from a place beyond sea, and
is not able to testify that it was written and signed in his presence,
its validity must be proved by the signatures of the attesting
witnesses.

§ 4. Both Gittin of women and deeds of manumission for slaves, are alike
in respect to the person who brings them from, or carries them to \[a
distant country\], <span id="fr_986"></span>[5](#fn_981) and this is one
of the points in which the laws respecting Gittin and deeds of
manumission are alike.

§ 5. All legal documents, on which the attestation of a Samaritan
witness appears, are void, Gittin and deeds of manumission excepted. It
once happened that a Get was brought to Rabbon Gamaliel in the village
Otnay, which was attested by Samaritans, which he nevertheless declared
to be a valid instrument. All legal documents made in courts of justice
of non-Israelites are valid, even when the attesting witnesses are not
Israelites, Gittin and deeds of manumission excepted. R. Simeon declares
these also to be valid, the contrary was only mentioned to apply to the
case when they were prepared in an extra judicial manner.

§ 6. When a person says, "Give this Get to my wife, or this deed of
manumission to my slave," he can, if he repents of his purpose, take it
back. <span id="fr_987"></span>[6](#fn_982) Such is the dictum of R.
Meir, but the sages hold

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "That this is only
allowable with a Get, and not with a deed of manumission, because it is
permitted to confer advantages on a person in his absence, but not to
deprive him of any advantage, except in his presence; for, if a person
refuses to maintain his slave, he may do so, but he may not refuse
maintenance to his wife." He \[R. Meir\] thus argued to them: "Does he
not surely disqualify both his slave and wife from the right of eating
heave?" <span id="fr_988"></span>[7](#fn_983) But they \[the sages\]
replied, "It is because the slave is the priest's property \[and is
considered in the same light as his cattle\] that he has a right to eat
of the heave." <span id="fr_989"></span>[8](#fn_984) Should a person
say, "Give this Get to my wife, and this deed of manumission to my
slave," and dies \[before it was delivered\], they may not be delivered
to the parties mentioned after his decease; but if he said, "You are to
give a maneh to A.B.," and dies, that money must be paid \[to the
legatee\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_977"></span>[280:1](etm135.htm#fr_982) In the original
‏מדינת הים‎, "provinces or countries \[beyond\] sea." All countries with
the exception of Palestine are thus called, but it relates more
especially to the countries situated beyond its line of sea-coast or
western frontier, which is bounded by the Mediterranean.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[280:2](etm135.htm#fr_983) Because it is
supposed that it is only in Palestine where it is generally known that a
Get, to be a valid instrument, must be written and signed in the
presence of the messenger, if it is intended to send it to another
place.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[280:3](etm135.htm#fr_984) The mentioned places
are on the eastern frontier of Palestine, and are known in Scripture by
the names of *Kadesh* and *Bared* \[see Targum on Gen. xvi. 14\]. The
two last-mentioned places are also situated near the northern frontier
of Palestine.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[281:4](etm135.htm#fr_985) It was unnecessary
to assign the western limit, as the Mediterranean forms its natural and
well-defined boundary.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[281:5](etm135.htm#fr_986) Viz., that this
messenger must make the above mentioned declaration, "This document was
written and signed in my presence."

<span id="fn_982"></span>[281:6](etm135.htm#fr_987) That is, before the
slave or woman had received it.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[282:7](etm135.htm#fr_988) In case the husband
or master is a priest, when the slave is disqualified to eat heave the
moment he is manumitted, and the wife as soon as she is divorced;
consequently a disability is imposed on them, and both are here
damnified.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[282:8](etm135.htm#fr_989) And the advantage he
gains by his manumission, by being raised in the scale of human society,
does amply compensate for the prohibition of eating heave after becoming
a freeman. Consequently \`no disadvantage is imposed on him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](etm136)
