[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm138)  [Next](etm140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V.

§ 1. Compensation in damages is to be levied from the best field of an
aggressor; for a creditor, from medium property <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1](#fn_1022) of the debtor; and for the payment of
a Ketubah, from that which is least in value. R. Meir saith, "The latter
is also to be paid from medium property."

§ 2. They cannot be levied from mortgaged property, <span
id="fr_1028"></span>[2](#fn_1023) while there is yet uncharged property
to levy from, although that should be the least valuable. The payment of
claims against the estate of orphans, can only be enforced by the sale
of their least valuable property.

§ 3. Payment for usufructum, <span id="fr_1029"></span>[3](#fn_1024) for
the improvement of the land, or for the maintenance of a wife and her
daughters \[of a former marriage\], <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[4](#fn_1025) is not to be levied from mortgaged
property. <span id="fr_1031"></span>[5](#fn_1026) All this was ordered
for the maintenance of social order, and an oath is not to be imposed on
a finder <span id="fr_1032"></span>[6](#fn_1027) for the same reason.

§ 4. When the estate of orphans is administered by the father of a
family, <span id="fr_1033"></span>[7](#fn_1028) or that the father of
the orphans had nominated a person as guardian to them, these persons so
acting are bound to tithe the fruit belonging to the orphans. A guardian
nominated by the father of the orphans, must swear to his due
administration of the estate; but one appointed by the tribunal is not
bound to do so. But Abbah Saul says, "It is just the reverse." <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[8](#fn_1029) When a person had

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

caused fruit belonging to another to become \[legally\] unclean, or
mixes them with heave, or his wine with other wine used for idolatrous
libations; if he did it inadvertently, he is absolved from paying for
the damage he has caused; but if he did it wilfully, he is liable.
Priests who wilfully render sacrifices ‏פיגול‎ \[unacceptable\], are
bound to make good the damage \[to the owner\].

§ 5. R. Jochanan ben Gudgodah testified, "That it is lawful to divorce
by a Get a deaf and dumb woman, who had been given in marriage by her
father; and that an Israelite \[orphan\] girl, who in her minority had
been married to a priest, may eat heave; also, that if she dies first,
her husband becomes her heir; also, that the owner of a stolen beam
which was used in a large ornamental building, can only claim its
present value, to facilitate the repentance of transgressors; also, that
a stolen sin-offering, the theft of which was not generally known, does
expiate, which was thus ordered for the benefit of the altar." <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[9](#fn_1030)

§ 6. The right of Sicaricon <span id="fr_1036"></span>[10](#fn_1031) did
not prevail in Judea during the war, <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[11](#fn_1032) but it did afterwards; as for
instance: When an Israelite bought a field from a Sicaricon \[forcible
intruder\], and afterwards from the rightful owner, the bargain is void;
but it is effective if he bought it first of the rightful owner, and
then of the Sicaricon. When a person bought a field from a husband, and
then of his wife, <span id="fr_1038"></span>[12](#fn_1033) the bargain
is void; but if he bought it first of the wife, and subsequently from
the husband, it is effective. Such was the first decision. But a
subsequent tribunal decided, that a person who bought a field from a
Sicaricon must pay a fourth part of the price paid for the purchase to
the rightful owner of the field. This is when it is not in the power of
the latter to repurchase his field; but when that is the case, the
rightful owners are to be preferred to any one. Ribi constituted a Beth
Din, which decided that a field which had remained for a twelvemonth in
the power of a forcible intruder \[Sicaricon\]

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

may be sold to any one, but the purchaser must pay a fourth part to the
former rightful owner.

§ 7. A deaf and dumb person may enter into engagements by contract, by
means of mutual signs \[between the contracting parties\]. Ben Beterah
saith, "Where the contract affects moveable property only, the mutual
motion of the lips suffices." When children have arrived at the age of
discernment, <span id="fr_1039"></span>[13](#fn_1034) their purchase or
sale of moveable property stands good.

§ 8. The following ordinances were made for the sake of promoting of
peace: That a Cohen should read first in the Holy Law, then a Levite,
and an Israelite afterwards, for the sake of peace; the Erub must be
placed in the same house in a court where it had always been put, for
the sake of peace; the well nearest to the water-course must be filled
first, for the sake of peace. Taking out of nets or traps belonging to
other people, <span id="fr_1040"></span>[14](#fn_1035) \[any animal,
bird, or fish\] therein caught, was made constructive felony, in order
to preserve peace. R. José saith, "It is a real felony." What a deaf and
dumb or foolish person or minor finds \[is his own\], and the taking it
from him was made a constructive felony, for the preservation of peace.
R. José saith, "It is a real felony." It was also ordained, in the case
of a poor person beating down olives from the top of a tree, that the
fruit so dropped is his property, and whoever takes it from him will be
considered guilty of a constructive felony. R. José saith, "It is a real
felony." Non-Israelite poor must not be prevented to glean in the fields
of Israelites, from gathering the forgotten. \[corn ears\], and from the
produce of the corner of the field \[reserved for the poor\], for the
sake of peace.

§ 9. One woman may lend to another who is suspected \[not to observe
properly the laws\] of the Sabbatical year, <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[15](#fn_1036) a flour-sieve, a winnow, a handmill,
and a stove, but she may not assist her to winnow or to grind. The wife
of a ‏חבר‎ (i.e. one learned in, and observant of, the law\] may lend to
the wife of an unlearned person, a flour-sieve or a winnow, and may aid
her to winnow, to grind, or to sift; but as soon as water is poured over
the flour, she may not further assist her, for those who transgress the
law are not to be aided in their transgressions. All the mentioned
permissions have been granted for the sake of peace only. A heathen
\[who works in

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

the fields\] during the Sabbatical year may be comforted, <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[16](#fn_1037) but not an Israelite; <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[17](#fn_1038) and the former may be greeted at any
time, for the sake of promoting concord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[290:1](etm139.htm#fr_1027) That is, of medium
value, that which is neither the best nor the worst property of the
debtor.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[290:2](etm139.htm#fr_1028) Or as others
explain it, from property already sold, and which has become subject to
another.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[290:3](etm139.htm#fr_1029) This treats of a
case where a person took forcible possession of the field of another,
then sold it to a third, who cultivated it and used the produce. When
after this the rightful owner is reinstated by a legal decision in his
favor, he need only pay to the third possessor his outlay for the
improvement of the estate, leaving the latter for the repayment of his
purchase-money, &c. to his remedy at law against the person who
fraudulently sold another man's property to him.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[290:4](etm139.htm#fr_1030) When her husband
agrees to do so in the Ketubah.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[290:5](etm139.htm#fr_1031) See Note 2, above.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[290:6](etm139.htm#fr_1032) To swear that he
did not find more than he owned he did find.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[290:7](etm139.htm#fr_1033) That is, one who
was not nominated as executor, but acts as such.

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[290:8](etm139.htm#fr_1034) Because a person
appointed executor does it only either for the sake of his former
friendship with the testator, or for the benefit of the orphans, and if
an oath were to be imposed, many would refuse to act, and the orphans
suffer in consequence.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[291:9](etm139.htm#fr_1035) That the priests
might not suppose they had been eating profaned offerings, and refuse to
minister, by which means the altar would remain unoccupied.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[291:10](etm139.htm#fr_1036) From the Latin
*Sicarii*. It treats here of an Israelite who bought a field of a
heathen, who, by violence and threatening to murder the rightful owner,
had forcibly ejected him from his property.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[291:11](etm139.htm#fr_1037) That is, during
the great war against the Romans under Vespasian and Titus, when lawful
authority was powerless to shield those whom the barbarous conquerors
murdered and violently despoiled.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[291:12](etm139.htm#fr_1038) Who has a lien on
that field by her marriage contract.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[292:13](etm139.htm#fr_1039) At the public
readings in the synagogue.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[292:14](etm139.htm#fr_1040) This treats of
nets where the animals or fish were not completely caught, and might
have escaped.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[292:15](etm139.htm#fr_1041) Compare Treatise
Shebiith, chap. V.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[293:16](etm139.htm#fr_1042) By wishing him
good success, &c.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[293:17](etm139.htm#fr_1043) Because he is a
transgressor, in labouring in his field during the Sabbatical year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](etm140)
