[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm114)  [Next](etm116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

§ 1. Beth Shammai hold that the right of refusal \[‏מיאון‎\] <span
id="fr_745"></span>[1](#fn_740) is permitted to those who are betrothed
only; but Beth Hillel extend it to those \[minors\] also who had been
married \[under the nuptial canopy\]. <span
id="fr_746"></span>[2](#fn_741) According to Beth Shammai \[the right of
refusal\] is only available against the husband, but not against the
brother-in-law \[in case of *Yeboom*\]; but Beth Hillel permit it
against either. Beth Shammai will only allow \[the refusal\] when it was
made in the presence of the husband; but Beth Hillel permit it in his
absence, as well as in his presence. Beth Shammai require the refusal to
be made \[formally\] before a Beth Din \[tribunal\]; but Beth Hillel
consider a refusal not made before a tribunal sufficient. Beth Hillel
said to Beth Shammai, "A girl may thus, during her minority, refuse four
or five men." But the school of Shammai replied, "The daughters of
Israel are not to be thus loosely dealt with, therefore, as soon as such
a girl expressed her refusal, she must wait \[to be again betrothed\]
till she has attained her majority, or expressed her refusal of the man
to whom she is betrothed, <span id="fr_747"></span>[3](#fn_742) and
marries another immediately.

§ 2. What minor \[orphan girl\] is hound to make a formal refusal? She
who, with her consent, was married by her mother or brothers, but when
she had been married. by them without her consent, she need not, to
annul this marriage, pronounce a formal refusal. R. Hanina ben Atignos
saith, "Any child who was then <span id="fr_748"></span>[4](#fn_743)
incapable of taking care of the money, &c. \[given her as her marriage
bond\] is also not required to make a formal refusal." R. Eleazar saith,
"The act of a minor is a nullity, and such a girl can only be considered
in the same light as one who had been seduced. Should she be the
daughter of an Israelite, and he a priest, she may not eat heave, but if
she is a priest's daughter, and he an Israelite, she may eat thereof."

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

§ 3. R. Eleazar ben Jacob saith, "When the prolonged stay of such a
woman <span id="fr_749"></span>[5](#fn_744) \[who had been divorced from
her husband\] is owing to affection for him, she must be considered as
his wife; but if it did not proceed from that cause, <span
id="fr_750"></span>[6](#fn_745) she is not to be considered as his wife.

§ 4. When such a female has once formally expressed her refusal \[of the
man she was betrothed to\], he may marry her near relatives, and she may
marry his, and she is not disqualified from being married to one of the
priesthood; but if he divorced her, he may not marry her, nor she his
near relatives, and she is disqualified to be married to a priest. If he
divorced her, and then desired to take her back, when she formally
refused him, and married another from whom she was subsequently
separated, or became a widow, the first husband may take her back; but
if she had expressed her refusal, and the man took her again and then
divorced her, upon which she was married to another, and became a widow,
or was divorced, then the first husband may not take her back; the rule
is when a *Get* was given after a declaration of refusal, he may not
take her back, but he may do so if the refusal was posterior to the
*Get* in point of time.

§ 5. When a woman who expressed her refusal of a man to whom she was
betrothed, was married to another, and divorced by him; then again to a
third, whom she refused, and thereupon married a fourth, by whom she was
divorced; then again to a fifth, of whom she expressed a refusal: then
is she not allowed to return to any of the men who had divorced her, but
she may return to one of those whom she had refused.

§ 6. If a person divorced his wife and took her back, his brother may
\[at his decease without issue\] marry her by *Yeboom;* but R. Eleazar
prohibits this. Thus also may an orphan who had been divorced, and taken
back, be married by *Yeboom;* but R. Eleazar prohibits this also. A
female who, in her minority had been given in marriage by her father,
and received a *Get*, is to he considered an orphan, even during her
father's life. All agree, however, that in case he \[i.e. the man from
whom she was divorced\] took her back she may not \[at his desire\] be
married to his brother by *Yeboom*.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

§ 7. When two brothers are married to two sisters who are minors and
orphans, and the husband of one dies, then the widow is released from
*Yeboom*, as the sister of the brother-in-law's wife; also when both
females are deaf and dumb. When one of the sisters has attained her
majority, and the other is yet a minor, should the minor's husband die,
she is released from *Yeboom*, as sister of the brother-in-law's wife.
R. Eleazar says, "When the husband of the elder sister dies, the
youngest sister must be instructed to refuse." <span
id="fr_751"></span>[7](#fn_746) Rabbon Gamaliel saith, "If she refuses,
it is well; if not, let her wait till she attains her majority; and then
her sister will be released as a wife's sister." R. Joshua saith, "Such
a man deserves commiseration, on account of his own wife, and his
sister-in-law, because he must part with his wife by a *Get*, and is
bound to receive *Chalitzah* from his sister-in-law.

§ 8. When a person who had married two orphans <span
id="fr_752"></span>[8](#fn_747) in their minority dies, then the
connexion which the surviving brother may have with one of them, or the
*Chalitzah* he received front one of them, does also release her rival.
The same applies in respect to deaf and dumb females; <span
id="fr_753"></span>[9](#fn_748) but if one of the females is a minor,
and the other is deaf and dumb, connexion with one does not release her
rival. When one is sound, \[i.e. neither deaf or dumb\], and the other
deaf and dumb, then does connexion with the sound one release her who is
deaf and dumb, but not on the reverse case. If one has attained her
majority, and the other is a minor, connexion with the eldest releases
the younger, but not in the reverse case.

§ 9. When the husband of two orphans who are minors dies, and that the
brother on whom the obligation of *Yeboom* devolved, had connexion first
with one and then with the other, or that one of his brothers had
connexion with the other sister-in-law, the first is not thereby
disqualified to remain his wife. <span id="fr_754"></span>[10](#fn_749)
The same applies to the case of two deaf and dumb women under the same
circumstances.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If one of the
females is a minor, and the other deaf and dumb, and the brother on whom
the duty of *Yeboom* devolved had connexion first with the minor, and
then with the deaf and dumb one, or that a brother of his had connexion
with this latter, the minor is not thereby disqualified to remain his
wife, but if he had connexion first with the deaf and dumb one, and then
with the minor, or that his brother had connexion with the minor, the
deaf and dumb became disqualified to be his wife.

§ 10. When one of the females is sound \[i.e. not deaf and dumb\] and
the other deaf and dumb, and the *Yabam* <span
id="fr_755"></span>[11](#fn_750) had connexion with the first mentioned,
and afterwards with the last mentioned of his sisters-in-law, or that
his brother had connexion with the latter, the sound one has not thereby
. become disqualified to be his \[the *Yabam's*\] wife. If he had
connexion first with the deaf and dumb woman, and then with the sound
one, or that his brother had afterwards connexion with the sound one,
the deaf and dumb female is disqualified.

§ 11. When one of the females is of age, and the other a minor, if the
*Yabam* had connexion with the elder, and then with the minor, or that
his brother had connexion with the latter, the elder is not
disqualified. If he had connexion first with the minor, and then with
the elder, or that his brother had connexion with this latter, the minor
is disqualified. R. Eleazar saith, "The minor is to be instructed to
make use of her right of refusal."

§ 12. When the *Yabam* and his sister-in-law are both minors, and had
connexion together, they must grow up with each other \[i.e. the *Yabam*
has not the power to divorce her during his minority\]. If the widow had
then attained her majority, she must wait till he has attained his. If
the widow declares within thirty days \[after the marriage by *Yeboom*
has taken place\] that her husband has not consummated the marriage, he
will be compelled to allow her to perform to him the ceremony of
*Chalitzah*. When she made the mentioned declaration after the
expiration of the thirty days, he is to be requested to allow her to
perform *Chalitzah* to him; but when he admits the truth \[of her
accusation of the non-consummation of the marriage\] he will be
compelled even after a twelve month, to allow her to perform to him the
ceremony of *Chalitzah*.

§ 13. When a woman made a vow during her husband's life not

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

to receive any benefit whatever from the brother-in-law on whom the duty
of *Yeboom* devolves, the latter will be compelled to allow her to
perform the ceremony of *Chalitzah* to him: if she made this vow after
the death of her husband, he is to be requested to allow her to perform
*Chalitzah* to him; but when she made the vow with the intention of
being thereby freed from the claim the brother-in-law has on her, he is
in that case merely to be requested to allow her to perform to him the
ceremony of *Chalitzah*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_740"></span>[227:1](etm115.htm#fr_745) Namely, that of an
orphan girl, who, during her minority, was betrothed by her mother or
brothers, and who, on attaining her majority, has a right to refuse her
consent, and render the betrothing void.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[227:2](etm115.htm#fr_746) Which completes the
marriage.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[227:3](etm115.htm#fr_747) According to the
school of Shammai she is not entitled to refuse again.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[227:4](etm115.htm#fr_748) When she is under
the age of six, or even of ten years, in case she is innocent, and did
not well know the meaning, or was not aware of the extent of the
engagement she had entered into.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[228:5](etm115.htm#fr_749) Namely, the orphan
who had been betrothed in her infancy, &c., who had not refused the
husband intended for her, but had been rejected and divorced by him.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[228:6](etm115.htm#fr_750) When she expressed
her refusal, and insisted on having her engagement annulled.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[229:7](etm115.htm#fr_751) And as her marriage
thus becomes void, her husband may marry her sister.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[229:8](etm115.htm#fr_752) Who are not related.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[229:9](etm115.htm#fr_753) This must be
understood as limited to the connexion with the brother-in-law, but not
to the *Chalitzah*, which a deaf and dumb woman is not qualified to
perform.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[229:10](etm115.htm#fr_754) The reason is this,
either the marriage with these minors is legal, or it is not; if it is
legal, then the first becomes at once the brother-in-law's lawful wife
by *Yeboom*, by the act of connexion with him; and the connexion he had
with the second is unlawful connexion; and if the marriage was illegal,
then both widows are only strangers to the supposed brother-in-law.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[230:11](etm115.htm#fr_755) This word signifies
the brother-in-law, on whom the duty of *Yeboom* has devolved, by the
death of his brother without issue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](etm116)
