[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm136)  [Next](etm138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III.

§ 1. Every Get which is not expressly written for the woman about to be
divorced is void; as for instance, if a person passing through a street
hears the voice of public notaries \[dictating to their clerks or
pupils\], saying, "A.B. divorces C.D., his wife, living at the place
E.," to which he remarked, "That is the same name as mine and that of my
wife" \[and he gave that Get to the latter\], it is void. More rigid
than this is, that even when he had ordered a Get to be written for him,
to divorce his wife, and afterwards changed his mind, and was met by a
fellow townsman, who told him, "My name and that of my wife are exactly
the same as yours and that of your wife \[give it me therefore to
divorce my wife\]," the latter may not use it for

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

that purpose. More rigid than this is, that if a man had two wives,
whose names are similar, and a Get was written to divorce the elder, he
may not use it to divorce the younger. More rigid than this is, that
when a man says to a notary, "Write a Get, that I may therewith divorce
one of my two wives," he may not use it \[for either\].

§ 2. \[Public\] writers of blank forms of Gittin \[bills of divorce\]
must leave sufficient space for the insertion of the names of the
husband and wife, and for the date. In blank forms of loan contracts
sufficient space must be left for the insertion of the lender's name and
that of the borrower, the sum lent, and the date. In forms of deeds of
sale, space must be left sufficient for the insertion of the names of
buyer and seller, the purchase money, \[the description of\] the field
\[sold\], and the date. This institution \[of allowing blank forms to be
made by notaries, to be filled up when required\] was made for the
convenience of public writers. R. Jehudah, however, declares all such
written \[and afterwards filled up\] blank forms void; but R. Eleazar
considers them valid, with the exception of a Get, or act of divorce,
because it is written in the Law (Deut. xxv.), "He shall write unto her
a bill of divorce," i.e., on purpose for her.

§ 3. If a messenger entrusted with a Get loses it, if he finds it again
immediately it is still valid, but not otherwise. If he found it in a
pocket or bag \[or in any other place\], if he identifies it <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[1](#fn_997) the Get is valid. When a messenger
brings a Get from a husband who was aged, or from one he left very ill,
he may deliver it on the presumption that the husband is still alive.
Thus may an Israelitess whose husband \[a priest\] went beyond seas, eat
of the heave offering on the presumption of her husband being alive.
Also, when a person abroad sends a sin offering \[to the Temple\], it is
to be sacrificed, on the presumption of the sender being alive.

§ 4. The three following dictums of R. Eleazar ben Partah, were
confirmed by the sages; viz., "That the existence may be presumed of
persons who were known to be in a besieged town, or on board of a vessel
in a storm, and of an accused person who was led before a tribunal to be
judged \[in a criminal case\], but that in respect to persons living in
a town which was taken by assault, or in a vessel that became a
wreck, <span id="fr_1003"></span>[2](#fn_998) and a malefactor who was
led forth to be executed,

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

the laws relating to the living and the dead are to be applied to them
in their utmost rigidity." <span id="fr_1004"></span>[3](#fn_999) An
Israelitess married to a priest, or a priest's daughter married to an
Israelite, may not \[under the last mentioned circumstances\] eat
heave. <span id="fr_1005"></span>[4](#fn_1000)

§ 5. A person who \[in the Holy Land\] brings a Get from one place to
another, and falls ill on the road, may send it further on to its
destination by another messenger; but, if the husband had said, "Bring
me also from her this or that \[valuable\] article," he may not send it
by another; because the husband trusted him, but would not \[perhaps\]
have trusted the agent.

§ 6. When a person who brings a Get from beyond sea, falls ill on the
road, he may empower the Beth Din to nominate another messenger for him,
to carry the Get to the person it was intended for: and the first
messenger must testify before them, that the Get was written and signed
in his presence: the second messenger is not bound to make any such
declaration, but need only say, "I am a messenger of the tribunal."

§ 7. When a person lends money to a priest, or to a Levite, or to a poor
person, on condition that he may deduct from the debt the tithe or
oblation due from him to them, he may do so, in the presumption that
they are then alive; neither need he apprehend that the priest or Levite
should have died, or the poor man have become rich; but if they died
\[before the debt was paid\] he must obtain the consent of their heirs
\[to make this deduction\], but this is [unnecessary](errata.htm#5) if
the money was lent in presence of the Beth Din.

§ 8. A person who puts fruit aside to separate from them heave and tithe
\[due of other fruit\], or money to redeem the second tithe \[of his
fruit\], may do so, <span id="fr_1006"></span>[5](#fn_1001) in the
presumption, that the fruit or money set apart is in actual existence;
but if the fruit was lost, he must always calculate \[in paying the
tithe\] the quantity \[of fruit\] which existed twenty-four hours
\[before the discovery of the loss\]. <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[6](#fn_1002) Such is the dictum of R. Eleazar ben
Shamuang; R. Jehudah saith, "When wine was separated for such a purpose,
it must be examined at three periods \[of the year\], viz. when the
eastern winds begin to

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

blow after the Feast of Tabernacles, when the fruit of the grape vine
has set, and when the unripe grapes begin to be juicy."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_997"></span>[285:1](etm137.htm#fr_1002) Even if he
recognizes the pocket or bag only, as being that in which he put the
Get.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[285:2](etm137.htm#fr_1003) The ship is
considered in law as a wreck when it has lost its masts, rudder, anchor,
and sails, although the hull should not have been damaged.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[286:3](etm137.htm#fr_1004) That is, the rigor
of the law is to be applied to them both when the law supposes them
dead, or when it presumes them yet alive.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[286:4](etm137.htm#fr_1005) Because the
husband of the first is presumed to be dead, and that of the second to
be alive.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[286:5](etm137.htm#fr_1006) And eat of other
untithed fruit.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[286:6](etm137.htm#fr_1007) And must pay tithe
accordingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](etm138)
