[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](etm131)  [Next](etm133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029F21C4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Eighteen Treatises from the Mishna*, by D. A. Sola and M. J. Raphall,
\[1843\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII.

§ 1. Two rigorous magistrates were in Jerusalem, Admon and Hanan ben
Abishalom. Hanan pronounced two decisions, and Admon seven. <span
id="fr_960"></span>[1](#fn_955) \[In the case of\] a man that went
beyond seas, and whose wife claimed her maintenance \[out of his real
estate\], Hanan decided she must be put upon her oath at the close \[of
the proceedings\], but not at the commencement <span
id="fr_961"></span>[2](#fn_956) \[thereof\]. The sons of high priests
disputed with him, and maintained that she must be put upon her oath at
the commencement as well as at the close \[of the proceedings\]. R. Dosa
ben Harkeenos adopted their opinion, but R. Jochanan ben Zachai
declared, "Hanan had decided justly, and that she is not to be sworn
till the close \[of the proceedings\]."

§ 2. \[In the case of\] a man that went beyond seas, and another

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

man took upon himself to maintain the wife \[during her husband's
absence\], Hanan decided, "He \[who of his own accord supported her\]
has lost his money." <span id="fr_962"></span>[3](#fn_957) The sons of
high priests disputed with him, and maintained, "He must swear how much
he expended \[in her support\], and he then recovers it." R. Dosa ben
Harkeenos adopted their opinion; but R. Jochanan ben Zachai declared,
"Hanan decided justly: for the man has placed his money on the antlers
of a stag." <span id="fr_963"></span>[4](#fn_958)

§ 3. Admon pronounced seven decisions. \[In the case of\] a man who at
his death leaves sons and daughters, \[the rule is that\] if the
property be ample, the sons inherit \[the estate\], and the daughters
must be maintained \[by the sons\]; but if the property be scanty, the
daughters must be maintained, even though the sons must go from door to
door \[to beg their bread\]. \[In opposition to this rule\] Admon
remarked, "What, because I am a male, am I to be the sufferer?" <span
id="fr_964"></span>[5](#fn_959) Rabbon Gamaliel said, "I approve of
Admon's remark."

§ 4. \[In the case of\] a man who sued his neighbour for \[certain\]
jars of oil, and the defendant admits that he owes him for the oil-jars
\[but denied owing for the oil\], Admon decided, "As he admits the
demand in part, he must be sworn." The sages said, "This is no admission
\[as it differs\] in kind with the demand." <span
id="fr_965"></span>[6](#fn_960) Rabbon Gamaliel said, "I approve of
Admon's decision."

§ 5. \[In the case of\] a man who engages to give \[certain\] monies to
his \[intended\] son-in-law \[as a marriage portion to his daughter\],
and afterwards holds up his leg at him, <span
id="fr_966"></span>[7](#fn_961) \[the rule is, the husband may\]

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

let her sit until her head gets grey. Admon decided, "She has a right to
say, 'Had I entered into this engagement for myself \[and deceived
thee\], I ought to sit \[forsaken\] until my head gets grey; but as it
is my father who engaged for me, what can I do? Either take me to thee
\[as thy wife\], or discharge me \[from my marriage obligation by
divorce\].'" Rabbon Gamaliel said, "I approve of Admon's decision."

§ 6. \[In the case of\] a man who disputed the title to a field, <span
id="fr_967"></span>[8](#fn_962) and was himself a subscribing
witness, <span id="fr_968"></span>[9](#fn_963) Admon held, "He \[the
ejector\] may plead '\[I come forward now because\] the second
\[holder\] I can \[more\] easily \[contest possession with\] than the
first, who was too powerful for me.'" <span
id="fr_969"></span>[10](#fn_964) But the sages say, "He \[the ejector\]
has forfeited his title \[and right to the field\]." <span
id="fr_970"></span>[11](#fn_965) If he had designated <span
id="fr_971"></span>[12](#fn_966) \[the field in question\] as boundary
to another \[field\], he also forfeits his right and title."

§ 7. \[In the case of\] a man who went beyond seas, and \[during his
absence\] loses the path \[leading to\] his field, <span
id="fr_972"></span>[13](#fn_967) Admon held, "He may make a short cut to
it;" but the sages hold, "He must purchase a path, though it cost him
one hundred maneh, as otherwise he must fly through the air <span
id="fr_973"></span>[14](#fn_968) \[to get to his field\]."

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

§ 8. \[In the case of\] a man who \[sueing another for debt\] produced a
bond, while the defendant produced a deed of sale \[dated subsequent to
the bond\], by which the plaintiff conveyed to him a field, Admon
remarked, "He \[the defendant\] can plead, 'Had I been in thy debt, it
was for thee to recover thy due when thou didst sell me thy
field;'" <span id="fr_974"></span>[15](#fn_969) but the sages say, "This
\[the\] plaintiff was a prudent \[man\]; he sold him the land in order
that he might be able to seize on it as security \[for his
debt\]." <span id="fr_975"></span>[16](#fn_970)

§ 9. \[In the case of\] two men, who \[sueing each other for debt\]
produce cross bonds against each other, Admon remarked "\[The holder of
the last dated bond has a right to plead\] 'Had I been in thy debt, why
didst thou borrow of me?'" <span id="fr_976"></span>[17](#fn_971) But
the sages decided, "That each is entitled to recover \[the amount of\]
the bond he holds." <span id="fr_977"></span>[18](#fn_972)

§ 10. \[With respect\] to marriages \[the following\] three provinces
\[are considered as distinct countries, viz.\] Judea, \[the land\]
beyond the Jordan, and Galilee. A woman cannot be compelled to \[follow
her husband who will\] remove \[out of her own country\] from a town to
a town, or from a borough to a borough; but within her own country she
is compelled to remove \[with her husband\] from a town to a town, or
from a borough to a borough, but not from a town to a borough, or from a
borough to a town. <span id="fr_978"></span>[19](#fn_973) She can be
compelled to

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

move \[with him\] from an inferior dwelling to a superior one; but she
is not compelled to move \[with him\] from a superior dwelling to an
inferior one. R. Simeon ben Gamaliel saith "\[She cannot be compelled to
move\] even from an inferior dwelling to a superior one, because the
superior one \[if new and previously uninhabited\] may occasion
sickness." <span id="fr_979"></span>[20](#fn_974)

§ 11. All \[persons\] can be compelled to move into the land of Israel,
but none can be compelled to move out of it. All persons can be
compelled to move into Jerusalem, but none can be compelled to move out
of it. \[This rule applies\] alike to men, to women, and to
bondmen. <span id="fr_980"></span>[21](#fn_975) Has a man married a
woman in the land of Israel, and divorced her in the land of Israel, he
must pay her \[the amount of her Ketubah\] in the coin of the land of
Israel. Has he married her in the land of Israel, and divorced her in
Cappadocia, he may pay her \[the amount of her Ketubah\] in the coin of
the land of Israel. <span id="fr_981"></span>[22](#fn_976) Has he
married her in Cappadocia, and divorced her in the land of Israel, he
may pay her in the coin of the land of Israel. R. Simeon saith, "He must
pay her in the coin of Cappadocia." Has he married her in Cappadocia,
and divorced her in Cappadocia, he must pay her \[the amount of her
Ketubah\] in Cappadocia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_955"></span>[274:1](etm132.htm#fr_960) Which the sages did
not all approve of, but of which some obtained the force of law.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[274:2](etm132.htm#fr_961) Not until she claims
the amount of her Ketubah, having ascertained that her husband is dead;
or, according to Rambam, not until the husband returns and pleads, "I
left thee sufficient means for thy maintenance," when she must be sworn
that he did not do so.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[275:3](etm132.htm#fr_962) As the husband on
his return may say, "I did not request or authorise thee to advance any
money for such a purpose, and therefore have not undertaken to repay
it." If, however, the advance was made at the woman's request, and under
her promise that it should be repaid, the man may sue her, and she
summon her husband, who in that case is bound to repay it, unless he can
swear that he left her sufficient means for her support.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[275:4](etm132.htm#fr_963) A figurative
expression, signifying that risking his money in such an advance, is
placing it in jeopardy as great as if he had put it on the antlers of a
stag, which runs away with it without his being able to overtake it.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[275:5](etm132.htm#fr_964) And forfeit every
right to share in the little my father left? Not so!

<span id="fn_960"></span>[275:6](etm132.htm#fr_965) The sages assume
that the demand made is for the oil only; for had the plaintiff
considered the jars as a distinct portion of his claim, he would have
sued defendant for "certain jars containing oil." And as the demand made
is for oil only, while the admission is restricted to jars, which form
no part of the plaintiff's demand, Admon's decision is wrong. R.
Gamaliel, however, agrees with Admon that "jars of oil" means both jars
and oil.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[275:7](etm132.htm#fr_966) ‏פשט לו את הרגל‎
"holds his foot out to him," a gesture of contempt, as if he <span
id="page_276">p. 276</span> said, "Take thy dowry out of the dust on my
shoe." Rambam explains, "If after the wedding the father runs away to a
far country;" according to this exposition, the phrase of the text would
run, "gives him leg-bail."

<span id="fn_962"></span>[276:8](etm132.htm#fr_967) Of which he declares
he has been forcibly dispossessed.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[276:9](etm132.htm#fr_968) To the deed of sale,
by which the alleged usurper conveys this very field to the purchaser
whose title he disputes.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[276:10](etm132.htm#fr_969) Commentators
explain his plea in the following manner. "The man who forcibly
dispossessed me was so powerful and influential that I preferred to
submit, and even tacitly to sanction his usurpation, rather than involve
myself in a ruinous contest; and I attested the deed of sale because I
wished the field to get into the hands of a man of my own standing,
against whom I could enforce my rights."

<span id="fn_965"></span>[276:11](etm132.htm#fr_970) His sanctioning the
sale by his attestation is a complete renunciation of his rights.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[276:12](etm132.htm#fr_971) If, when selling
another field, he has in the conveyance described the disputed
field—bordering on the one which he sells—as belonging to the alleged
forcible holder, by which description he acknowledges his title.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[276:13](etm132.htm#fr_972) It having been
seized, and made arable by one of the adjoining landowners.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[276:14](etm132.htm#fr_973) Admon and the sages
agree that should the fields adjoining his own belong to different
proprietors, he must purchase a right of path, as every one of the
neighbours will say, "Prove that it is I, and no one else, who has
seized on thy property." They also agree that if all the adjoining
fields belong to one proprietor, the man has a right to cut a path, as
in that case there can be no doubt <span id="page_277">p. 277</span>
that the great proprietor must have seized on his property. The dispute
arises from the circumstance that the adjoining fields, though
originally the property of different persons, have eventually become the
property of one man. The expression "fly through the air" is used to
denote the legal impossibility of getting to his field, as any other way
he commits a trespass on his neighbour's grounds.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[277:15](etm132.htm#fr_974) Assuming that the
sale arose from want of money, which could not have been the case had
the bond been valid, as the plaintiff would then naturally have enforced
payment rather than sell his land; that consequently the bond produced
must either have been previously paid, or is a forgery.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[277:16](etm132.htm#fr_975) Assuming that as
the debtor possessed no immoveable or other tangible property, the
plaintiff got him to buy land, by which means he gained a security for
his demand.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[277:17](etm132.htm#fr_976) Assuming that he
borrowed from want of money, which he would not have done had the bond
been valid, as the plaintiff would then naturally have enforced payment
rather than contract a debt. That consequently the bond bearing the
first date must either have been paid before the last dated bond was
given, or is a forgery.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[277:18](etm132.htm#fr_977) Assuming that the
bonds arose from bona fide business, and not from want of money.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[277:19](etm132.htm#fr_978) Because in boroughs
the comforts of life are not so readily obtained, and in <span
id="page_278">p. 278</span> towns the air is not so pure. In either case
she is exposed to a change of habits that may be painful or injurious to
her.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[278:20](etm132.htm#fr_979) But if the
bridegroom resides in one country, and marries in another, the wife is
bound to go with him, as that is assumed to be a necessary condition of
the marriage.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[278:21](etm132.htm#fr_980) If the husband
wishes to move to Palestine or Jerusalem, and the wife will not, he may
divorce her without paying her Ketubah. If she wishes to move thither,
and he will not, he must divorce her, and pay her Ketubah. The converse
of this rule holds good in case of removal from Palestine and Jerusalem.
The bondman spoken of in the text is not only the Hebrew engaged for a
term of years, but also the Gentile, who from any other country has fled
to Palestine or Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[278:22](etm132.htm#fr_981) The coin of
Palestine, though of the same denomination as that of Cappadocia, is
lighter, and therefore of less value. The name of Cappadocia stands
generally for any country in which the coin bears the same name as in
Palestine, while the intrinsic value is different.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Treatises XXV. Nedarim to XXVII. Sootah \[synopses\]](etm133)
