[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp27)  [Next](dmp29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. XXV.

\(1\) The words of the lamp for inquiry of the boy. (2) Formula: 'Te,
Te, Ik, Tatak, Thethe, (3) Sati, Santaskl, Kromakat, (4) Pataxurai,
Kaleu-pankat, A-a-tieui, (5) Makat-sitakat, Hati, Hat-ro, E-o-e, (6) Hau
(?). E; may they say to me an answer to everything concerning which I
ask here to-day, (7) for I am Harpocrates in Mendes, for I am Isis the
Wise; (8) the speech of my mouth comes to pass.' Say seven times. You
take a new lamp (?), (9) you put a clean linen wick into it brought from
a temple, (10) and you set it on a new brick, brought from the mould (?)
and clean, on which

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (11) no man has mounted (?); you set it upright,
you place the lamp (?) (12) on it; you put genuine oil in it, or Oasis
oil, (13) and you set two new bricks under you; you place the boy
between (14) your feet; you recite the charms aforesaid down into the
head of the boy, (15) your hand being over his eyes; you offer myrrh
upon a willow leaf (16) before the lamp. You do it in a dark place, the
door of it (17) opening to the East or the South, and no cellar being
underneath it. (18) You do not allow the light to come into the place
aforesaid; you purify the said place beforehand. (19) You push the boy's
back to the opening of the niche. When you have finished, you recite a
charm, (20) bringing your hand over his eyes, A boy who has not yet gone
with a woman, (21) is he\] whom you make come before you (?); you
question him, saying. 'What do you see?' (22) Then he tells you about
everything that you ask him. (23)

A method to put the heart of a woman after a man; done in one moment
(?), and it comes to pass instantly. You take (24) a swallow (?) alive,
together with a hoopoe, (both) alive. Ointment made for them: (25)
blood, of a male ass, blood of the tick (?) of a black cow; you anoint
(26) their heads with lotus ointment; you utter a cry before the sun in
his moment of rising; (27) you cut off the heads of the two; you take
the heart out of the right ribs (28) of both of them; you anoint it with
the ass's blood and the blood of the tick (?) of a black cow, (29)

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

as aforesaid; you put them into an ass's skin you lay them in the sun
until they (30) are dry for four days; when the four days have passed,
you pound them, you put them into a (31) box; you lay it in your house.

When you wish to make a woman love a man, you take (32) the shaving (?)
of a pleasure-wood (?); you recite these correct names before them; (33)
you put it into a cup of wine or beer; you give it to the woman and she
drinks it. (34) 'I am Bira, Akhel, La-akh, Sasmrialo (?), (35)
Ples-plun, Ioane, Sabaathal, Sasupu, (36) Nithi, put the heart of N.
born of N. after N. born of N. in (37) these hours to-day.' Seven times.
You do it on the fourteenth of the lunar month. Very excellent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. XXVI](dmp29)
