[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp20)  [Next](dmp22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. XVIII.

\(1\) Of Heu (*bis*), the son of Heo (*bis*) for he shall see thee with
his eyes, and thou shalt make his ears to hear, (2) and shalt speak with
him of everything; he shall ask thee about it, and thou shalt tell me
answer truly; for thou art the great god (3) Sabaoth; come down with
Boel, Tat (*bis*); bring Boel in, come into the midst of this flame (4)
and inquire for me concerning that which is good; Takrtat, he of
eternity, bring Boel in,' three times, 'Arbeth, (5) Bainouthio, O great
god, bring Boel in,' three times. You say these things down into the
head of the boy, (6) you make him open his eyes, you ask him as to
everything according to the method which is outside, again.

\(7\) \[Another?\] vessel-inquiry which a physician in the Oxyrhynchus
nome gave me; you also make it with a vessel-inquiry alone by yourself:
(8) 'Sabanem, Nn, Biribat, Ho! (*bis*) O god Sisiaho who (art) on the
mountain of Kabaho, (9) in whose hand is the creation of the Shoy,
favour (?) this boy, may he enchant the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

light, for I am (10) Fair-face'--another roll says, 'I am the face of
Nun--in the morning, Halaho at midday, I am (11) Glad-of-face in the
evening, I am Phre, the glorious boy whom they call Garta by name; I am
he that came forth (12) on the arm of Triphis in the East; I am great,
Great is my name, Great is my real name, I am Ou, Ou (13) is my name,
Aou is my real name; I am Lot Mulot, I have prevailed (?) (*bis*), he
whose (14) strength is in the flame, he of that golden wreath which is
on his head, They-yt (*bis*),To (*bis*), (15) Hatra (*bis*), the
Dog-face (*bis*). Hail! Anubis, Pharaoh of the underworld, let the
darkness depart, (16) bring the light in unto me to my vessel-inquiry,
for I am Horus, son of Osiris, born of Isis, (17) the noble boy whom
Isis loves, who inquires for his father Osiris Onnophris. Hail! Anubis,
(18) Pharaoh of the underworld, let the darkness depart, bring the light
in unto me to my vessel-inquiry, (19) my knot (?) here to-day; may I
flourish, may he flourish whose face is bent down to this vessel here
to-day (20) until the gods come in, and may they tell me answer truly to
my question about which I am inquiring (21) here to-day, truly without
falsehood forthwith (?). Hail! Anubis, (22) O creature (?), Child, go
forth at once, bring to me the gods of this city and (23) the god who
gives answer (?) to-day, and let him tell me my question about which I
am asking to-day. Nine times.

\(24\) You open your eyes or (those of) the boy and you see the light.
You invoke the light, saying, 'Hail,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (25) O light, come forth (*bis*) O light, rise
(*bis*) O light, increase (*bis*) O light, O that which is without, come
in.' You say it nine times, (26) until the light increases and Anubis
comes in. When Anubis comes in and takes his stand, (27) then you say to
Anubis, 'Arise, go forth, bring in to me the gods of this city (or?)
village,' (28) then he goes out at the moment named and brings the gods
in. When you know (29) that the gods have come in, you say to Anubis, '
Bring in a table for the gods (30) and let them sit down.' When they are
seated, you say to Anubis, 'Bring a wine-jar in and some cakes; let them
eat, let them drink.' (31) While he is making them eat and making them
drink, you say to Anubis, ' Will they inquire for me to-day?' If he says
'Yes' again, you say to him, (32) 'The god who will ask for me, let him
put forth his hand to me and let him tell me his name.' When he tells
you his name, you ask him as to that which you desire. When you have
ceased asking him as to that which you desire, you send them away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. XIX](dmp22)
