[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egyptian](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dmp30)  [Next](dmp32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COL. XXVIII.

\(1\) Another mode of vessel-inquiry, alone. Formula: 'I am the lord of
Spirits, Oridimbai, Sonadir, Episghes, Emmime, (2) Tho-gom-phrur,
Phirim-phuni is thy name; Mimi, Bibiu (*bis*), Gthethoni, I am Ubaste,
Ptho, (3) Balkham born of Binui, Sphe, Phas, I am Baptho, Gammi-satra is
thy name, Mi-meo, (4) Ianume.' Its spirit-gathering: You go to a clean
place, you take a vessel of bronze, you wash it with water of natron,
you put a *lok*-measure (5) of oil to it; you place it on the ground;
you light a bronze lamp; you put it on the ground by the bronze vessel;
(6) you cover yourself with a clean

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

linen robe, you and the vessel; you recite into the vessel, your eyes
being shut, for seven times; you open your eyes; (7) you ask it
concerning that which you wish; if you wish to make the gods of the
vessel speak with you with their mouths to your mouth, you cry: 'Iaho,
(8) Iph, Eoe, Kintathour, Nephar, Aphoe.' Then they make answer to you
concerning everything concerning which you will ask of it again. If they
do not tell you answer, you recite (9) this other name: 'Gogethix,
Mantounoboe, Kokhir-rhodor, Dondroma, Lephoker, (10) Kephaersore.' If
you recite these, then they inquire for you truthfully.

\(11\) Another vessel-inquiry; you put vegetable oil into it; you must
proceed as above. Formula: 'Speak unto me (*bis*), Hamset, god of the
gods of darkness, (12) every demon, every shade that is in the West and
the East, he that hath died hath done it (?), rise up to me (*bis*), O
thou living soul, O thou breathing soul, may (13) my vessel go forth, my
knot (?) here to-day, for the sake of the vessel of Isis the Great, who
inquireth for her husband, who seeketh for her brother; Menash (*bis*),
(14) Menanf (*bis*).' Say 'Menash (*bis*), Menanf (*bis*), Phoni
(*bis*),' a multitude of times; and you say to the boy, 'Say, (15)
"Depart, O darkness; come to me O light," and open your eyes at once.'
Then the gods come in and tell thee answer to everything.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Col. XXIX](dmp32)
