[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar05)  [Next](gar07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE BOOK OF ENOCH.

This most ancient (as it professes) of the Hebrew Scriptures being so
frequently referred to as the highest authority by the Æon
Pistis-Sophia, a brief summary of its doctrine seems to form the
necessary complement to the preceding section. The Book of Enoch, though
often quoted by the Fathers, had been lost ever since the eighth century
(with the exception of a few chapters of a Greek version preserved by
Georgius Syncellus), until Bruce brought back three copies of it from
Abyssinia. In the canon of that Church it takes its place in the Old
Testament immediately before the Book of Job. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2)

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

This book is divided into ninety chapters, and begins with the preface:
"In the Name of God, the merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and of
great mercy, and holiness. This Book is the Book of Enoch the prophet.
May blessing and help be with him who loves Him, for ever and ever.
Amen. Chapter I. This word is the blessing of Enoch with which he
blessed the chosen and the righteous that wore of old. And Enoch lifted
up his voice and spoke, a holy man of God, while his eyes were open, and
he saw a holy vision in the heavens, which the angels revealed to him.
And I heard from them everything, and I understood what I saw." After
this follows the history of the angels, of their having descended from
heaven, and produced giants with the daughters of men; of their having
instructed them in the arts of war, and peace, and luxury. The names of
the leading angels are mentioned, which appear to be of Hebrew origin,
but corrupted by Greek pronunciation. The resolution of God to destroy
these is then revealed to Enoch. These topics occupy about eighteen
chapters. From the eighteenth to the fiftieth chapter Enoch is led by
the angels Uriel and Raphael through a series of visions not much
connected with the preceding. He saw the Burning Valley of the fallen
angels, the Paradise of the saints, the utmost ends of the earth, the
treasuries of the thunder and lightning, winds, rain, dew, and the
angels who presided over these. He was led into the place of the General
Judgment, saw the Ancient of Days on his throne, and all the kings of
the earth before him. At the fifty-second chapter, Noah is said to have
been alarmed at the enormous wickedness of mankind, and, fearing
vengeance, to have implored the advice of his great-grandfather. Enoch
told him that a flood of water should destroy the whole race of man, and
a flood of fire punish the angels whom the deluge could not affect. In
Chapter LIX. the subject of the angels is resumed, Semeiza, Artukaru,
Arimeon, Kakabael, Tusael, Ramiel, Damdal, and others to the number of
twenty, appear at the head of the fallen spirits, and give fresh
instances of their rebellious dispositions. At Chapter LXII. Enoch gives
his son Methuselah a long account of the sun, moon, stars, the year, the
months, the winds, and the like physical phenomena. This takes up

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

eight chapters, after which the Patriarch makes a recapitulation of the
former pages. The remaining twenty chapters are employed on the history
of the Deluge, Noah's preparations for it, and the success which
attended them. The destruction of all flesh excepting his family, and
the execution of divine vengeance on the angels, conclude the work.

 

<span id="img_fig01"></span> ![Fig. 1.](img/fig01.jpg)  
Fig. 1.

[(\*)](gar71.htm#an_fig01)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[18:\*](gar06.htm#fr_2) An English translation
was made by Dr. Lawrence, Bishop of Cashel, of which the third edition,
with notes, was published in 1837. The best German translation is that
of Dillmann, 1857. *Cf*. Schodde *Book of Enoch*, 1882.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gnosticism in its Beginning](gar07)
