[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar12)  [Next](gar14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

### SIMONIANISM.

"It is my intention here to exhibit the system of Simon Magus, a native
of Gitteh in Samaria, and I will prove that from him all those that come
after have derived the elements of their doctrines, and impudently
attempted the same things under different appellations. This Simon was
skilled in magic and had imposed upon great numbers, partly by
practising the art of Thrasymedes after the manner which I have already
exposed (in the Book upon 'Magicians'), and partly by miracle-working
through the agency of demons. He attempted to set up for a god, being a
thorough impostor and altogether unscrupulous and daring; for he was
that one whom the Apostles confuted, as is recorded in the Acts.

"Much more wisely therefore and sensibly than Simon did that Apsethus
act, when he aimed at being accounted a god, who went to work in Libya;
whose story, not being very dissimilar to the scheme of our foolish
Simon, it were fitting here to quote, inasmuch as it is quite of a piece
with the procedure of the latter.

"Apsethus the Libyan was very desirous of making himself a god, but
when, after long labouring, he had failed in his endeavours, he wanted,
as the next best thing, to be *supposed* to have made himself a god; and
in fact for a considerable time he did enjoy such a reputation. For the
simple Libyans used to sacrifice to him as to a Divine Power, in the
belief that they were obeying a voice sent forth out of Heaven. He had
got together and confined several parrots in one and the same little
room, for parrots are plentiful all over Libya, and they distinctly
mimic the human voice; and having kept these birds for some time, he
taught them to say 'Apsethus is a god.' And when the birds in course of
time were taught, and could speak that sentence which he supposed, when
spoken, would cause him to pass for a god, then he opened their place of
confinement.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

and allowed the parrots to escape in different directions. And as the
birds flew about, the sound was carried all over Libya, and the words
travelled as far as the Greek territory (Cyrene); and thus the Libyans,
being struck with amazement at the voice of the birds, and not
suspecting the trick played them by Apsethus, accounted him a god. But
one of the Greeks having clearly detected the contrivance of the
supposed deity, did, by means of the self-same parrots, not merely
confute, but also extinguish that vain-glorious and impudent fellow.
This Greek caged several of the same parrots, and taught them to utter a
contrary strain, 'Apsethus shut us up, and forced us to say *Apsethus is
a god*.' But when the Libyans heard this recantation of the parrots,
they all came together with one accord, and burnt Apsethus alive.

"In this light we ought to regard the magician Simon, and compare him to
this Libyan, a man who made himself a god in that very expeditious
manner; for in truth the comparison holds good in all particulars, and
the sorcerer met with a fate not unlike that of Apsethus. I will
therefore endeavour to *un-teach Simon's parrots* by showing that Simon
was not the Christ 'Who hath stood, standeth, and shall stand,' but a
man, mortal, generated from the seed of woman, begotten from blood and
carnal concupiscence like the rest of mankind: and that such was the
fact I shall clearly demonstrate in the course of my narrative. For
Simon speaks, when interpreting the Law of Moses, in an impudent and
fraudulent fashion, for whenever Moses says 'Our God is a burning and a
consuming fire,' Simon, taking what Moses has said in a false sense,
maintains that *Fire* is the Principle of all things. He does not
perceive the true meaning that God is not 'a fire,' but 'a burning and a
consuming fire,' and so not only mutilates the Law of Moses, but
plagiarises from Heraclitus, surnamed 'the Obscure.' For Simon
designates the Principle of all things 'Boundless Power' in the
following words: 'This is the Book of the Declaration of the Voice, and
of the Name, from the inspiration of the Great, the Boundless Power.
Wherefore the same is sealed, hidden, wrapped up, stored in the dwelling
wherein the Boot of all things is established.' This *dwelling* 

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

he says, signifies *Man* here below, who is born of blood, and also
signifies that there dwells within him that 'Boundless Power' which he
asserts is the Root of all things. But this Boundless Power (or *Fire*,
according to Simon) is not a simple substance, in the same way as most
people who call the Elements 'simple' account Fire likewise as simple:
on the contrary, he maintains that the nature of Fire is, as it were,
*double*; and of this double number he terms one part the *Insensible*,
the other the *Visible*; asserting that the insensible are contained
within the visible parts of the Fire, and that the visible parts are
generated by the invisible. (This is the same thing that Aristotle
expresses by his 'Force' and 'Energy'; and Plato by his 'Intelligible'
and 'Sensible.')

"Again the *Visible* part of Fire contains within itself all things
whatsoever one can perceive, or even *fail* to perceive, of things
visible. The *Invisible*, on the other hand, is whatsoever one can
conceive as an object of thought, but which escapes the sense, or even
what one *fails* to comprehend by the thought. And to sum up, it may be
said that of all things that exist, whether objects of sense or of
thought, or, as Simon terms them, Visible and Invisible, the store-house
is the Great Fire that is above the heavens: 'As it were a great Tree,
like to that seen in his dream by Nabuchadonosor, from the which all
flesh was fed.' And the *Visible* he considers to be the *trunk* of the
Tree and the branches, and the leaves, and the bark surrounding the same
on the outside. All these parts of the great Tree, says he, are kindled
from the all-devouring flame of the Fire, and are destroyed. But the
*Fruit* of the Tree, if it takes a shape and assumes a proper form, is
laid up in a storehouse, and not cast into the fire. For the fruit is
made in order that it may be laid up in the storehouse, but the *husk*
that it may be committed to the fire; which sake is the trunk, ordained
not for the sake of the husk but of the fruit.

"And this, according to Simon, is what is written in the Scripture: 'The
vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the House of Israel, and a man of Judah
the well-beloved branch thereof.' Now, if a man of Judah be the
'well-beloved branch,' it is a proof that the *wood* can be nothing else
than a *man*. But as

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

regards the *excretion* and the *dispersion* from the same, the
Scripture hath spoken fully and sufficiently for the instruction of all
such as be brought to their perfect form: according to the saying, 'All
flesh is grass, and the glory thereof as the flower of the grass; the
grass withereth, the flower thereof fadeth, but the Word of the Lord
endureth for ever.' Now this Word of the Lord, says Simon, is the word
that is produced in the mouth, that is, Speech; for the 'place of its
birth is nowhere else.

"To be brief therefore: since, according to Simon, the Fire is of the
aforesaid nature, and all things that be, both visible and invisible,
and vocal and voiceless, and numbered and unnumbered, are this Fire,
therefore in his 'Great Revelation' he terms this the Fountain-head of
all, the *Great Intellectual*, as constituting each individual of all
things in their infinite order, which are capable of being conceived in
the mind, and likewise of speaking, of thinking, and of acting. As
Empedocles hath it--

"'Through Earth, the Earth perceive, through Water, Water;  
Through Air scan Air; through Fire the hidden Fire;  
Through Love view Love; through Discord, hateful Discord.'

"For Simon held that all the members of this Fire, both the Visible and
the Invisible, possessed *intelligence* and a portion of *mind*. The
world that is created, consequently, according to him, comes from the
untreated Fire. The commencement of its creation was in this wise: six
'Radicals' (*lit*. Roots), the First Principles of the beginning of
Creation, were taken by the Begotten One out of the Principle of that
Fire; for he asserts that these Six Radicals emanated by *pairs* out of
the Fire. These Six Radicals he names, 'Mind and Intelligence, Voice and
Name, Reason and Thought.' And there exists in these Radicals taken
together the whole of the 'Boundless Power,' but existing in
*potentiality*, not in *activity*. And this Boundless Power Simon calls
'He who standeth, hath stood, and shall stand;' who, if he shall be
*figured* (invested with form) when he is in those Six Powers, shall be
in reality, force, power and perfection, the one and the same with the
Unbegotten Boundless Power. But if he shall abide in *potentiality* 

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

alone in those Six Powers, and not assume a *form*, he vanishes and
perishes, as does a grammatical or a geometrical power in a man's mind.
For potentiality, when it has gotten *art*, becomes the light of things
generated; but when it has not gotten art (execution) it remains in
inertness and darkness, and exactly as when it did not exist at all, and
dies with the man upon his death.

"Now of these Six Powers, and of the Seventh which goes along with them,
the *First Thought* Simon terms 'Mind and Intellect,' 'Heaven and
Earth'; teaching that the one of the male sex looks down upon and takes
care of his consort; whilst the Earth below receives from Heaven the
'Intellect,' and fruits of the same nature with the Earth, which are
poured down from above. For this cause, says Simon, the Word, often
looking down upon the things that spring out of Mind and Intellect,
says, 'Hear, O Heavens, and receive with thine ears, O Earth! for the
Lord hath spoken: I have begotten and brought up sons, but they have
despised me.' He that saith this is the *Seventh Power*, 'He who
standeth, hath stood, and shall stand;' for He is the author of those
good things which Moses commended, saying that they were very good.

'Voice and name' are the Sun and Moon; 'Reason and Thought' are air and
water. But with all of these is mingled and combined that Boundless
Power, 'He who standeth,' as I have already mentioned.

"Therefore when Moses says, 'In six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
and on the seventh day he rested from all his works,' Simon, distorting
the passage after the aforesaid fashion, makes himself out to be God.
When therefore, the Simonians say that there were three days before the
Sun and the Moon were made, they understand by it Mind and Intelligence,
or Heaven and Earth, and also that 'Boundless Power' of theirs. For
these three Powers were made before all the rest. Again, where it is
said: 'Before all the world he hath begotten me,' these words, as they
pretend, refer to the Seventh Power. Now this Seventh Power, who was a
Power existing *within* the Boundless Power, and who was made before all
the world, *this*, as Simon teaches, is that Seventh Power of whom Moses
spake:

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'And the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters,' that is to say, the Spirit
containing all things within itself, the Image of the Boundless Power,
concerning which Simon saith, the *image* is the incorruptible Power
governing all things by himself!'

"Now the creation of the world having been after this or a similar
fashion, God, says he, made Man out of clay taken from the earth; and he
made them not single, but double, both as regards the *image*, and the
*likeness*. For the *image* is the Spirit moving upon the face of the
waters, who, if he be not clothed with form will perish together with
the world, inasmuch as he abode merely in potentiality, and was not made
*concrete* by activity. For this is the meaning of the Scripture: 'Lest
we be condemned together with the world.' But if it shall take a form,
and spring out of an indivisible point, it is what is written in the
Revelation: 'The little shall become great.' This 'Great' shall continue
to all eternity, and unchangeable, inasmuch as it is no longer *to be*
made (*i.e.*, no longer abstract).

"In what way therefore, and after what manner did God form man? In
Paradise--for in this point Simon also agreed. But this 'paradise' must
be the *womb* (according to him), and that such is the true explanation
is proved by the Scripture, which saith, 'I am he that formed thee in
thy mother's womb,' for so he will have it to be written. The womb Moses
called Paradise by an allegory, if we choose to listen to the word of
God; for if God did form man in his mother's womb, that is, in paradise
then 'Paradise' must needs signify the womb. 'Eden' is that same region,
and the river going forth out of Eden to water the garden, is the
*navel*. This navel is divided into four heads; because from each part
thereof proceed two arteries running side by side, channels for the
breath; and also two veins, channels for the blood. When, therefore,
this *navel* proceeding out of the region, Eden, is attached to the
fœtus at the lower belly which we commonly term the navel. . . \[Here
some words are evidently lost\]. And the two veins through which the
blood flows, and is carried out of the region Eden, through what are
called 'the gates of the liver' which nourish

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the embryo. Again, the two tubes which we have spoken of as the channels
of the blood, embrace the bladder at each side of the pelvis, and touch
the great artery which runs along the same, called the *aorta*; and thus
the breath, passing through the veins into the heart, produces the
motion of the embryo. For so long as the child is being formed in
'paradise,' it neither takes nourishment through the mouth, nor breathes
through the nostrils; for, placed as it is in the midst of fluid, it
would be instant death for it, were it to breathe, inasmuch as it would
draw a fluid and be destroyed. Moreover, the child is conceived within
an envelope, which is called the *aminium*; but it receives nourishment
through the navel, and takes in the essence of the breath through the
dorsal artery above described. The River, therefore, going forth out of
Eden, is divided into four heads, namely, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling,
Touching and Tasting, for these are the only senses that the infant
formed in Paradise is possessed of.

"This then, according to Simon, is the law which Moses gave and his Four
Books are written in accordance with that law, as their own titles do
manifest. For the first book is *Genesis*; the very title, he affirms,
were sufficient for the understanding of the whole matter. For this
'Genesis' is the *Sight*, into which one section of the River branches
off, because the whole outer world is perceived through the sight.
Again, the title of the second book is *Exodus*, which signifies that it
was necessary for the thing born to pass through the Red Sea (meaning by
'Red Sea,' the blood), and to enter into the wilderness, and to drink of
the bitter water (Marah). Now this 'bitter water' which lies beyond the
Red Sea, is the path of *knowledge* during life, which leads through
places toilsome and unpleasant. But after it hath been changed by Moses,
that is, by the Word, that same bitter water becometh *sweet*. And that
such is the reality one may learn from everybody who exclaims in the
words of the poet:--

"'Black is the root, the flower as white as milk,  
Named Moly by the gods, full hard to find  
By mortals: but the gods all things can do.'

"Even what is said by the Gentiles is sufficient for the understanding

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

of the whole matter unto him that hath ears to hear. He that tasted of
the fruit given by Circe <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21) was not
only himself not changed into a beast, but by making use of the virtue
of the self-same fruit, remodelled, reformed and recalled those already
transformed by her into their own proper shape. For the Faithful Man,
and the beloved by that sorceress, is found out by means of that divine
and milky potion.

"In the like manner Leviticus is the Third Book (or River); which
signifies the sense of *smell*, or the *respiration*; for the whole of
that Book is concerning *sacrifices* and *oblations*. But wheresoever
there is sacrifice, there also dues a sweet smell of perfume arise up
from the sacrifice; concerning which sweet odour the sense of smelling
is the approver.

"'Numbers,' the Fourth of the Books, signifies the *Taste*, for then the
speech is active, inasmuch as it is through the Speech that all objects
are designated in *numerical* order.

"'Deuteronomy,' Simon makes out, is so named in reference to the child
that has been formed for *Touching*. For as the Touch doth by feeling
*reciprocate* and *confirm* the impressions received by the other
senses; proving an object to be either hard, or hot, or slippery--in the
like manner the Fifth Book of the Law is a *recapitulation* of the four
preceding Books.

"All things, therefore (continues he), that are not created exist within
us in *potentiality*, not in *activity*; like the science of grammar, or
of geometry, In the case, therefore, where they shall have met with the
proper training and instruction, there 'shall the Bitter be turned into
Sweet'; that is, 'the spears shall be turned into reaping-hooks, and the
swords into ploughshares;' they shall be no longer chaff and sticks born
for the fire, but the Perfect Fruit, like and equal, as already said,
unto the Unbegotten and Boundless Power. But where the Tree shall stand
alone, not bearing fruit, there, because it hath not received *form*, it
shall be destroyed. 'For now (saith he) the axe is nigh unto the root of
the tree. Every tree therefore that beareth not good fruit, is hewn down
and cast into the fire.'

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

"According to Simon, therefore, that blessed and inscrutable thing lies
*hidden*, and *within* every man, but in potentiality alone, not in
activity; the which is 'He who standeth, hath stood, and shall stand';
who standeth *above* in the Unbegotten Power, who hath stood *below* in
the 'River of Waters' when he was begotten in the *image*, and who shall
stand *above* by the side of the Blessed and Boundless Power, provided
that he shall have received *form*. For there are three that stand, and
unless there be the three Æons that stand, 'the Begotten One is not
adorned,' meaning Him, who, according to Simon's teaching, moved upon
the face of the waters; who hath been re-created after the image,
perfect and heavenly; who likewise is in no degree lower than the
Unbegotten Power."

"This is a saying amongst the Simonians, 'I and thou are one; thou
before me, I after thee.' '*This* is the One Power, divided into Above
and Below, begetting itself, nourishing itself, seeking after itself,
finding itself, being its own mother, its own. father, its own sister,
its own consort, its own daughter, son mother, father, inasmuch as it
alone is the Root of all things.'

"That *Fire* is the origin of the generation of all things generated,
Simon demonstrates after this fashion. 'Of all things whatsoever that
exist, being generated, the final cause of the desire for their
generation proceeds out of Fire. For "to be set on fire" is the term
used to designate the desire of the act of generation and propagation.
Now this "Fire," which is *one*, is changed into *two*. For in the male
the blood which is hot and red, like Fire in a visible shape, is
converted into seed; in the female this same blood is converted into
milk. And this change in the male becomes the generation-faculty itself;
whilst the change in the female becomes the instrument (efficient
cause), of the thing begotten. This (according to Simon) is the "Flaming
Sword," which is brandished to keep the way unto the Tree of Life. For
the blood is turned into seed and into milk; and this Power becomes both
father and mother; the father of those that be born, and the nutriment
of those that be nourished; standing in need of none other, sufficient
unto itself. Moreover the Tree of Life, which is guarded by the
brandished flaming sword is, as we have said, the Seventh Power, the
self-begotten,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

which comprehends all the others, and which is deposited within the
other Six Powers. For if that Flaming Sword should not be brandished,
then would that beautiful Tree be destroyed and perish; but when it is
changed into the seed and the milk, then He that is stored up within
them in potentiality, having obtained the necessary Logos (*Reason*) and
the fitting place wherein that Logos may be generated, then, beginning
as it were from the smallest spark, he shall wax great to perfection,
and increase, and become a Power without end, and without change, being
equal and like unto the infinite Æon, being no more begotten again to
all eternity.'

"Now, on the strength of this theory, as all are agreed, Simon made
himself out a god unto the ignorant, like that Libyan Apsethus above
mentioned; 'being begotten and subject to passion so long as he is in
potentiality, but not subject to passion after he shall have been
begotten, and have received the image, and having been made perfect
shall pass out of the dominion of the first two Powers, that is, of
Heaven and Earth.' For Simon speaks expressly upon this point in his
'Revelation,' in the following manner. 'Unto you therefore I say what I
say, and write what I write. The Writing is this. There are Two stocks
of all the Æons put together, having neither beginning nor end,
springing out of one Root, the which is *Silence*, invisible,
inconceivable, of which Stocks, the one shows itself from above, the
which is a great Power, *Mind* of the *all*, pervading all things, and
of the *male* sex: the other, showing itself from below, is the Great
*Intelligence*, and is of the *female* sex; generating all things. From
thence they correspond with each other, and keep up a partnership, and
illuminate the Middle Space lying between them (which is the air),
inconceivable, having neither beginning nor end. In this Middle Space is
the Father, who bears up all things and nourishes the things that have
beginning and ending. This is "He who standeth, hath stood, and shall
stand; being both male and female, a Power after the image of the
pre-existing infinite Power, that hath neither beginning nor ending,
existing in *Unity*." For the Intelligence in Unity proceeded out of
this last and became Twain. Now He (the Father) is One, for whilst he
contained that

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Power within
himself he was single; nevertheless he was not the *First*, although he
was pre-existent, but when he was manifested to himself out of himself,
he became *Second*, and neither was he named the "Father," before that
Power called him Father. In the like manner therefore as the
drawing-forth himself out of himself manifested unto himself his own
*Intelligence*, so did this Intelligence also, when manifested, not
*create*, but *contemplate* Him; and thereby stood-up the Father within
herself, that is to say, the Power. And this Intelligence likewise is
both a male and female Power; on which account they answer to one
another, for the Power differs not at all from the Intelligence, being
one and the same. From that which is above, indeed, is formed the Power;
from that which is below, the Intelligence. Of the same kind therefore
is the *Unity*, which is manifested out of them both; for being *one* it
is found to be *Twain*; both male and female, containing within itself
the female. In this manner the *Mind* exists within the Intelligence;
which, when severed from each other, although they are One, are found to
be Two.'

"Simon, therefore, by publishing these notions, did not merely distort
and wrest to his own purpose the sayings of Moses, but equally those of
the heathen poets. For he makes an allegory out of the Trojan Horse of
wood, and the story of Helen with the torch, and much else, which he
applies to his own fables concerning himself and his
'Intelligence.' <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22) Again he makes out
the latter to be the Lost Sheep, which, always taking up her abode in
the persons of women, doth cause trouble amongst all earthly Powers by
reason of her incomparable beauty; wherefore the Trojan War came to pass
because of her. For this 'Intelligence' <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_22) of his took up her abode in Helen who was
born just at that time; and so, when the Powers laid claim to her
possession, strife and discord arose amongst all the nations to whom she
manifested herself. At any rate, it was on this account that
Stesichorus, for having reviled her in his verses, was deprived of
sight; but afterwards, when he had repented,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

and written his 'Recantation,' in which he sang her praises, he
recovered the use of his eyes. Then, after she had been placed in
another body by the Angels and the Powers below (who according to Simon
wore the creators of the world), she was standing upon a housetop <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*](#fn_23) in Tyre, a city of Phœnicia, where he
found her on his landing. For he pretends to have gone thither expressly
in quest of her, to deliver her out of bondage; and, after having
ransomed her, he always carried her about with him, pretending that this
was the Lost Sheep, and he himself was the Power that is over all. But
the truth is, the impostor had become enamoured of this harlot, whose
real name was Helena, so that he bought and kept her; but out of shame
as regards his disciples, he invented the aforesaid fable. Furthermore,
nowadays those that be the followers of this deceiver and magician,
Simon, imitate his example, asserting that it is right to have
intercourse with all women promiscuously, for they say 'All land is
land, and it matters not where one sows his seed so long as he does sow
it.' Nay more, they pride themselves upon this promiscuous intercourse,
affirming that *this* is the 'Perfect Love,' and quote the text 'The
Holy of holies shall be made holy.' For they hold that they are bound by
no obligation as regards anything usually accounted wicked, inasmuch as
they have been *redeemed*. In this way, Simon, after he had ransomed
Helena, granted salvation unto men by means of his own *Knowledge* (or
the *Gnosis*). For inasmuch as the Angels governed the world badly by
reason of their own ambitiousness, Simon pretended that he was come to
set all things right, having changed his form, and made himself like to
the Principalities, the Powers, and the Angels; wherefore it was that he
appeared in man's shape, though not a man at all, and had suffered the
Passion in Judæa, although he had not suffered it; moreover that he had
manifested himself to the Jews as the *Son*, in Samaria as the *Father*,
and amongst the Gentiles elsewhere as the *Holy Ghost*, but that he
submitted to be called by whatever name men pleased. The Prophets were
inspired by the Angels, creators of the world, when they

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

delivered their prophecies; on which account those who believe in Simon
and Helena pay no regard to them, even in our times; and they do
whatever they please, affirming that they are redeemed through *his*
grace. For nothing is the cause of damnation, supposing a man to act
wickedly, for Evil is evil not through the nature of things but by
*convention*. For the Angels who created the world ordained it to be so
(as they assert), in order that they might keep in subjection, by means
of such fictions, all men who should listen to them. Furthermore they
explain the dissolution of the world as referring to the redemption of
their own sect.

"The disciples, therefore, of this Simon, practise magic arts and
incantation, and make philtres and seductive spells; they likewise send
the so-called 'dream-bringing' demons to trouble whomsoever they choose.
They likewise practise the rites of the gods named *Paredroi* (the
Assessors); they have also an image of Simon in the guise of Jupiter,
and likewise one of Helena in the figure of Minerva; and these they
worship, calling one the 'Master,' the other the 'Mistress.'" <span
id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_24)

So much for the system of the renowned Samaritan, in which, it will have
been seen, the place of logical reasoning is supplied by quibbles upon
words, taken absolutely without any reference to the context--a style of
argument, however, for which it must be confessed that he had highly
respectable authority. In strong contrast to this stands the next
system, which displays much of the refinement and sound training (amidst
its extravagance) of the Grecian mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[65:\*](gar13.htm#fr_21) Simon has here
forgotten his "Odyssey"; the antidote Moly having been given to Ulysses
by Hermes.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[68:\*](gar13.htm#fr_23) That is his wife
Helena. By a remarkable, though doubtless un-designed coincidence, Fra
Dolcino of Novara also went about accompanied by a similar female
"Intelligence."

<span id="fn_23"></span>[69:\*](gar13.htm#fr_24) A euphemism for "living
in a brothel," such being the mode in which these ladies advertised
themselves.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[70:\*](gar13.htm#fr_25) Here follows the
account of his career and end, already extracted (pp.
[21](gar07.htm#page_21), [22](gar07.htm#page_22)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Basilides](gar14)
