[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar17)  [Next](gar19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### II. THE MITHRAIC SACRAMENTS.

The principal rites of the worship of Mithras bore a very curious
resemblance to those subsequently established in the Catholic church;
they likewise furnished a model for the initiatory ceremonies observed
by the secret societies of the Middle Ages, and by their professed
descendants in modern times. The Neophytes were admitted by the rite of
*Baptism;* the initiated at their assemblies solemnly celebrated a
species of *Eucharist:* whilst the courage and endurance of the
candidate for admission into the sect were tested by *twelve*
consecutive trials, called "The Tortures," undergone within a cave
constructed for the purpose; all which "tortures" had to be completely
passed through before participation in the Mysteries was granted to the
aspirant.

The two distinguishing Rites, or "Sacraments" (to use the technical
term) are thus alluded to by Justin Martyr (*Apol*. II) in the earliest
description which has been left us of their character. "The Apostles in
the Commentaries written by themselves, which we call *Gospels*, have
delivered down to us that Jesus thus commanded them: He having taken
bread, after that He had given *thanks*, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[\*](#fn_46) said: Do this in commemoration of me;
this is my body. Also having taken a cup and returned thanks, He said:
This is my blood, and delivered it unto them alone. Which things indeed
the evil spirits have taught to be done, out of memory, in the Mysteries
and Initiations of Mithras. For in these likewise a cup of water, and
bread, are set out, with the addition of certain words, in the sacrifice
or act of worship of the person about to be initiated: a thing which Ye
either know by personal experience or may learn by inquiry." Again,
Tertullian, writing in the following century, has in the same
connection: "The Devil, whose business it is to pervert the truth,
*mimicks the exact circumstances* of the Divine Sacraments, in the
Mysteries of idols. He himself *baptises* some that is to say, his
believers and followers; he promises forgiveness

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

of sins from the *Sacred Fount*, and thereby initiates them into the
religion of Mithras: thus he *marks on the forehead* his own soldiers:
there he celebrates the *oblation of bread:* he brings in the symbol of
the Resurrection, and wins the crown with the sword." By the "symbol of
the Resurrection" Tertullian clearly means that "simulation of death"
mentioned by Lampridius (of which more hereafter), and which is typified
on so many talismans by the corpse bestridden by the Solar Lion. The
final ceremony he has himself explained in another passage: "Blush, my
Roman fellow-soldiers, even though ye be not to be judged by Christ, but
by any 'Soldier of Mithras,' who when he is undergoing initiation in the
*Cave*, in the very Camp of the Powers of Darkness, when the *crown*
(garland, rather) is offered to him (a sword being placed between, as
though in semblance of martyrdom), and about to be set upon his head, is
instructed to put forth his hand, and push the crown away, transferring
it perchance, to his shoulder, saying at the same time: My crown is
Mithras. And from that time forth he never wears a crown (garland), and
this he has for the badge of his initiation, for he is immediately known
to be a 'soldier of Mithras,' if he rejects a garland when offered to
him, saying that his crown is his god. Let us therefore acknowledge the
craftiness of the Devil; who copies certain things of these that be
Divine, in order that he may confound and judge us by the faithfulness
of his own followers." As to the ceremony here mentioned, unimportant as
it may seem to the modern reader, it may be remarked that as the wearing
a garland was indispensable among the ancients on all festive occasions,
the refusal of one upon such occasions would be a most conspicuous mark
of singularity, and of unflinching profession of faith. But every
dispassionate observer will perceive that these over-zealous Fathers
proceed to beg the question when they assume that the Mithraic rites
were devised as *counterfeits* of the Christian Sacraments: inasmuch as
the former were in existence long before the first promulgation of
Christianity; unless indeed to *imitate* by anticipation be considered
as merely another proof of the mischievous sagacity of its diabolical
opponent. On the other hand, there is good reason to suspect that the
simple

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

commemorative, or distinctive, ceremonies, instituted by the first
founder of Christianity, were gradually invested with those mystic and
supernatural virtues which later ages insisted upon as articles of
faith, by the teaching of unscrupulous missionaries, anxious to outbid
the attractions of long-established rites of an apparently cognate
character. By this assimilation they offered to their converts through
the performance of, as it were, certain magical practices, all those
spiritual blessings of which the rites themselves were, at their
institution, the *symbols* only, not the instruments. A very instructive
illustration of such union of Mithraicism and Christianity, in the
celebration of the Eucharist, is afforded by the Pistis-Sophia's
description of the great one celebrated by the Saviour himself upon the
shore of the Sea of Galilee, which will be found given at length in its
proper place. And lastly, it deserves to be mentioned that "eating the
flesh and drinking the blood" of a human sacrifice was far from being a
mere figure of speech in certain of these mystic celebrations. Pliny
gives high praise to Claudius for having suppressed the worship of the
Druids (whom he considers as identical in their religion with the Magi),
in whose rites "it was esteemed the highest act of religion to slaughter
a man, and the most salutary of proceedings to eat the flesh of the
same." And in this notion, which necessarily became attached by
suspicion to the proceedings of all secret societies, lay most probably
the root of the belief so widely diffused amongst the Roman vulgar, that
the real Eucharist of the first Christians at their nocturnal meetings
was the sacrifice, and the feasting upon, a new-born child, concealed
within a vessel of flour, into which the catechumen was directed by his
sponsors to plunge a knife.

In the particulars preserved to us of the Mithraic Sacrament, certain
very curious analogies to those of the Christian rite cannot fail to
arrest our attention. The "Bread therein used was a round cake," emblem
of the solar disk, and called *Mizd*. In this name Seel discovers the
origin of *Missa*, as designating the Bloodless Sacrifice of the Mass,
assuming that this Mizd was the prototype of the Host (*hostia*), which
is of precisely the same forum and dimensions.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

It is not out of place to notice here the various etymologies which have
been proposed for the word *Missa*. The most popular one, which moreover
has the sanction of Ducange, derives it from the words "Ite, missa est,"
with which the priest dismissed the *non-communicant* part of the
congregation, before proceeding to the actual consecration of the
Eucharist. The translation of the phrase by the vulgar into "Depart, it
is the Missa," would certainly be obvious enough. But, according to the
rule in all such cases, the *object* sacrificed gives its name to the
ceremony, rather than a phrase from the ceremonial itself, and this
object had from time immemorial gone by the name of *hostia*, or
"victim." The early Christians were quite as partial as the Gnostics to
the naturalizing of the Hebrew terms belonging to the Mosaic ordinances,
and applying the same to their own practices. Thus the old Covenant went
amongst them by the name of *Phase*, for example:--

"In hoc festo novi Regis,  
 Novum *Pascha* novæ legis  
    Vetus *Phase* terminat."

The Rabbins have possibly preserved a tradition that explains the true
origin of the wafer. Alphonsus de Spira, in his "Fortalitium Fidei" (II.
2), asserts that its circular form is a symbol of the sun, and that it
is in reality offered in sacrifice, at the celebration of the Mass, to
the genius of that luminary! For the Kabbalists hold that Moses and the
prophets were inspired by the genius of Saturn, a good and pure spirit,
whereas Jesus was by that of Mercury, a malevolent one; and the
Christian religion was the work of Mercury, Jupiter and the Sun, all
combining together for that purpose. There is yet another curious
analogy to be noticed, when it is remembered that the Mass symbolises
the *death* of its first institutor. A *round* cake (the *chupatty* of
such evil notoriety at the commencement of the Sepoy Mutiny) is, amongst
the Hindoos, the established offering to the Manes of their ancestors.
The Christian "breaking of bread," besides symbolising the great
sacrifice once offered, seems, from the account of the Manifestation at
Emmaus, to have been done in some peculiar

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

way which should serve for a *masonic* token, or means of mutual
recognition amongst the brethren.

The sacramental Cup, or *chalice*, is often represented as set upon the
Mithraic altar, or rather, *table;* and a curious piece of jugglery
connected with its employment (though not amongst the Mithraicists), is
described by Epiphanies (Hæres. xxxiv.). The followers of Marcus, in
their celebrating the Eucharist, employed *three* vases made of the
clearest glass. These were filled with wine which, during the progress
of the ceremony, changed into a blood-red, purple, and blue colour,
respectively. "Thereupon the officiating minister, or more properly
speaking, *magician*, hands one of these vessels to some lady of the
congregation, and requests her to bless it. Which done, he pours this
into another vase of much greater capacity, with the prayer, "May the
grace of God, which is above all, inconceivable, inexplicable, fill
thine inner man, and increase the knowledge of Himself within thee,
sowing the grain of mustard-seed in good ground!" Whereupon the liquid
in the larger vase swells and swells until it runs over the brim.

The worship of Mithras long kept its ground under the Christian emperors
in the capital itself, and doubtless survived its overthrow there for
many generations longer in the remote and then semi-independent
provinces. At the very close of the fourth century, Jerome, writing to
Læta, says, "A *few* years ago, did not your kinsman Gracchus, a name
the very echo of patrician nobility, when holding the office of Prefect
of the City, break down and burn the Cave of Mithras, with all the
monstrous images which pervade the initiatory rites, as Corax, Niphus,
the Soldier, the Lion, the Persian, Helios, and Father Bromius?"

In the imagery here alluded to, it is easy to recognise figures that
perpetually occur upon the still extant representations of the Mithras
worship. In *Corax*, the Raven; in *Niphus*, Cneph the serpent; the
*armed man;* the *Lion* bestriding the human victim; the youth in
*Persian* garb; the *Sun*, expressed either by Phœbus in his car, or by
the star with eight rays; and *Bromius* "the Roarer," appropriate title
of the Grecian Dionysos; who also appears as the Asiatic *Phanaces*, a
youth holding a

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

torch in each hand, one elevated and one depressed to signify his rising
and setting. Chiflet's gem (Fig. 62) may on good grounds be taken for a
picture of the Mithraic ritual, and upon it all the forementioned
figures and symbols are easily to be discovered. Two erect serpents form
a kind of frame to the whole tableau; at the top of which are seen the
heads of Sol and Luna confronted; between them stands an eagle with
outspread wings; at the back of each, a raven. In the field are two
naked, crowned men on horseback, trampling upon as many dead bodies;
between them a kneeling figure in supplicatory attitude, over whose head
are two stars. Behind each horseman stand two soldiers. In the exergue
is set out a table supporting a loaf, a fawn (sacred to Bacchus), a
chalice, and something indistinct, but probably meant for the *crown*
Tertullian speaks of. The reverse presents a more simple design: two
crested serpents (*dracones*), twined about wands, and looking into a
cup; two stars over a table resting upon a larger vase; and on each side
a bow, the ends of which finish in serpents’ heads.

In this composition we probably see portrayed certain amongst the tests
of the neophyte's courage, which, according to Suidas, were termed the
"Twelve Degrees" or "Tortures." These corresponded in nature, although
of vastly more severe reality, with those trials of courage to which our
Masonic Lodges subject the "apprentice" who seeks admission amongst
them. During the Mithraic probation, which lasted *forty* days, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_47) the candidate was tested by the Four
Elements, he lay naked a certain number of nights upon the snow, and
afterwards was scourged for the space of two days. These Twelve Tortures
are sculptured upon the border of the famous Mithraic tablets preserved
in the Innsbruck Museum, and a brief account of their several stages
will serve to elucidate much of what remains to be discussed. I. Man
standing and about to plunge a dagger into the throat of a kneeling
figure, who holds up his hands in supplication. (This scene appears
analogous to the one in the modern ceremonial, when the candidate,
ordered to remove the bandage from his eyes, beholds many swords pointed
in the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

most threatening manner at his naked breast.) II. Naked man lying on the
earth, his head resting on his hand, in the posture of repose. (Probably
the penance of the bed of snow.) III. The same figure, standing with
hands uplifted in a huge crescent (perhaps an *ark*, and representing
the trial by water. To this last, Plato is reported to have been
subjected during his initiation in Egypt, and to have but narrowly
escaped drowning). IV. The same, but now with the *pileus*, cap of
liberty, upon his head, rushing boldly into a great fire (the trial by
fire). V. He is now seen struggling through a deep stream, and
endeavouring to grasp a rock. VI. Bull walking to the left.

On the other side come the remaining stages. VII. Four guests reclining
at a horseshoe table (*sigma*), upon which is set a boar roasted whole.
VIII. Youth guided up a flight of interminable steps by an aged man. IX.
Youth kneeling before a man in a long robe, whose hand he grasps in
prayer. X. The same figures, but their positions are interchanged. XI.
Seated man, before whom kneels a naked, crowned, youth, escorted by one
in a long robe. XII. Naked man holding up the hind legs of a cow, so as
to receive in his face the stream still regarded by the Hindoos as the
most efficient laver of regeneration, and consequently always
administered to persons at their last gasp. The same sacred fluid (as I
am informed by a Parsee) is used in the sacramental cups drunk by every
male upon his first admission into that religion, which takes place on
his completing his seventh year. Nay more, such is the belief in its
cleansing virtue, that scrupulous Parsees always carry a bottle thereof
in their pocket, wherewith to purify their hands after any unavoidable
contact with unbelievers!

Very similar ceremonies to these were practised in the secret societies
of the Middle Ages, if we choose to accept Von Hammer's interpretation
of certain mysterious sculptures, still to be seen in the
Templar-churches of Germany; and which he has copiously illustrated in
his 'Mysterium Baphometis revelatum.' In the intaglio already described,
the kneeling neophyte is encompassed by all the terrific and mysterious
host of Mithras, so remorselessly destroyed by the zealous Gracchus.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And again, the
corpses trampled on by the crowned horsemen clearly refer to that
recorded test of the candidate's fortitude--the apparent approach of
death--for Lampridius puts down amongst the other mad freaks of
Commodus, that during the Mithraic ceremonies, "when a certain thing had
to be done for the purpose of inspiring terror, he polluted the rites by
a *real murder:*" an expression clearly showing that a scenic
representation of such an act did really form a part of the proceedings.
The Raven properly takes its place here, as being the attribute of the
Solar god in the Hellenic creed, on which account it is often depicted
standing upon Apollo's lyre.

Many other gems express the spiritual benefits conferred by the Mithraic
initiation upon believers. A frequent device of the kind, is a man, with
hands bound behind his back, seated at the foot of a pillar supporting a
gryphon with paw on wheel, that special emblem of the solar god; often
accompanied with the legend ΔΙΚΑΙΩΣ, "I have deserved it." Another
(Blacas) displays an unusual richness of symbolism: the same gryphon's
tail ends in a scorpion, whilst the wheel squeezes out of its chrysalis
a tiny human soul that stretches forth its hands in jubilation; in front
stands Thoth's ibis, holding in its beak the balance, perhaps the
horoscope of the patient. This talisman too, unites the Egyptian with
the Magian creed, for the benefit of the carrier; for the reverse
displays Isis, but in the character of Hygieia, standing upon her
crocodile; the field being occupied by strangely complicated monograms,
of sense intelligible to the initiated alone, and doubtless communicated
to the recipient of the talisman, who found in them "a New Name written,
that no man knoweth, save he that receiveth the same." But both
doctrines and ceremonial of this religion are best understood through
the examination of extant representations displaying them either
directly or allegorically; which in their turn are illustrated by the
practice of the faithful few who still keep alive the Sacred Fire,
namely the Parsecs of Guzerat. The series therefore will be most
fittingly opened by the following curious description of a cave of
Mithras, as discovered in its original and unprofaned condition, written
by that eminent antiquary, Flaminius Vacca. (No. 117.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[122:\*](gar18.htm#fr_47) This expression seems
to prove that the notion of blessing, or consecrating, the elements, had
not then (the second century) crept into the Christian practice.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[127:\*](gar18.htm#fr_48) Perhaps the origin of
the Lenten term of self-inflicted punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. A Roman Mithras in His Cave](gar19)
