[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar18)  [Next](gar20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

### III. A ROMAN MITHRAS IN HIS CAVE.

"I remember there was found in the vineyard of Sig. Orazio Muti (where
the treasure was discovered), opposite S. Vitale, an idol in marble
about 5 palms high (3¾ ft.), standing erect upon a pedestal in an empty
chamber, which had the door walled up. This idol had the head of a lion,
but the body that of a man. Under the feet was a globe, whence sprung a
serpent which encompassed all the idol, and its head entered into the
lion's mouth. He had his hands crossed upon the breast, with a key in
each; four wings fastened upon the shoulders, two pointing upwards, two
downwards. I do not consider it a very antique work, being done in a
rude manner, or else indeed it was so ancient that at the time when it
was made the good style was not yet known. Sig. Orazio, however, told me
that a theologian, a Jesuit Father, explained its meaning by saying it
signified the Devil, who, in the times of heathenism, ruled over the
world: hence the *globe* under his feet, the *serpent* which begirt his
body and entered into his mouth, signified his foretelling the future
with ambiguous responses; the *keys* in his hands, his sovereignty over
the world; the *lion's head*, his being the ruler of all beasts; the
*wings*, his presence everywhere. Such was the interpretation given by
the Father aforesaid. I have done everything to see the idol, but Sig.
Orazio being now dead, his heirs do not know what has become of it. It
is not, however, unlikely that by the advice of the same theologian,
Sig. Orazio may have sent it to some *limekiln to cure its dampness*,
for it had been buried many and many a year." Thus was this most
interesting monument destroyed through the conceited ignorance of a
wretched ecclesiastic, himself more truly a worshipper of the Evil
Principle, than was the ancient votary of the beneficent Lord of Light
who carved that wondrous image. Vacca adds, "I remember, there was found
in the same place, after the above-mentioned idol, another, only in
bas-relief, also having a lion's head, but the rest of the body human:
with the arms extended, in each hand a torch; with two wings pointing
upwards, two downwards, from between which issued a serpent.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At his right stood
an altar with fire; from the idol's mouth proceeded a ribbon or scroll
extending over the fire."

This *lion*-headed deity can be no other than Jerome's "Pater Bromius,"
a Grecian title of Bacchus; and he, we are told, distinguished himself
under that disguise in the famous war of the giants--

"Tu cum Parentis regna per arduum  
 Cohors Gigantum scanderet impia,  
 Rhætum retorsisti *leonis*  
    Unguibus horribilique mala."  
                        (Horace, Od. II. xix. 21-24.)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And, tracing back
this composite figure to the real source of such iconology, it is found
to be the very one under which "Nri-singha-avatar" is depicted. It was
assumed by the deity in order to destroy the tyrant Hiransyakacipu, who
had obtained the gift of invulnerability against all *known* beasts,
either by day or night.

A Mithraic cave, with the contiguous buildings, was discovered at
Spoleto in 1878. In the end wall were the usual three niches for the god
and his torch-bearers. In front of them an altar inscribed "Soli invicto
Mithræ sacrum." Close to the altar, a tall phallic stone, perforated
with a square hole near the top--perhaps the "stone symbolizing the
Birth of Mithras" mentioned by Firmicus. The cave, with the ground plan
of the whole edifice is given in the 'Archæologia,' vol. 47, p. 205.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Mithraic Talismans](gar20)
