[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar28)  [Next](gar30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

## GNOSTIC CONNECTION WITH SUPERSTITIOUS PRACTICES.

### I. THE EVIL EYE.

Serapis we have seen, in one of his representations lately noticed,
specially invoked to defend his votary against the *Evil Eye* under its
abstract title of φθόνος. A glance therefore at this most ancient
superstition (which still flourishes in full vigour in the same
countries that gave it birth) will form a fitting prelude to the coming
section, which takes for subject talismans and amulets of every class.

The belief in the power for mischief of the eye of an envious or
malignant person (to counteract which was the principal object of so
many of the amulets that have come down to us) was universal amongst all
ancient nations. It is needless to bring forward classic writers to
support this statement; such as Apollonius Rhodius, where he skilfully
avails himself of the notion, and makes Medea by her basilisk glance
alone work the death of Talas, the Brazen Man, guardian of the Cretan
shores; for even St. Paul (Rom. i. 29) sets down this action of the soul
working through the eye in the list of sins of the deepest dye. But the
actual *manner* of operation upon the sufferer I have nowhere found
explained except in the following passage from Heliodorus ('Æthiopica,'
iii. 8), and which therefore deserves to be inserted at length in this
prelude to the subject. "Tell me, my good Calasiris, what is the malady
that has attacked your daughter?" "You ought not to be surprised," I
replied, "if at the time when she was heading the procession in the
sight of so vast an assemblage of people, she had drawn upon herself
some *envious eye*." Whereupon, smiling ironically, "Do you then," asked
he, "like the vulgar in general, believe in the reality of such
fascination?" "As much as I do in any other fact," I replied, "and the
thing is this: the air which surrounds us passing through the eyes, as
it were through a strainer, and

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

also through the mouth, the teeth and the other passages, into the
inward parts, whilst its external properties make their way in together
with it--whatever be its quality as it flows in, of the same nature is
the effect it disseminates in the recipient, so that when any one looks
upon beauty with envy, he fills the circumambient air with a malignant
property, and diffuses upon his neighbour the breath issuing from
himself, all impregnated with bitterness, and *this*, being as it is of
a most subtile nature, penetrates through into the very bone and marrow.
Hence envy has frequently turned itself into a regular disease, and has
received the distinctive appellation of *fascination* (βασκανία).
Consider also, my Charities, how many people have been infected with
ophthalmia, how many with other pestilential diseases, not from any
contact with those so affected, or from sharing the same bed or same
table, but merely from breathing the same air. Let also (and above all
the rest), the origin of love be a support to my argument, for *that*
owes its first origin to the sight which shoots like arrows the passion
into the soul. And for this there is very good reason, for of all the
senses and passages of the body, the sight is the most easily excited,
and the most inflammable, and consequently the most susceptible with
regard to external emanation, in consequence of its own natural fiery
essence, attracting to itself the visits of love. And if you wish for a
proof drawn from Natural History, recorded likewise in the Sacred Books,
the bird, the yellowhammer, cures the jaundice, and if a person so
affected shall but look at that bird, the latter at once tries to escape
and shuts its eyes; not as some think, because it begrudges the benefit
to the sick man, but because, if looked upon by men, it is forced by its
nature to attract his disease into its own body, like an exhalation, and
therefore shuns the glance as much as a blow. And amongst serpents, the
basilisk, doth not he, as you may have heard, kill and blast whatever
comes in his way by means of his eyes and his breath alone? And if some
give the stroke of the Evil Eye even to those they love and are well
disposed towards, you must not be surprised, for people of an envious
disposition act not as they wish, but as their Nature compels them to
do."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. On a Ceraunia of Jade Converted into a Gnostic
Talisman](gar30)
