[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar32)  [Next](gar34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

## THE ABRAXAS.

### I. ABRAXASTER, OR BORROWED TYPES.

Bellermann in his lucid little treatise, 'Drei Programmen über die
Abraxas-gemmen,' <span id="fr_132"></span>[\*](#fn_131) has divided his
subject into three parts--the true *Abraxas*, all of which bear the
Pantheos commonly so entitled, whose creation is assigned to Basilides
himself; the *Abraxaster*, or types borrowed from the old religions, but
adapted by the Gnostic semi-Christians to the expression of their own
new ideas; and *Abraxoid*, which, though vulgarly accounted Basilidan
gems, have no connection at all with Basilides’ own doctrines, but owe
their origin entirely to the astrologers of *his* or anterior times.

The *Abraxaster* gems, therefore, on account of this priority of their
first creation, have by right the first claim to be considered; and this
mode of treating the subject possesses the additional advantage of
elucidating the sources of many ideas that strike us as so extraordinary
in the Gnostic creed.

The strangely heterogeneous mixture of creeds that prevailed over the
Roman Empire during the two centuries between the reigns of Trojan and
Constantine is exemplified by numerous allusions in the 'Historia
Augusta,' equally with their tangible monuments, which are the subject
of this inquiry. What vast encouragement (little enough needed, of a
truth) must have been given to the talisman-makers by the accession to
imperial power of the Syrian priest Heliogabalus! "He used to sacrifice
*human victims*, selecting for the purpose, throughout all Italy, boys
of noble birth and conspicuous beauty, having both parents living, in
order that both parties might feel the keener anguish. In fact
*Magicians* of every sort attended upon him and practised their arts
every day, whilst he gave them every encouragement, and returned thanks
to the gods for his having met with their especial favourites, at the
same time that he was prying into the entrails of the sacrificed
children, and torturing the victims to death, after the rules of his
national religion."--(*Lampridius*.) And yet the same amusing chronicler
puts it

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

down amongst the *accomplishments* of his model Emperor, Severus
Alexander, cousin-german to the monster he has previously
portrayed--"that he was a great proficient in Judicial Astrology
(*mathesis*), so that he gave permission to astrologers to profess and
teach that science publicly at Rome. He was moreover very well skilled
in divination by victims (*haruspicina*); also an excellent diviner by
birds (*ornithoscopos*), so far as even to surpass the Augurs of Spain
and Pannonia." This same "every way accomplished gentleman" (to use the
Elizabethan phrase) set up the statues of Abraham and Christ side by
side with Orpheus and Alexander in his private chapel (*Sacrarium*);
whilst his mad predecessor had conceived the grand notion of founding
one universal syncretistic religion; for having conveyed to Rome his
Emesene god (the *aerolite*), he built for him a temple on the Palatine,
whither he transferred the Palladium, Vesta's fire, the Ancilia, the
Cybele--in short, whatever object of worship was most sacred to the
Romans. Nay, more--he talked of drawing into the same centre the
"*religions* of the Jews and Samaritans and the *devotion* of the
Christians, in order that his deity, Elagabal, might possess the mystery
of every other creed."--(*Heliogabalus*, 3.)

Of the Abraxaster class the figures are for the most part drawn from the
ancient iconography of the Egyptian religion; but they were adopted in a
more spiritual sense by the newly-arisen sects, holding the doctrines of
Christianity strangely amalgamated with the old teachings of the
Mysteries. <span id="fr_133"></span>[\*](#fn_132)

Of all these borrowed types the most frequent and most important is the
Jackal-headed *Anubis* (sometimes double-headed, the human being
superadded to his own), and bearing the caduceus of Hermes to denote his
office of conducting souls, not as of yore through the shades of the
lower world, <span id="fr_134"></span>[†](#fn_133) but along the
planetary path to their final rest in the Pleroma. Thus the Gnostic

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gospel,
"Pistis-Sophia" (§ 20), describing the Saviour after receiving his
luminous vestment, inscribed with the Five words of power and with the
names of all the Domination to be encountered in his Ascension, makes
him come first to the Gate of the firmament, then to the God of the
sphere, then to the Sphere of Fate, and lastly to the Twelve great Æons:
all which Powers when they beheld their own *names* written upon his
vesture were smitten with fear and began to sing hymns unto him.

This Anubis-Hermes appears sometimes waving a palm-branch, to proclaim
his victory over the Powers of Evil; or presiding at the *psychostasia*
"weighing of the soul," the scene commonly pictured in the Egyptian
Ritual of the Dead. In the latter character he stands here for Christ,
the Judge of the quick and the dead; but his successor in mediæval art
is the Archangel Michael, who holds the scales. In the old Greek gems
Hermes is often represented as bending forward, caduceus in hand, and by
its mystic virtue assisting a soul to emerge from the depths of the
earth--a strange coincidence in form, probably too in origin, with the
mediæval picture of the Saviour lifting souls out of Purgatory. The
Zoroastrian Hell, a burning lake of molten metal, into which, on the
Judgment-Day, Ahriman with his followers were to be cast, had for object
the ultimate *purification* and restoration to their pristine state of
the condemned--a merciful doctrine, held by Origen, and partly allowed
by Jerome.

Hermes in this particular character of *Psychopompos* was made great use
of by the Naaseni (Ophites) as the prophetic representative of the
Saviour in his grandest office. They interpreted Hermes’ leading souls
through darkness into Elysium as Christ's guiding the minds of the
*enlightened* out of *Ignorance* into *Knowledge*, in their special
sense of the words. As may well be supposed, they descanted largely upon
that

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

peculiar symbol, under which form Hermes, surnamed Cyllenius, was
worshipped. Amongst their mystical expositions of the object one curious
fact appears, that its popular name was ἀγαθοφόρον, "bringer of good
luck," for which cause it was set up at cross-roads, and upon
house-tops. But as regards the ancient religion, since it is thus made
out that this attribute, later modified into a Pillar, stood for
Cyllenius, guide of departed souls (exactly as the same figure,
*lingam*, represents Siva, Lord of the dead in modern Hinduism), the
reason becomes obvious why its sculptured representations should have
been the earliest form of monument placed over the departed. The
monuments secured for the dweller in the grave the perpetual protection
of the Guide and Shepherd of souls; a colossal phallus crowns to this
day the summit of the oldest tomb, the date of which is historically
certain, the tumulus of the Lydia king, Alyattes. The Asiatic colonists
carried with them into Italy the same belief in the protective virtues
of the symbol; carved in stone it regularly surmounted the door of the
sepulchre. One lately came into my possession, inscribed around with the
name and patronymic of the deceased Etruscan, whose repose it had so
long guarded, **SVSES FELVS FENTV**, "Suses, son of Phintas."

This double character of Anubis is very curiously expressed by the
figure upon a sard belonging to myself, which to the casual observer
presents that most orthodox of types, the Good Shepherd, carrying a lamb
upon his shoulders, leaning upon his staff, his loins bound with a
girdle having long and waving ends. But upon closer examination this so
innocent personage resolves himself into the double-headed god of Egypt,
the lamb's head doing duty for the jackal's, springing from the same
shoulders with that of the man, whilst the floating end of the girdle is
turned into the bushy tail of the wolfish beast, and the "latrator
Anubis" bursts upon our astonished eyes. This identification of
character in Anubis and Christ enables us rightly to understand that
drawing, the discovery of which created such a sensation at Rome a few
years back, scratched (*graffito*) roughly on the plaster of a room in a
house buried (in ancient times) under the extended buildings of the
Palatine.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It represents this
same jackal-headed man holding in front of him a Latin Cross with his
outstretched hands, and standing on a pedestal, in front of his
worshipper, who makes the customary form of adoration by raising his
hand to his lips, and who has expressed the object of his handiwork by
the inscription **ΑΛΕΞΑΜΕΝΟC CΕΒΕΤΕ ΘÆΟΝ**. In reality the production of
some devout, but illiterate Gnostic, it is construed by its present
owners <span id="fr_135"></span>[\*](#fn_134) into a shocking heathen
blasphemy, and a jibe upon the good Christian Alexamenos, because they
mistake the jackal's head for that of an ass, and consequently imagine
an intentional caricature of their own Crucifix.

The discovery of this picture clearly illustrates a passage of
Tertullian (Apol. xvi.) where he says to his opponents: "Like many
others you have dreamed that an *Ass's Head* is our god. But a now
version of our god has lately been made public at Rome, ever since a
certain hireling convict of a bullfighter put forth a picture with some
such inscription as this, 'the god of the Christians **ΟΝΟΚΟΙΗΤΗΣ**.' He
was depicted thus--with the ears of an ass, and with one of his feet
hoofed, holding in his hand a book, and clothed in the toga." An exact
description this of the Anubis figured by Matter (Pl. ii. c. No. 1.),
save that instead of a book the god carries a [caduceus](errata.htm#12)
and palm-branch. The same calumny was somewhat later transferred by the
Christians themselves to the account of the Gnostics. Not being
acquainted with the Egyptian beast, they mistook (perhaps intentionally)
the head of the jackal for that of the ass, which in truth it strongly
resembles in the rude drawing of our gems. Thus we find, at the close of
the fourth century, Epiphanius asserting "that the Gnostic Sabaoth has,
according to some, the face of an *Ass*, according to others; that of a
Hog; on which latter account He hath forbidden the Jews to eat swine's
flesh." This second notion was a very ancient one, being alluded to by
Petronius in 'Judæus licet et *porcinum* numen adoret." Now *Sabaoth*
being held by the Gnostics as the national god of the Jews, it seems
probable that this same confusion of one beast with the other was the
real source of

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

the opinion so prevalent amongst the ancients, and quoted by Tacitus
(Hist. v. 4). "The sacred object so zealously guarded from profane eyes
within the Sanctuary at Jerusalem was the figure of the *wild ass* by
whose guidance they had relieved their thirst and their distress, Moses
having, through the observation of the movements of a troop of these
animals, discovered the spring, the waters of which saved his followers
from perishing in the desert." This legend was furthermore connected
with the belief that the real god of the Jews was Bacchus, for the ass
was sacred to the god of wine. For this dedication Pliny finds a
singular reason in the fact that the ass was fond of fennel, a deadly
poison to all other quadrupeds, but a plant specially consecrated to
Bacchus (xxxv. 1). Again, the spurious gospel 'The Genealogy of Mary'
assigns for the cause of the death of Zacharias, son of Barachias, that
once entering the Temple he beheld standing within the Sanctuary a man
with the face of an ass, and when he was rushing out to cry unto the
people, Woe unto you! Whom do ye worship? he was smitten with dumbness
by the apparition. But afterwards, when he had recovered his speech, and
revealed what he had seen unto the Jews, they slew him for a blasphemer.
And this they gave as a reason wherefore the High Priest had bells
fastened around the hem of his garment, in order that this monstrous
deity might by their tinkling be warned of the approach of man, and so
have the time to conceal himself. This wild story is preserved by
Epiphanius alone, for the original work is entirely lost. It was
ascribed to St. Matthew, and was taken for their special textbook by the
Collyridians, who got their name from their custom of sacrificing cakes
to the Virgin Mary, whom they pretended was also born of a virgin.
Faustus, bishop of Riez, cites this same gospel concerning the parentage
of Mary. But the apocryphal gospel, 'The Birth of Mary,' still extant,
is of a totally different character, being a mere monkish invention of
the most orthodox stupidity; and which, coupled with the
'Protevangelion,' became the source of all the mediæval pictures and
sculptures that set forth the history of the Madonna.

To the same Egyptian family likewise belongs the boy *Harpocrates* or
*Horus* (the vernal Sun), having the symbol. of

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

fecundity monstrously exaggerated and seated upon the lotus, which
expressed the same idea by its abundant seeds; and also *Perfection*
because for its flower, fruit, bulb, all exhibit the form of the
*circle*, as Iamblichus observes. Macrobius too remarks that *Horus* is
the Egyptian equivalent for Apollo, who gave his name to the twenty-four
*hours* of day and night: and this acceptation of his character is
recorded by the Alexandrian plasma (Vienna Cabinet, I. 39) which
identifies him with the Grecian Sun god: **ΜΕΓΑC ΩΡΟC ΑΠΟΛΛΩΝ ΑΡΠΟΚΡΑΤΗC
ΕϒΙΑΛΑΤΟC ΤΩ ΦΟΡΟϒΝΤΙ**. He often appears accompanied by Anubis in the
character of his messenger. Again, Horus is seen adored by the kneeling
Cynocephalus baboon, the animal consecrated to Luna. This last curious
animal also belonged to Thoth, scribe of the gods, and makes a favourite
Gnostic device performing his devotions before a pillar covered all over
with inscriptions and supporting a *triangle*, symbol of the Moon whose
influence was supposed singularly to affect his constitution. This
*pillar* clearly enough denotes those "Pillars of Hermes," by means of
which Iamblichus solved all the questions propounded to him by
Porphyrius (*Jam. De Mysterieis*, II.).

To make the allusion more certain, these beings are even designated in
the spells by their proper name of "Titans." Ficoroni has given in his
*Formæ* No. 4 a mould for casting the reverse of a medalet, of the 3 B
size, bearing the Dioscuri facing each other, holding their spears point
downwards, in token of amity, in their left hands each a *situla*.
Behind, vertically **CΑΒΑΩΤ** in two lines: in the exergue **ΤΙΤΑΝ**,
space not admitting the remainder of the title--too well-known besides
to require more than such a reminiscence.

Horus is often figured sailing through the heavens in the sacred boat,
the *Baris* steered by two hawks; solar emblems, with sun and moon
overhead, and taking the same titles **ΙΑΩ**, **ΑΒΛΑΝΑΘΑΝΑΛΒΑ**, &c., as
the great Abraxas-god himself, and with reason, the same idea being
couched in the two personifications. *Horus*, as Heliodorus records
(Æth. ix. 22), was also applied to the Nile, whose Greek name Νεῖλος
also contained the mystic solar number 365; this voyager in the *baris*
is analogous to the Hindoo Neryana, the child floating

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

in his argah leaf upon the face of the waters having his whole body
coloured *blue* (nila). To complete the resemblance the *situla*
regularly carried from a cord in the hand of Anubis is the very *lotah*,
brass drinking cup, of the modern Brahmins. Those common emblems, the
baris and the coiled serpent, have their Gnostic meaning fully explained
by a remarkable passage in the Pistis-Sophia (§ 359). "And the disk of
the sun was a *Great Dragon* whose tail was in his mouth, who went up
into the Seven Powers on the left hand, being drawn by four Powers
having the similitude of white horses. But the going of the Moon was in
the shape of a *boat*, the rudder whereof showed a male and female
dragon with two white cows drawing the same, and the figure of a child
on the stern guiding the dragons, who drew away the light from the
*Rulers* (the regular synonym in the book for the rebellious Æons, lords
of the Zodiac), and in front of the child was the similitude of a cat."

The *Regeneration* of the "Spiritual Man" occasionally decorates these
talismans, being symbolised in the most materialistic manner by the
Solar Lion impregnating a naked woman, the recognised emblem of the
soul, who, "quadrupedum ritu," submits with joy to the vivifying
operation. And the spiritual man thus regenerate is again depicted under
the form of a human outline holding up by the neck a huge serpent, both
of them entirely filled up with inscribed letters, amongst which the
mystic Seven Vowels largely predominate.

Scaliger, however, as cited by Salmasius in the above-quoted work, takes
this figure to be the representative of the combined 365 Æons, all whose
names are *supposed* to be condensed within his outline--in short he is
the emblem of the Pleroma, and stands for the "Adam-Kadmon" of the
Kabbalists, the Primal Man, the Ophite *Adamas*, after whose image the
second Adam was made. Or again, this same combination may have been
intended to display the Seven Vowels, with their forty and nine Powers,
the virtues whereof are so wondrously exalted by the inspired writer of
the Pistis-Sophia (§ 378), whose words are cited in another place. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[\*](#fn_135) But as the fact bears directly upon the

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

sigh before us, it may be mentioned here that the same gospel (358)
makes the Saviour open his "Prayer" with the ejaculation, **ΑΕΗΙΟϒΩΙΑΩΩΑ
ΙΩΙΑ**; which, as enveloping the mystic Name of God, were the most
obvious spell to be selected to fill up so important a talisman. Neither
is it out of place to conclude this inquiry with the notice that the
motto of the mediæval House of Hapsburgh was the *Latin* vowels
**A.E.I.O.V**. These enigmatical letters were interpreted by the
arrogance of succeeding generations, puffed up with imperial dignity,
into the initials of the prophecy "Austriae est imperare orbi universe."
But I more than suspect that the *five* Latin letters were adopted by
some *illuminato* amongst the ancient Dukes (perhaps acquired during his
alchemical studies) as containing the same transcendental virtues with
the Gnostic *seven* of the Greek alphabet.

The *winged* goddesses Athor and Sate, representing the Roman Venus and
Juno, sometimes are found accompanied with such legends as makes it
evident they too had been pressed into the Gnostic service, as
representatives of certain amongst the *feminine* Æons. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[\*](#fn_136) But another shape repeatedly presents
his monstrosity to our astonished gaze, whose true character almost sets
conjecture at defiance, but evidently the offspring of very diverse
ideas most strangely commingled. He is an aged man, Priapean,
four-winged, with four hands grasping as many sceptres; he has likewise
the spreading tail of the vulture and stands in the *baris*, or upon the
coiled serpent, or on a tree-trunk, horizontal, whence project *five*
lopped off branches. Some potent saviour must he be, for he is
addressed, like Abraxas himself, by the title **ΑΒΛΑΝΑΘΑΝΑΛΒΑ**! But the
most prominent symbol in the monstrous collocation suggests an
explanation of its hidden meaning, supplied by the following

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

exposition of Justinus, that wildest teacher in all the Gnosis. "For
this cause said he unto *Eden*, Mother, behold thy son! meaning his
animal and carnal body. He himself, however, having commended his spirit
into the Father's hands, ascended up unto the Good One. Now this Good
One is *Priapus*, He that *created before* anything existed. On this
account he is called Priapus because he *first made* all things
(ἐπριαπόισε). <span id="fr_138"></span>[\*](#fn_137) For this reason is
he set up in every temple, being honoured by all Nature, and likewise in
the roadways, having the fruits of Autumn hung about him, that is, the
fruits of the Creation whereof he is the author, inasmuch as he first
made the Creation which before was not."

That very frequent type, a mummy swathed in the coils of a vast serpent,
is easily explained as an allusion to the protection in the next world
of the ancient agatho-demon, <span id="fr_139"></span>[†](#fn_138) or
the spiritual Naas of the more recent Ophites. The same belief also
generated that more graceful allegory, the woman enthroned on the back
of the same reptile, like the Atergatis of Phœnicia.

Interesting above the rest for the part it played in mediæval
superstition is the *Osiris*, or *old man*, with radiated head, a
terminal figure always shown in front face with arms crossed on the
breast, the true *Baphomet* of the Templars. Sometimes he is borne aloft
upon the heads of four Angels, upon whom two streams pour forth from his
sides. This group has been explained as Ormuzd borne up by the Four
Elements; although it may possibly refer to the notion the prophet Enoch
mentions (xviii. 3) "I also beheld the *Four Winds* which bear up the
earth and the firmament of heaven." The idea in truth has rather an
Assyrian than Egyptian cast, for in Assyrian works Athor (Mylitta) often
appears pouring out from her extended arms the Waters of Life; and again
the Persian female *Ized* Arduisher is by interpretation "The giver of
living water." <span id="fr_140"></span>[‡](#fn_139)

A curious specimen of ancient form, borrowed in a more

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

spiritual sense, is furnished by a pretty sard, found in the Punjab
(Major Pearse), engraved with two figures of the Roman Providentia
facing each other, in the field between them, the heads of Sol and Luna,
and below **ΧΑΙΑ**, the Hebrew for Life.

The common figure **Θ** may be explained by Eusebius's description of
the Egyptian hieroglyph for the world, as a circle coloured sky-blue and
besprinkled with flames, in the centre an extended serpent; the whole
being carelessly imitated by the letter **Θ** in the Diagramma of the
Ophites.

An armed man, the Mithraic *soldier*, one of the figures regularly set
up in the mystic Cave of the Solar god, often decorates a talisman,
holding a spear tipped with the head of a cock, a mark of honour granted
by the Persian kings to distinguished valour (as by Artaxerxes to the
Carian who slew Cyrus the Younger); or else grasping a serpent in each
hand. A sect that sprung up in Egypt, the Phibionites, took the title
"Militant," Στρατιωτικοί. Another figure, the three-headed, three-bodied
god, who, standing like Priapus, grasped with one hand the symbols of
fecundity, with the other, asps and scorpions, must be the visible
embodiment of the Great Τριδύναμεις, who figure so prominently in the
celestial hierarchy of the Pistis-Sophia. The Trees sometimes enlisted
in the Talismanic corps may find their motive in the "Almond-tree" of
the Phrygian Mysteries, in which the Naaseni discovered the name of the
Great Creator of All; or else to the "Mystery of the Five Trees,"
mentioned in that oft-quoted revelation, on whose true nature light is
thrown by Justinus' exposition making out

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

the *Trees* of Paradise to be the *Angels* generated between the
Demiurgus Elohim and his daughter Eden. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[\*](#fn_140)

There is a sigil of this class, that from its frequency must have been
considered of peculiar virtue. It represents a fish with immense head
and shoulders, but diminutive body, as if seen from above; the reverse
of the stone thus inscribed--

<span id="img_23700"></span> ![](img/23700.jpg)

One of the three sacred fish of the Nile must figure here; and in this
talismanic character passed, with an appropriate mystic interpretation,
into the symbolism of the Alexandrine Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[226:\*](gar33.htm#fr_132) Berlin, 1820.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[227:\*](gar33.htm#fr_133) Many of the actual
*types*--the mummified erect Osiris, the reclining Isis, the Nile, the
Horus on the lotus-flower, the Anubis, &c.--occur on the contemporary
Alexandrian coins; they therefore can only be accounted Gnostic
productions when their Hebrew inscriptions certify their authorship.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[227:†](gar33.htm#fr_134) In the paintings on
the mummy-case of Petemenopt (or Ammonius), Osiris the Occidental,
invoked in the papyrus ritual inclosed with the corpse, is seen seated
on his throne; <span id="page_228">p. 228</span> at his side, his wife
and sister, Isis. In front stands an altar, loaded with flowers, fruits,
and libations. Anubis, recognisable by his jackal's head crowned with
the *pschent* (tall cap), because, like the Hermes of the Greeks, he
discharges important functions equally in the supernal and infernal
regions (the place of the Four Amenti), presents to his sire the defunct
Petemenopt, swathed in his sepulchral bandages, and holding up his hands
in the attitude of supplication.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[230:\*](gar33.htm#fr_135) Having been cut from
the wall and deposited in the museum of the Collegio Romano.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[233:\*](gar33.htm#fr_136) Goodwin's 'Magic
Papyrus,' gives, at the end of a spell (No. 1) terminating in several
vowel-combinations, these directions for pronouncing <span
id="page_234">p. 234</span> each--

"**Α**, with the mouth opened, rolled about like a wave.

**Ο**, in a short manner for spiritual threatenings.

**Α Ω**, unto Earth, Air, Heaven.

**Ε**, after the fashion of the cynocephalus.

**Ο**, in the same manner as above said.

**Η**, with gentleness aspirated.

**ϒ**, unto the Shepherd (Hermes), as if it were long."

<span id="fn_136"></span>[234:\*](gar33.htm#fr_137) Valentinus made his
Æons in pairs, male and female.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[235:\*](gar33.htm#fr_138) That is, the proper
symbol of Priapus, either the phallus or the Egyptian Tau.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[235:†](gar33.htm#fr_139) The **ΗΦΕ** painted
on the mummy cases in that very capacity.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[235:‡](gar33.htm#fr_140) At Tarsus (1863) was
discovered in company with aurei of Sev. Alexander and Gordian III., a
talisman thus described by Longperier "Amulet formed of lapis-lazuli,
set <span id="page_236">p. 236</span> in a gold frame of rude
[workmanship](errata.htm#13), with a ring for suspension. The two faces
are engraved in intaglio, and represent an Æon with four wings and
bird's tail, holding two spears; and with a Venus and the inscription
(not reversed) **ΑΡΩΡΙ ΦΡΑCΙC**, some letters of which are concealed by
the setting. Length, 0.0034; weight, 5.20 grammes (= 95 grs. troy)." The
same legend accompanies a Venus Anadyomene upon a large hæmatite (Praun)
now in the British Museum. Montfaucon, pl. clxi. has a Venus unveiling
inscribed **ΑΡΩΡΙ ΟΡΑCΙC**, "The Vision of Arori;" and another with
**ΑΡΡΩΡΙΦ ΙΑCΙC**, and on the field **CΑΝΤΚΑ** for the owner's name. It
was under such a form as this that the Supreme Tetrad brought down Truth
from Heaven to display her beauty to Marcus as he describes in his
'Revelation' (see [p. 218](gar31.htm#page_218)).

<span id="fn_140"></span>[237:\*](gar33.htm#fr_141) An authentic
description of the Tree of Knowledge will doubtless be acceptable to my
readers. "The Tree of Knowledge also was there, of which if any eats he
becomes endowed with great wisdom. It was like a species of the
tamarind-tree, bearing fruit which resembled grapes extremely fine; and
its fragrance extended to a considerable distance. I exclaimed: 'How
beautiful is this tree, and how delightful is its appearance!'"--(Book
of Enoch, xxxi. 3-4).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Abraxoids, or Gems Confounded with the True Gnostic](gar34)
