[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar37)  [Next](gar39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. "ABRAXAS"--ETYMOLOGY OF.

Of this "Great Name," many etymologies have been proposed. Of all these
the most satisfactory is perhaps the one offered by Rabbi Abraham
Geiger, making it the Grecised form of *Ha-Brachah*, "The Blessing." For
there is good reason for believing that the **Ξ** had the sound of
**SH**, which explains the strange metamorphoris of the Persian
"Artashir" into "Artaxerxes." By the same rule the Rabbi interprets the
talismanic **ΕΛΞΑΙ** as representing *El-Chai*, "The Living God." The
same interpretation is again confirmed by the true solution (so long
sought in vain, and now suggested by Mr. W. A. Wright) of the mighty
spell *abracadabra*, which receives a

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

most fitting sense when rendered by *Ha-Brachah-dabarata*, "Pronounce
the Blessing," where "Blessing" stands for the name of the Blessed One,
that most potent of exorcisms.

Another derivation, extremely acute, but probably untenable, had been
previously offered by Bellermann in the Coptic compound signifying "The
Blessed Name," made of the word *ab* or *of*, "let it be," *Rah*,
"adore," and *Sax* for *Sadsh*, "name." This formula would agree in a
remarkable manner with the regular Jewish synonym for the Ineffable Name
Jehovah, viz., *shem Hamephorash*, "The Holy Word"; which the Rabbins
compress into "The Name" or "The Word." It is, besides, a singular
coincidence that the Egyptian word *Abrak* should be used by Moses (Gen.
xli. 43), where Pharaoh commands that Joseph shall ride in his own
chariot, and that they shall cry before him *Abrak*, "kneel down!" where
the Coptic word is actually retained in the Hebrew text, and not
rendered by an equivalent in that language. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[\*](#fn_144) A precedent for expressing a sacred
title in an unknown tongue is furnished by St. John (Rev. xix. 12): "His
eyes were as a flame of fire, and upon his head were many crowns, and he
had a *name* written (upon them) that *no man knew* but himself: and he
was clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, and his name was called The
Word of God." And again (iii. 12): "He that overcometh will I make a
pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I will
write upon him the *name* of my God, and the *name* of the City of my
God."

All this supplies a reason for the occurrence of the word *abra* in so
many sacred titles. A very remarkable instance is to be seen in the
wall-painting of the tomb of Vincentius and Vibia, in the Catacomb of
Prætextatus at Rome. Now this Vincentius is described in his epitaph as
priest of *Sabazius*, a title connected with the Iao-worship; and the
name *Abracura* is inscribed over the head of the consort of *Dispater*,
the two Rulers of the Shades into whose presence Vibia's soul is ushered
by Hermes. In the first title, *cura* is plainly the Latinised κούρη
Virgin,

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

the regular synonym for Proserpine, whilst *Abra* seems to have the same
deeper meaning in which it was employed by the talisman-makers.

The efficacy of a Mystic Name is set forth in the Book of Enoch (lxviii.
19): "This is the Number of the Kesbal, the principal part of the oath
which the Most High dwelling in glory revealed unto the holy ones. Its
name is Beka: He spoke to holy Michael to deliver to them the *Secret
Name*, that they might understand that secret name and thus remember the
oath; and that those who pointed out every secret thing to the children
of men might tremble at that Name and oath. This is the power of that
oath, for powerful is it and strong. And he established the oath of
Abrac by the instrumentality of the holy Michael. These are the secrets
of this oath, and by it were they confirmed. Heaven was suspended by it
before the world was made for ever. By it has the earth been framed upon
the flood, whilst from the concealed parts of the hills the agitated
waters proceed forth from the creation unto the end of the world. By
this oath the sea has been formed and the foundation of it. . . . By
this oath the sun and moon complete their progress, never swerving from
the command given to them for ever and ever. By this oath the stars
complete their progress. And when their names are called they return an
answer for ever and ever . . . And with them he establishes this oath by
which their paths are preserved, nor does their progress perish. Great
was their joy."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[252:\*](gar38.htm#fr_145) Sharpe, however,
makes *Abrasax* a pure Egyptian phrase, signifying "Hurt me not," as
addressed to the deity represented on the gem.--('Egypt. Mythol.' p.
xii.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Abraxas--Its Numerical Force](gar39)
