[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar44)  [Next](gar46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

### THE NAME ΙΑΩ.

Diodorus Siculus, when enumerating the different legislators of
antiquity, says, "Amongst the Jews Moses pretended that the god surnamed
*Iao* gave him his laws" (i. 94). And this is elucidated by the remark
of Clemens Alexandrinus, that the Hebrew *Tetragrammaton*, or Mystic
Name, is pronounced **ΙΑΟϒ**, and signifies "He that is and shall be."
Theodoret states that the same four letters were pronounced by the
Samaritans as **ΙΑΒΕ** (*Jave*); by the Jews as **ΙΑΩ**. Jerome (upon
Psalm viii. says, "The Name of the Lord" amongst the Hebrews is of four
letters, *Iod*, *He*, *Vau*, *He*, which is properly the Name of God,
and may be read as **ΙΑΗΟ** (*Iaho*) (that is in *Latin* characters),
which is held by the Jews for unutterable. The author of the 'Treatise
on Interpretations' says, "The Egyptians express the name of the Supreme
Being by the seven Greek vowels **ΙΕΗΩΟϒΑ**": <span
id="fr_190"></span>[\*](#fn_188) which sufficiently explains the mighty
potency ascribed to this formula by the inspired author of the
'Pistis-Sophia,' and equally so its frequent appearance upon the
talismans now under consideration.

Rabbi Tarphon (Tryphon), who could remember the Second Temple, noticed
that the Ineffable Name, though occurring a hundred times in the course
of the daily service, was "rather

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

*warbled* than *pronounced*." A precious hint this, as indicating how
the Gnostic strings of boneless vowels give an approximation to the
audible and yet unuttered sound. Since the destruction of the Temple,
the Name has never been heard in prayer, or pronounced aloud. It is
communicated, indeed, to every Rabbi, after his ordination, but not in
full. One half of it is told; the rest he is left to make out for
himself.

The first idea of an "Ineffable Name," and all its inherent virtues,
evidently came to the Egyptians (from whom the Jews borrowed it) from
the Hindoo doctrine respecting the title **AUM**,--itself, like the
**ΑΙΩ**, trilateral--representing the Triad, Brahma-Vishnu-Siva: **A**
standing for the Creator, **U** for the Preserver, **M** for the
Destroyer. The connection between Indian and Egyptian mythology is
certain, however difficult to account for, the names of the principal
deities in the latter having the appearance of pure Sanscrit. Thus Isis
signifies in that tongue the *Mistress;* Tat and Sat, *Virtue* and
*Power;* Serapis, Sripa, the *Blood-drinker;* Nila, *Blue-water*, &c.
The original identity of the two religious systems no one can doubt who
has *intelligently* studied the monuments of each: but which country
instructed the other?

The balance of probabilities is strongly in favour of India, the
confinement of the peculiar system within the narrow limits of Egypt
betokening an importation by a *colony* from some very remote source.
Traces of a very ancient intercourse between the two countries are
discernible, though very dimly, in history. The Periplus of the Red Sea
mentions that as late as Cæsar's time the town Endæmon on that coast was
the entrepôt where the Indian and Egyptian traders used annually to
meet. In prehistoric times therefore it is conceivable that Brahminical
missionaries may have laboured amongst the aborigines of the Valley of
the Nile. This religious analogy manifests itself in the meanest
details, in the sacred titles as well as attributes. For example, as the
Brahmins teach that each of the letters **A**, **U**, **M** envelops a
great mystery, so does the *Pistis-Sophia* ('Prayers of the Saviour,' §
358) interpret the **Ι**, **Α**, **Ω**, as the summary of the Gnostic,
or Valentinian, creed. "**Ι** signifies *All goeth out;* **Α**, *All
returneth within;* **Ω**, *There shall be an end of* 

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

*ends*": thus expressing the grand doctrines of the *Emanation*, the
*Return*, and the *Annihilation*, or rather reabsorption, of the
Universe. <span id="fr_191"></span>[\*](#fn_189)

To turn now to Greece--in the same way as *Abraxas* is no other than a
numerical title of the Solar god, so does *Iao* actually make its
appearance as an epithet of the same divinity. Macrobius (Sat. i. 18),
whilst labouring to prove that the Sun-worship was in truth the sole
religion of Paganism, under whatever name it was disguised, gives a
notice very much to our purpose. The Apollo of Claros, when consulted as
to the true nature of the god called Ἰαὸς, gave the following
response:--

"The sacred things ye learn, to none disclose,  
 A little falsehood much discretion shows;  
 Regard *Iaos* as supreme above,  
 In winter Pluto, in spring's opening Jove,  
 Phœbus through blazing summer rules the day,  
 Whilst autumn owns the mild *Iaos’* <span
id="fr_192"></span>[†](#fn_190) sway."

Here we find Iao expressly recognised as the title of the Supreme God
whose physical representative is the Sun. Again we have Dionysos or
Bacchus added to the list by Orpheus, who sings

"Jove, Pluto, Phœbus, Bacchus, all are One."

A distinct recognition this of the grand principle of Brahminism--that
all the different deities are but representations of the different
attributes of the One. The same truth is curiously expressed upon a
talisman (Hertz collection) which at the same time sets forth the triune
nature of the Supreme Being whose visible type is the Sun. It is a
*heart-shaped* piece of basalt engraved with seated figures of Ammon and
Ra (the Zeus and Helios of the Greeks), with the sacred Asp erect
between them. The reverse bears the invocation neatly cut in characters
of the third century--

**ΕΙC ΒΑΙΤ ΕΙC ΑΘΩΡ ΜΙΑ ΤΩΝ ΒΙΑ ΕΙC ΔΕ ΑΧΩΡΙ  
ΧΑΙΡΕ ΠΑΤΕΡ ΚΟCΜΟϒ ΧΑΙΡΕ ΤΡΙΜΟΡΦΕ ΘΕΟC**

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "There is One
Bäit, One Athor, their power is one and the same, there is One Achori.
Hail Father of the universe, hail God under three forms!" Concerning the
three figures a word is necessary in explanation of their titles. As for
the hawk-head Ra, Horapollo gives for reason of the type: "The *hawk*
stands for the Supreme Mind, and for the intelligent soul. The hawk is
called in the Egyptian language '*Baieth*,' from *bai* soul, and *eth*
heart, which organ they consider the seat or inclosure of the soul." A
sufficient explanation this for the shape in which the talisman is
formed. *Achoreus*, the virtuous priest-councillor of the last of the
Ptolemies (see Lucan), derives his name from the sacred serpent here
invoked.

That *Iaos* was recognised by the Greeks as an epithet for the Sun in
the autumnal quarter has been shown from Macrobius. The philosophical
interpreters of the ancient mythology discovered in *Dionysos* also a
mere type of the same luminary. "One is Zeus, Hades, Helios, and
Dionysos." And Serapis is substituted for the last in an oracle quoted
by Julian: nor must it be forgotten that the main object of Macrobius in
the above-quoted dissertation is to prove, that Serapis is a
representative of the various powers of the Solar deity all combined in
one figure. Again, to the same effect, comes Virgil's famous
apostrophe--

             "Vos, O clarissima mundi,  
Lumina labentem qui cœlo ducitis annum,  
Liber et alma Ceres!"

where "Bacchus" and "Ceres" do no more than interpret Osiris and Isis,
the Sun and Moon. Here lies the reason for equipping Bacchus with
*horns* in some of his statues.

"Accedant capiti cornua *Bacchus* eris," says Sappho to Phaon. For in
Hebrew a *radiated* and a *horned* head is expressed by the same word.
When Moses came down from the Mount, "cornuta erat facies ejus,"
according to the version of the Vulgate; and on the strength of this
mistranslation Christian art hath ever graced the Jewish lawgiver with
these appendages.

In this very title *Iao* undoubtedly lies the origin of the universal
persuasion of the ancients that the Jehovah of the

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jews--whose name
was thus expressed in Greek letters--was no other than the Egyptian
Bacchus. For this notion they found strong support in the Golden Vine
which formed the sole visible decoration of the Temple; in the "blowing
the trumpets at the New Moon," and the custom of keeping the Feast of
Tabernacles in huts made of leafy boughs, accompanied with many of the
ceremonies used at the Grecian Dionysia: "Quia sacerdotes eorum tibia
tympanis concinebant, hedera vinciebantur, vitisque aurea templo
reperta" (Tacit. Hist. v. 5.) This opinion as to the real nature of the
Jewish worship Tacitus quotes as the one generally held by the learned
of his own times, although he cannot bring himself to accept it as
satisfactory--although merely on the grounds that the gloomy and
unsocial character of the religion seemed to disprove its relationship
to the merry worship of the "god of wine," the only character in which
the Romans recognised Bacchus. Nevertheless this ancient theory has
found supporters in modern times, notably in the overlearned Dr.
Stanley, rector of St. George the Martyr, who (without giving much
scandal to his own easy-going generation) advocated this heterodox
opinion in an elaborate treatise which puts to shame the boldest flights
of the 'Essays and Reviews,' or even the interpretations of our
indiscreet apostle to the Zulus. Ludicrously enough, the German Jews
still celebrate the Feast of Purim, and the Fall of Haman, by getting as
royally drunk as their means afford, and thus to the present day do
their best to perpetuate the old Roman aspersion. Amongst the later
Gnostics, indeed, some rites were unmistakably borrowed from the
Bacchanalia, singularly modified by Christian doctrine. Epiphanius
relates (Hæres. xxxvii.) how that "they kept a tame serpent in a chest
or *sacred ark*, and piled loaves upon a table before the same, and then
called upon the serpent to come forth. Whereupon, opening of himself the
ark, he would come forth, mount upon the table, and twine about the
loaves, which they broke in pieces, and distributed amongst the
worshippers, calling this their 'Perfect Sacrifice' and their
'Eucharist.'"

Another explanation as to the true character of the god

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

named Iao must not be passed over in silence, however little foundation
it may have in truth, seeing that it is supported by the authority of
the learned historian of Gnosticism, Jacques Matter. The Moon to the
Egyptians, as to the Orientals of to-day, was of the *masculine* gender,
and was designated by the phonetic name *Aah* or *Ioh*. Thoth was
sometimes identified with this deity; and therefore Thoth's emblem, the
ibis, accompanied with the crescent, bears the legend *Ioh*, "because
(says Plutarch) Mercury attends the Moon in her journey round the earth
in the same way as Hercules Both the Sun." When Thoth, *Tat*, appears as
Mercury he has the head of an ibis; but in his character of the
Moon-god, or *Deus Lunus*, he shows the face of a man supporting the
lunar crescent enclosing the sun's disk and surmounted by a double
plume.

Hence came the notion mentioned by Plutarch, that "the Egyptians call
the Moon the Mother of Creation, and say it is of both sexes": and to
the same effect Spartian (Caracalla, vii.) explains that the Egyptians
in the mysteries (*mystice*) call the Moon a male, though designating it
a female in ordinary speech. He adds that the people of Carrhal (famed
for its great temple of Deus Lunus) hold that "whatsoever man thinks the
moon should be called of the feminine gender shall pass his life a slave
unto women, whereas he that holds it to be a male deity shall rule over
his wife and be secured against all female treachery." A very sufficient
reason this for the fondness of Spartian's contemporaries for wearing in
their signet rings the *vera effigies* of the Carrhene god, a youth in a
Phrygian cap, his bust supported on the crescent that gives his name.
This elegant effeminate lunar genius is in truth no other than the
modernized and tasteful version of the grim old Assyrian "Sin," pictured
in the Ninevitish monuments as an aged man leaning on his staff as he
floats through the heavens on the crescent, presenting a ludicrous
resemblance to our popular idea of the "Man in the Moon." A blue
calcedony in my possession fully illustrates Plutarch's title of "Mother
of Creation." It exhibits a perfect hermaphrodite figure wearing the
Egyptian head-dress, and squatting down so as more clearly to display
its bisexual nature: below creeps a snail surmounted by a

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

butterfly, the well-understood emblems of lasciviousness and life, the
fount of propagation.

All this brings us to Matter's theory (based on a statement of
Origen's), that *Iao*, *Adonai*, *Sabaoth* signified the genii of the
Moon, the Sun, and the Planets--being far inferior in power and even
antagonistic to *Abraxas*, who is the actual representative of the
Supreme Source of Light. Matter therefore explains the warlike attitude
in which the Abraxas-god is regularly depicted as declaring his office
of scaring away the Adversary, or *demon*, *Iao*, who is expressed by
his *name* alone, placed in the lowest part of the scene, to denote his
inferiority. But the authority of the monuments themselves is more than
sufficient to upset such an interpretation of the meaning given to them
by the actual manufacturers. The doctrine mentioned by Origen was, it
cannot be denied, that of the more recent sect, which set itself above
all old Egyptian or Hebrew tradition: but it most assuredly was not of
the immense body of primitive Kabbalistic Gnostics who excogitated and
put their trust in the *sigils* that they have bequeathed to us in such
fantastical profusion. These talisman-makers evidently held *Thoth* and
*Moses* in equal reverence: they had nothing to do with the
Valentinians, who had an obvious motive for exalting their
newly-invented invisible *Tetrad*, by so immeasurably degrading below it
the most venerated names of the old religion. The Valentinians were
Greeks by education, really drawing their inspiration from Pythagoras
and Plato, and only too well pleased with the opportunity of venting
their natural spite upon the most cherished ideas of the Alexandrine
Kabbalists, the grand fabricants of our talismans, those veritable
"Pierres d’Israel."

The *Pistis-Sophia* continually introduces, as a most important actor in
its scenes of the judgment and purification of the soul, "the great and
good Iao, ruler of the Middle Sphere," who when he looks down into the
places of torment causes the souls therein imprisoned to be set at
liberty. The very collocation of the words on our talismans clearly
denotes that *Adonai*, *Sabaoth*, are equally with *Abraxas* the titles
of Iao, who is the god actually represented by the symbolical figure
these

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

words accompany. What else would be the motive for their collocation in
a prayer like this (on a gem published by Matter himself)--"Iao,
Abraxas, Adonai, Holy Name, Holy Powers, <span
id="fr_193"></span>[\*](#fn_191) defend Vibia Paulina from every evil
spirit"? And, again, these same names perpetually occur united together,
and followed by the address **ΑΒΛΑΝΑΘΑΝΑΛΒΑ**, "Thou art our Father";
**CΕΜΕC ΕΙΛΑΜ**, "Eternal Sun"; a mode of adoration that could not
possibly have been applied to beings of a discordant, much less of an
antagonistic, nature to each other. Besides, if Abraxas were the
opponent and ultimate destroyer of Iao, it would have been absurd to put
the names of the two in such close union, the latter even taking
precedence; each, too, being equally invoked in the accompanying prayer,
and honoured with the same epithets of majesty. Moreover the composite
figure, or Pantheus, which, as all writers agree, represents the actual
god Abraxas, is much more frequently inscribed with the name **ΙΑΩ**
than with **ΑΒΡΑCΑΞ**; and nevertheless, though the former name stands
alone, it is followed by the same glorification, "Thou art our Father,"
&c., as when the two names are engraved in juxtaposition. It is moreover
quite opposed to all the rules of symbolism to represent the one actor
in a scene by his proper figure or emblem, and to indicate the other by
the simple letters of his name: and equally repugnant to common sense to
depict the figure of the god with the *name* of his adversary placed in
the most conspicuous portion of the tableau. The absurdity is as great
as though in Christian art one should paint a Crucifix with *Satan's*
name in the place of the holy **I . N . R . I**, and give for
explanation the hostility of the two personages. And lastly, it has been
already shown that the numerical or Kabbalistic value of the name
Abraxas directly refers to the Persian title of the god, "Mithras,"
Ruler of the year, worshipped from the earliest times under the
apellation of Iao. Matter himself

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

publishes (Pl. iii. 2) a gem that should have convinced him of his
error, had he not overlooked the force of its legend. The type is Horus
seated on the lotus, inscribed **ΑΒΡΑCΑΞ ΙΑΩ**--an address exactly
parallel to the so frequent **ΕΙC ΖΕϒC CΑΡΑΠΙ** on the contemporary
Heathen gems; and therefore only to be translated by "Abraxas is the One
Jehovah."

The "Great Name" with its normal titles is often to be observed
interpolated by a Gnostic hand upon works of a better period and creed,
but whose subjects were fancied analogous to the ideas conveyed by the
Iao Pantheus: such as Phœbus in his car, the Lion--House of the Sun, the
Sphinx emblem of royalty, and the Gorgon's Head of the Destructive
Force, or of Providence. <span id="fr_194"></span>[\*](#fn_192) But the
most interesting of such *adopted* types that has come to my knowledge,
as unmistakably pointing out the deity really understood by the name
Abraxas, is a work discovered by myself amongst the miscellanea of a
small private collection (Bosanquet). In this we behold the familiar
Pantheus with head of cock, cuirassed body, and serpent-legs brandishing
the whip and driving the car of Sol, <span
id="fr_195"></span>[†](#fn_193) in the exact attitude of its proper
occupant, Phœbus. In the exergue is the salutation **CΑΒΑΩ**, "Glory
unto thee": on the reverse, in a cartouche formed by a coiled
asp--precisely as the Hindoos write the Ineffable Name **AUM**--are
engraved the titles **ΑΒΡΑCΑΞ**, attesting that one deity alone is
meant, and that one to be the Ruler of the Sun.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[319:\*](gar45.htm#fr_190) According to the
Talmud, the Name of God, which was communicated only to the most pious
of the priesthood, was composed of twelve letters. And upon our
talismans the vowels inclosing **ΙΑΩ** are often found repeated so as to
make up that number; whence it may be inferred that their union
represents the same ineffable sound. In the same passage mention is made
of another Name of God, consisting of forty-two letters, which in its
turn may serve to account for the lines of often-repeated vowels
similarly to be met with.

Dante alludes to a curious tradition that the name of God, revealed to
Adam, was I, which succeeding times changed into *Eli*:--

"Pria ch’ in scendessi all’ infernale ambascia,  
   *I* s’ appellava in terra il sommo Bene,  
   Onde vien la letizia che mi fascia.  
 ELI si chiamo; poi, e ciò conviens,  
   Chè l’ uso dei mortali è come fronda,  
   In ramo, che sen va, ed altra viens."  
             ('Parad.' xxvi. 133).

<span id="fn_189"></span>[321:\*](gar45.htm#fr_191) This has a
remarkable analogy with the Brahminical definition of God as "the
Self-existing, Eternal, Supreme Being, who is the Cause of everything,
and into whom everything is finally absorbed"?

<span id="fn_190"></span>[321:†](gar45.htm#fr_192) ἀβρὸν Ἰαὼ, where the
epithet seems suggested by the name Abraxas so generally coupled with
it.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[326:\*](gar45.htm#fr_193) A parallel to this
form still exists in the Turkish amulet composed of the ninety-and-nine
epithets of Allah written on a paper, and believed to possess wondrous
protective power. The spirit of all Oriental religions is to glorify the
one object of adoration by heaping upon him a multitude of honorific
titles expressive of his various attributes. Amulets of this and various
other kinds are regularly sold at the mosques.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[327:\*](gar45.htm#fr_194) The holy name has
often been added to intagli of a foreign nature merely for the sake of
turning them into talismans: for example, on the reverse of a heliotrope
with Victory, inscribing a shield (R. S. Williams, Utica, U.S.).

<span id="fn_193"></span>[327:†](gar45.htm#fr_195) Exactly as Serapis
(also a type of the Sun-god) makes his appearance upon an Alexandrian
coin of Hadrian's, which has been already cited (section "Abraxas
gems"). The god is giving the benediction with his right hand, and holds
a sceptre in his left. Upon another coin of the same emperor and mint he
is seated on the Ram, clearly meaning the Sun in that sign, and perhaps
having no deeper meaning than the date of the month when, coined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abraxas, New Type of](gar46)
