[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar57)  [Next](gar59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Origin of Modern Freemasonry

Having thus briefly noticed our Masonic Symbols, let us proceed to
consider the society itself, and here a circumstance of the utmost
importance to this inquiry must always be kept in view: the Freemasons,
as at present organised into a mystic fraternity, derive their name from
nothing but an *accidental* circumstance belonging to their first
establishment. It was in the Common Hall of the Loudon Guild of the
Freemasons (the trade) that their first meetings were held, under
Christopher Wren for president, in the time of the Commonwealth. <span
id="fr_234"></span>[\*](#fn_232) Their real object was political--the
restoration of Monarchy--hence the exclusion of the public, and the oath
of secrecy enjoined upon the members. The pretence of promoting the
study of architecture, and the choice of the place where to hold their
meetings, suggested by the profession of their president, were no more
than blinds to deceive the existing government. There is a curious
analogy to all this in the history of another famous society, the
Neapolitan *Carbonari*, which similarly derived its name, terminology
and insignia from the accidental circumstances under which it was
created. Like Wren's associates, the first Carbonari were defeated
Royalists and fanatical Republicans joined in unnatural union by one
common hatred of the powers that be--the old Bourbonists equally with
the chimerical founders of the shortlived "Parthenopean Republic,"
equally forced to flee for their lives to the mountains, the former to
escape the well-deserved vengeance of the French under Murat, the latter
so fiercely persecuted by Cardinal

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ruffo upon the
first restoration of royalty at Naples. These desperate men, lurking
about in the Abruzzi forests, were forced to assume the disguise of the
only inhabitants of these wild regions, the *carbonari*,
charcoal-burners, as the best means of eluding pursuit. After their
forces had grown to a regular confederation, the disguise, so suggestive
and terror inspiring, was retained for a *uniform;* a charcoal-sack was
the badge of membership, a charcoal-measure the throne of the President,
and their conclaves were held by rule in the midnight forest. When
Ferdinand, "the Well-beloved," was firmly seated on his ancient throne,
for the third and last time, his diligent eradication of his former
friends, the Constitutionals, folks almost equally crazed with the
original "Parthenopean" patriots, sent thousands of exiles to swell the
ranks of the Carbonari. Soon the society was able to establish
ramifications all over Italy, thanks to the paternal government of the
Austrians and their *protégés*, the various restored princes of the
Bourbon and Este lines; and thus in our own times *Carbonaro* and
*Liberal* came to mean pretty nearly the same thing; and the Italian
"Carbonaro" to know no more about charcoal-burning than the English
"Mason" does about building.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[391:\*](gar58.htm#fr_234) In April, 1616, when
Ashmole was admitted member. Others named as present on that occasion
were Lilly the astrologer, Dr. Pearson, the two Whartons, Hewitt, and
Oughtred the mathematician.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Rosicrucians](gar59)
