[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar52)  [Next](gar54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

### TALISMANIC LEADEN SCROLLS.

The only classical notice of the employment of these engines for moving
the invisible world (not, however, for good, but for evil) is to be
found in the Annals of Tacitus (ii. 69), who thus enumerates them
amongst the means, real or imaginary, whereby Livia's agent, Piso,
occasioned, or aggravated, the final illness of the too popular
Germanicus. "The severity of the attack (a fever) was heightened by the
suspicion of poison on the part of Piso: and in fact there were
discovered, hidden in the house-walls, fragments of human corpses,
spells and curses and the name of Germanicus engraved upon plates of
lead; also ashes half-burnt and soaked in blood, and other pieces of
witchcraft by means whereof it is believed that souls are made over unto
the Infernal Gods." A very remarkable example of the practice of this
malevolent superstition has been published by Visconti (Op. Var. iii.
256). It is a sheet of lead found, folded up, within a tomb opened at
the Hippotade Gate of Athens; and a copy of which he had received from
M. Fauvel. The inscription, full of blunders both in spelling and
grammar, is arranged in ten lines, seemingly meant for trochaic
tetrameters, and may be read thus:

1\. Ἑρμὴς χθόνιος, Γῆ κατοχός.

2\. καὶ πρὸς τὴν Φερσεφόνην.

3\. Φερσεφόνη καταδῶ Δεξίαν.

4\. πρὸς τούτους ἅπαντας.

5\. καὶ Κλεοφραδὲς.

6\. καταδῶ πρὸς τοὺς αὔτους ἴοσι.

7\. καὶ Ναυβάτην καταδῶ πρὸς τοὺς αὔτους.

8\. Τληπόλεμον καταδῶ.

9\. καὶ τοὺς μετὰ Κτησίου ἅπαντας.

10\. καταδῶ. <span id="fr_216"></span>[\*](#fn_214)

"Infernal Hermes, imprisoning Earth, and also Persephone! I lay a spell
upon Dexias before all these deities, also upon Cleophrades, Naubates,
Ctesias with all his family."

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The defunct
Athenian must assuredly have departed this life full of charity towards
all his neighbours to have taken such pains to carry with him a
memorandum so expressive of his wishes on their behalf. It reminds one
of the old Monmouthshire farmer, who (as tradition tells), dying of a
broken heart, ordered the bitterest verses of the "Cursing Psalm" to be
engraved upon his tombstone for the benefit of his enemy; as it may yet
be seen at Christchurch, near Caerleon, Monmouthshire. The Verulamium
scrolls (p. 339) contained invocations of the opposite character, for
the benefit of the parties named therein. Yet another variety are the
leaden scrolls found numerously in the lately discovered Demetrium of
Cnidus. Some evidently belong to a kind of ordeal--the accused party
asking to be ill-treated by Persephone in the next world, if guilty of
such or such a charge; others contain similar ill wishes against
individuals therein specified who have injured the writers. By far the
most curious of these relics is the leaden plate, found at Bath (1880),
engraved with four lines of words placed in their proper order, but
spelt backwards for the sake of disguise, and about four inches square.
It is thus read by Zangemeister:

"Qui mihi mantilium involavit  
Sic liquat com aqua olla . . . ta  
Ni qui eam salvavit . . . vinna vel  
Exsupersus Verrianus Servianus  
Itianus Sagarbalis Cubus  
Minianus cum Sovina  
Ceramanilli."

This reading is not satisfactory in many places. The lost object is
written **ΜΑΤΗV ΜΑΤΕΗV**, to be read backwards, like all the rest, and
therefore bears no resemblance to "mantelium."

The malignity of the Greek character is exemplified in nothing more
strongly than in the open toleration of the use of such engines of
spite. In the great Temple of Demeter at Cnidus, Mr. Newton found many
of these leaden scrolls invoking the vengeance of the goddess of the
place, her daughter, and the other infernal gods, upon individuals
specified by name. It will be remarked that this "dira detestatio" was
not contingent upon the refusal of a just demand, as in the case of the
worthy

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Silurian hereafter
to be mentioned; but were the means of revenge resorted to by persons
too cowardly to use those supplied by nature, or probably for the mere
sake of gratifying spite.

As a Roman *pendant* to this Athenian legacy of curses, I copy the
leaden scroll found, many years ago, in the garden of the Villa Manenti,
upon the Via Latina. De Rossi, who first published it in the 'Bullettino
del Instit. Arch. Rom.' for 1852, is of opinion that orthography and
characters indicate the date of the last century of the Republic.
"Quomodo mortuos qui istic sepultus est nec loqui nec sermonari potest,
seic Rhodine apud M. Licinium Faustum mortua sit, nec loqui nec
sermonari possit. Ita ut mortuos nec ad Deos nec ad hommes acceptus est,
ita Rhodine apud M. Licinium accepta sit, et tantum valeat quantum ille
mortuos quei istic sepultus est; Dite Pater! Rhodinen tibi commendo ut
semper odio sit M. Licinio Fausto, item M. Hedium Amphionem, item C.
Popillium Apollonium, item Vennonia Hermiona, item Sergia Glycinna." It
is easy to construct a history out of these lines, the despairing lover
dying from the perfidy of the fair Rhodine, who has jilted him for the
noble Licinius. Faustus prays the God of Hell to make her distasteful to
her possessor, and also to punish her aiders and abettors, whose Greek
cognomens show them to be of the condition of freedmen.

In the same strain we Lave the commination, sounding to us so jocular,
but doubtless in its own time intended for something very serious,
addressed to Nodens, discovered amidst the ruins of his not much
frequented temple in Lydney Park, Gloucestershire. "Devo Nodenti
Silvianus anilum perdedit, demediam (sic) partem donavit Nodenti inter
quibus nomen Seniciani nollis permittas sanitatem donec perferat usque
Templum Nodentis." Whereby the half-civilized Silurian, as his name
betrays, in artless grammar and orthography, beseeches the local deity
never to allow Senicianus or any of his family to enjoy health, until he
brings back the ring, the loss of which Silvianus ascribes to him, and
restores it to the rightful owner at the temple of Nodens: in which case
one half its value is promised to the god for his assistance in
recovering the stolen property.

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

These thank-offerings to "Neddyn diw" (perhaps identical with the
Etruscan "Nethunos") were made in coppers, the very "stipes" out of
which the tesselated pavement of his temple was paid for, as the
inscription thereon yet testifies. They were found plentifully strewed
over the floor, of every date down to Honorius; then some sudden raid of
barbarians gave the whole establishment to the flames.

The idea of "binding" is practically carried out in Spell VII. of
Atanasi's 'Mag. Papyrus,' which directs you to lay the link of a chain
(κρίκος) upon a leaden plate, and having traced its outline, to write
thereon, round the circumference, the common Gnostic legend (reading
both ways) continuously:

**ΙΑΕΩΒΑΦΡΕΝΕΜΟϒΝΟΘΙΛΑΡΙΚΡΙΦΙ  
ΑΕϒΕΑΡΙΦΙΚΡΑΛΙΘΟΝϒΟΜΕΝΕΡΦΑΒΑΩΕΑΙ**

Within the circle must be written the nature of the thing it is desired
to prevent. The operation is entitled the "Ring of Hermes."

The link was then to be folded up on the leaden plate, and thrown into
the grave of one dead before his time, or else into a disused well.
After the formula above given was to follow, in Greek, "Prevent thou
such and such a person from doing such and such a thing"--a proof that
the long string of epithets all referred to the same Power.

We now come to relics of the same sort, but of diverse intention; being
those passports to eternal bliss, so frequently mentioned in the course
of the preceding dissertation. Of these the most complete example is the
Leaden Book formerly belonging to the celebrated Father Kircher, in
whose collection it first made its appearance, but concerning the
*provenance* of which nothing is known, although Matter *suspects* it to
be the same that Montfaucon gave to Cardinal Bouillon, who died at Rome
in 1715. But this identification is entirely ungrounded, as shall
presently be shown. The same writer has given facsimiles, in his
'Excursion Gnostique,' of the seven pages composing the book, now
deposited in the Museum Kircherianum. These leaves are of lead, 3 × 4
inches square, engraved on each side, with a religious composition for
heading, under which are, in every case, *five* lines of inscription,
that mystic

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

number having doubtless been purposely adopted by the spell-maker. These
lines are written in large Greek capitals, square-shaped, and resembling
the character commonly used on Gnostic gems. Intermixed are other forms,
some resembling the hieroglyphs still current for the Signs and Planets;
others Egyptian Demotic and Pehlevi letters. The language does not
appear to be Coptic, but rather some Semitic tongue, many words being
composed entirely of *consonants*, showing that the vowels were to be
supplied by the reader. The chief interest, however, of the relic lies
in the designs heading each page, in which we recognise the usual
figures of Gnostic iconology, together with others of a novel character,
all touched in with a free and bold graver with the fewest possible
strokes. The purport of the writing underneath may be conjectured, on
the authority of the 'Litany of the Dead' <span
id="fr_217"></span>[\*](#fn_215) and the 'Diagramma of the Ophites,' to
be the prayers addressed by the ascending soul to these particular
deities, each in his turn. The very number of the pages, *seven* in all,
comes to support this explanation. The Astral Presidents to be
propitiated in the heavenward journey are represented in the following
manner:--

1\. A nude female figure, in which the navel (the "circle of the Sun")
is strongly defined: she makes a gesture of adoration to a genius in a
conical cap and short tunic, armed with a trident, Siva's proper weapon,
and consequently appropriated afterwards by the mediæval Ruler of
Tartarus.

*Reverse*. Palm within a circle or garland, and a large Caduceus.

2\. Female in flowing robes, addressing a gigantic fowl, much too squat,
apparently, in its proportions for the ibis of Thoth: perhaps intended
for the yet more divine bird, the phoenix.

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

*Reverse*. Nude female adoring a certain undefined monster, furnished
with large ears, and placed upon a low altar. The first line of the
accompanying prayer seems to begin with the Pehlevi letters equivalent
to S, P, V.

3\. Horus, leaning upon an instrument of unknown use, regarding a huge
tortoise, better drawn than the rest, which is crawling towards him.

*Reverse*. Female in long flowing robes, holding up her hands to a naked
child (Horus?), who is in the act of leaping down to her from a lofty
pedestal.

4\. Anubis attired in a short mantle (reminding one of Mephistopheles)
attentively contemplating a lofty hill, the apex whereof has the form of
an eagle's head.

*Reverse*. Female in rags leaning on a staff advancing towards another
richly clothed and crowned, who lifts up her hands as though terrified
at the apparition.

5\. Abraxas in his proper form, looking towards a female fully draped,
who offers him some indistinct symbol, much resembling an **Ε** turned
upside down. The prayer below opens with the word **ΙΑΩ**; whence it may
be fairly *conjectured* that the first characters in each of the other
pages give the name of the deity pictured above.

*Reverse*. Frog and serpent facing each other: ancient emblems of
Spring, but probably used here in their mediæval sense as types of the
Resurrection of the body.

6\. A headless man with rays issuing from his shoulders, and holding out
a torch, appears falling backwards with affright on the approach of a
winged dragon.

*Reverse*. A squat personage with radiated crown stands in front face in
the attitude of the Egyptian Typhon. On the other side stands a very
indistinct figure, resembling a Cupid, having square-cut wings, his back
turned to the spectator.

7\. Female with robe flying in an arch over her head, as Iris is
commonly pictured, extends her hand to an approaching bull: the drawing
of the latter being vastly superior to any of the other figures. One is
led to discover in this group Venus and her tutelary sign, Taurus.

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

*Reverse*. Female reclining on the ground, towards whom advances a large
bird, seemingly meant for a pigeon.

In the sacred animals figuring in these successive scenes it is
impossible to avoid discovering an allusion to the forms the Gnostics
gave to the planetary Rulers. A legend of theirs related how the Saviour
in his descent to this lower world escaped the vigilance of these Powers
by assuming their own *form* as he traversed the sphere of each, whence
a conjecture may be hazarded that similar metamorphoses of the illumined
soul are hinted at in these inexplicable pictures.

We now come to the consideration of a second relic of the same kind,
known as "Card. Bouillon's Leaden Book." How Matter could have supposed
this to be the same with Kircher's (supposing him ever to have compared
his own facsimiles with Montfaucon's) is a thing totally beyond my
comprehension. For Montfaucon, in his Plate 187, has given every leaf of
the former, apparently copied with sufficient fidelity: the pictures on
which I shall proceed to describe for the purpose of comparison with
those in the Kircherian volume; for the general analogy in the designs
attests the similar destination of both monuments, whilst at the same
time the variation in details proves the existence of *two* distinct
specimens of this interesting class.

The leaves within the two covers, connected by rings secured by a rod
passed through them, are only *six* in number; whilst the inscriptions,
though in much the same lettering as the Kircherian copy, fill only
*four* lines on a page, and only *four* pages in all: the other eight
pages having pictures alone.

Now to describe these pictures, which seem in better drawing than those
of the former set. <span id="fr_218"></span>[\*](#fn_216) Page 1. Man,
nude, standing up. 2. Female fully draped, walking. 3. The same figure,
extending one hand. 4. Anubis in a short mantle. 5. The usual figure of
the Abraxas god. 6. Bird-headed man surrounded with rays (Phre?). 7.
Bust of Serapis. 8. Female reclining. 9. Terminal figure in the form of
a cross. 10. Frog. 11. Ibis, or Phoenix. 12. Female holding above her
head a star-spangled veil.

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

Montfaucon supposes all these figures represent the genii who preside
over the *hours* of the day--the first being expressive of *rising*, the
last of *night;* and calls attention to the fact that the *seventh* page
is assigned to Serapis, who sometimes receives the title of
ἑπταγράμματος θεός. But in his Plate 188, Montfaucon copies from
Bononi's 'Museum Kircherianum' another leaden book "found in a
sepulchre," which actually has seven pages, and two figures heading
each, in the specimen pages: and this may possibly be the one since
published in its entirety by Matter; although at present the leaves are
separate, not connected into a book, which may be the result of accident
during the century and a half that has elapsed since it was first
noticed.

Another discovery of the same nature has been made in our own times, and
investigated with the greatest care. In the year 1852, whilst excavating
the ruins of a tomb in the Vigna Marini, near the Porta Pia, a marble
sarcophagus was brought to light, ornamented with a bas-relief
representing either the Adoration of the Magi, or else the prototype of
that scene, the "Birth of the New Sun." The floor of the tomb was paved
with a mosaic equally ambiguous in subject, whether a Madonna and Child,
or, what the concomitants render more probable, Isis suckling the infant
Harpocrates. Several minor sarcophagi in terra-cotta surrounded the
larger one; and in these were found many leaden plates, rolled up into
scrolls, not bound-up like books. Eleven of these can still be
deciphered. Matter publishes facsimiles of three of the best preserved,
but none of them present any legends like the examples above described.

On the first is seen Anubis wearing a long tunic and buskins, and
holding out a scroll; at his feet are two female busts: below all are
two serpents entwined about the same object as in the second scroll,
where also the same busts appear, viz. a corpse swathed up like a mummy.
In the second scroll these busts are set on each side of the Anubis, a
large figure much mutilated, but attired as above, and holding out a
cross, the "Sign of Life." Under his feet lies the corpse, encircled in
the numerous folds of a huge serpent, the Agathodæmon, guardian of the
deceased. And this last type supplies the motive for so frequently
placing upon gems the serpent-girt mummy. In the

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

olden creed the serpent watched over tombs as well as over buried
treasure. When Æneas is offering sacrifice at his father's grave (v.
84)--

"Dixerat haec; adytis cum lubricus anguis ab imis  
Septem ingens gyros, septena volumina, traxit,  
Amplexus placide tumulum, lapsusque per aras;  
Coeruleae cui terga notae, maculosus et auro  
Squamam incendebat fulgor, ceu nubilus arcus  
Mille jacit varios adverso sole colores.  
Obstupuit visu Æneas. Ille agmine longo  
Tandem inter pateras, et lœvia pocula serpens,  
Libavitque dapes, rursusque innoxius imo  
Successit tumulo, et depasta altaria liquit.  
Hoc magis inceptos genitori instaurat honores;  
Incertus geniumne loci famulumve parentis  
Esse putet."

In the third scroll, the most valuable of all, the same Anubis bears on
his arm an oblong object, perhaps the Roman *scutum*, held so as to
convert the outline of the figure into a complete Latin cross. Across
this shield and the field run a number of Gnostic symbols, conspicuous
amongst which is the sigil prescribed by Alexander Trallianus as a cure
for the colic. <span id="img_36700"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/36700.jpg) |

Others resemble some ordinary Masons’ Marks. For example, an eight-armed
cross, a circle, and a square cut by horizontal and vertical lines: at
the god's foot is a rhomboid, the Egyptian "Egg of the World," towards
which crawls a serpent coiled into a circle. A remarkable addition is
the inscription carved over the tunic in semi-cursive letters:

<span id="img_36701"></span> ![](img/36701.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Under the pairs of
busts in the other scrolls is the letter **Ω**, repeated *seven* times
in a line: reminding one of the "Names," the interpretation whereof has
been already given from the *Pistis-Sophia* ([p.
16](gar05.htm#page_16)). Very remarkable also is the line of characters,
apparently Palmyrene, upon the legs of the first Anubis. As for the
figure of the *serpent*, supposing these talismans to emanate not from
the Isiac but the newer Ophite

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

creed, it may well stand for that "True and perfect Serpent" who "leads
forth the souls of all that put their trust in him out of the Egypt of
the body, and through the Red Sea of Death into the Land of Promise,
saving them on their way from the serpents of the Wilderness, that is,
from the Rulers of the stars."

As for the symbols so largely used here and in other Gnostic monuments,
their frequent construction out of lines terminated by dots or heads
irresistibly suggests a theory for their origin. In this respect, and in
general form, they strikingly resemble certain characters in the
*oldest* Babylonian alphabet. This alphabet, simple in construction,
long preceding the elaborate *nailhead*, is allowed to have been
pictorial, *i.e.* hieroglyphic, in its nature. It is very conceivable
that, revered for antiquity, this primitive character was preserved in
sacred usages long after it had grown obsolete in common life. The
cuneiform continued the national alphabet of Persia down to the
Macedonian conquest, and doubtless was the one generally employed by the
natives (very few of whom probably learnt the language of the new
masters) until it was replaced by its last modification the early
Pehlevi. And as for the primitive hieroglyphic letters, it was natural
that certain of their forms, expressing peculiarly sacred ideas (as the
<span id="img_36800"></span> ![](img/36800.jpg) signifying "God"),
should retain a mystic, perhaps thaumaturgic, value in the practice of
the Magi long after their original meaning was forgotten. And these very
Magi were the teachers of the talisman-makers of Gnostic times. <span
id="fr_219"></span>[\*](#fn_217) This explanation is strongly supported
by the recent discovery, that in the Assyrian inscriptions every deity
has a certain *numeral* assigned him, which said numeral frequently
stands in the place of his full name. For example, the numeral for *Anu*
(Pluto) is 60; for *Baal* (Jupiter) 50; for *Hoa* (Neptune) 40; the same

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

rule holding good for the sun, moon, and planets. Hence is it more than
probable that our Gnostic talismans exhibit to us those very "numeri
Babylonii" which Horace dissuades the fair Leuconöe from consulting in
her unadvised desire to learn the Future. Such relics of old Chaldean
lore would, it may well be supposed, never cease to be reproduced as
they were originally shapen; the current Pehlevi would have carried on
its face too recent a stamp to impose upon superstition.

All numerals were at first letters of an alphabet. Some amongst the
unknown characters and "Masons’ Marks" found on talismans cannot but be
*numerals*, considering the essential part the properties of numbers
play in several divisions of the Gnostic family. This notion is strongly
supported by what Hippolytus (*Egyptian Theology*) says of a certain
numeral, lost in the text, but from a subsequent passage clearly the
Ten. "Which is a *sacred Number*, and which is written down and tied
about the necks of sick people as a means of cure. In like manner a
certain plant which terminates in the same number (of leaves) being
similarly hung around the patient produces the same effect, in
consequence of the *virtue* of that Number. Moreover a physician cures
his patients when they amount to that particular number, but when the
number of them is against him he does so with great difficulty. The
Egyptians attend much to such numerals, and calculate all similar
matters according to this rule; some reckoning by the vowels alone,
others by all the letters in the Word." The plant meant may have been
the *Agnus castus*, still regarded by the Turks as a potent amulet, and
called *Kef Marjam*, "the hand of Mary," on account of its digitate
form. The same *hand* made of blue glass is tied round children's necks,
or on the part of the body to be protected against the stroke of the
Evil-eye. Again, that important sect the Marcosians are shown by
Hippolytus to teach no better doctrine than "a mere patchwork of scraps,
stolen from the notions of Astrology, and from the Pythagorean art of
*numbers*." In their theosophy the sacred numerals were the 30, the sum
of the letters constituting the Ineffable Name, and the constituents of
the same. viz. 8, 10, 12: expressed in Greek by **Η, Ι, ΙΑ**: or, again,
by an intricate combination of these

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

numerals giving the sum 99, written in Greek ρ. In another place (iv.
51) Hippolytus observes that "almost every heresy is indebted to the
science of arithmetic for its *invention* of the Hebdomads, and its
emanation of the Æons; although the different teachers divide them
variously, and change their names, doing in reality nothing more: in all
which way of proceeding Pythagoras is their true master, he who first
brought with him out of *Egypt the use of numbers in such matters*."

The so-called "Pythagorean Numerals" of unknown antiquity, whether or
not due to the Samian sage, are said to be preserved to us by Boethius,
"the last of the Romans," in his treatise on Arithmetic. That they would
be the true parents of our *Arabic* numerals is at once apparent by
inverting the figures standing for 1, 2, 5, 7, 9, 0. Their forms look
like certain Palmyrene letters slightly modified. The Palmyrene is a
very ancient Syriac alphabet, totally different in origin from either
Punic or Pehlevi. The ancient importance of this character is apparent
from what Epiphanius notices (Hær. lxvi.). "Manes divided his work into
22 books, being the number of the letters in the Syriac alphabet. For
most of the Persians use the Syriac character as well as the Persian,
just as with us many nations, although having a national alphabet of
their own, yet employ the Greek. Others again pride themselves upon
using the most cultivated dialect, viz. that current in Palmyra, both
the dialect itself and its letters; and these are 22 in number."

In this affectation of the learned in Persia, a sufficient reason
presents itself for the occasional appearance of Palmyrene letters in
spells composed and sold by the Magi or their semi-Grecian disciples
under the Roman Empire. The practice went back far beyond the epoch of
the great heresiarch, for many Babylonian cylinders are known inscribed,
instead of the cumbrous cuneiform, with a Semitic lettering, sometimes
more resembling the Palmyrene than the Punic. And even when the Pehlevi
had become the national alphabet of Persia there was very good reason
why the cultivators of polite literature should prefer the Palmyrene
alphabet for its superior copiousness, their own possessing no more than
fifteen distinct characters. And, lastly, the remark of Epiphanius
deserves attention as to certain

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Western nations
then possessing alphabets of their own: for it proves, contrary to the
received opinion, that as late as A.D. 400 they had not all been
superseded by the Greek or the Latin letters throughout the whole extent
of the Roman world.

The curious question of these Numerals, and the deep ideas involved
therein, has led us far away from the proper object of this
chapter--sepulchral scrolls. Their use was carried on by the Christians
down to comparatively recent times. Fauno describes amongst the
innumerable *bijoux* of all kinds deposited in the coffin <span
id="fr_220"></span>[\*](#fn_218) of the infant imperial bride Maria
Honorii "a small plate of gold on which were written, or rather
scratched, the words, in Greek, Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Uriel." And
the Abbé Cochet has figured in his very interesting researches <span
id="fr_221"></span>[†](#fn_219) in the old Norman cemeteries many leaden
plates, cross-shaped, inscribed with prayers, placed regularly upon the
breast of the buried body. Out of four examples found in the old
cemetery of Bouteilles, Dieppe, the most complete formula, written in a
character that cannot be later than the thirteenth century, runs as
follows: "Dñs ΙΗC ΧΡC qui dixit discipulis suis quodcunque ligaveritis
super terram erit ligatum et in celis quodcunque solveritis super terram
erit solutum et in celis de quorum numero licet nos indignos nos esse
voluit ipse te absolvet per ministerium nostrum quodcunque fecisti
cogitatione locutione negligenter atque necibus omnibus absolutum
perducere dignetur in regnum celorum qui vivit et regnat Deus per secula
saeculorum amen. Omnipotens Deus misereatur animo Mesaline condonet
peccata tibi preterita presentia et futura liberet te ab omni malo
conservet et confirmet itinere bono et perducat te Christus filius Dei
ad vitam eternam et ad sanctorum consortium absolutione et remissione
penitentia tribuat tibi Masaline omnipotens pius et misericors ΙΗC
Amen." The Abbé states that it is still the custom in the Russian Church
for the *popa* at a funeral, after reading the form of absolution, to
place the paper in the hand of the corpse to accompany him into the
grave.

The remarkable properties of Numerals captivated the fancy

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

of Man as soon as the science of arithmetic was invented. From their
powers of infinite multiplication the ancients gave them sexes: making
the odd the males, the even the females of the species. This assumption
plays a great part in the theosophy of Marcus. From this idea, the next
step was a very easy one--the attribution of mystic virtues to certain
combinations of numerals that produced curious results by their
addition. Of such, the most striking example is the Magic Square; the
grand mediæval charm against the plague, and therefore conspicuous in
Albert Durer's picture of 'Melancholy,' where the dull goddess sits in
gloomy abstraction, surrounded by the emblems of all the arts and
sciences. This, which however

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| 4   |  .  | 14  |  .  | 15  |  .  | 1   |
| 9   |  .  | 7   |  .  | 6   |  .  | 12  |
| 5   |  .  | 11  |  .  | 10  |  .  | 8   |
| 16  |  .  | 2   |  .  | 3   |  .  | 13  |

</div>

added, gives the same result, viz., 34.

The celebrated Caireen magician of forty years ago, employed a diagram
constructed on the same principle, but with different numerals, into the
middle of which, traced on a sheet

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| 4   |  .  | 9   |  .  | 2   |
| 3   |  .  | 5   |  .  | 7   |
| 8   |  .  | 1   |  .  | 6   |

</div>

of paper, he poured the little pool of ink which served for mirror to
exhibit the spectres of the persons called for by his dupes. And, to
conclude this subject in an appropriate manner, a fifteenth century MS.
in the library of this college, amongst a number of charms, gave this
"for procuring favour with all men;" always carry about you written
down--

**Α . Χ . Η . Β . Χ . U . Υ . ΙΙΙ . Κ . Ο**

 

<span id="img_fig17"></span> ![FIG. 17](img/fig17.jpg)  
FIG. 17

[(\*)](gar71.htm#an_fig17)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[359:\*](gar53.htm#fr_216) κατάδεσις κατάδεσμος
are used by Plato for witchcraft: and the Hebrew "Chabar," *to bewitch*,
properly signifies *to bind*.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[363:\*](gar53.htm#fr_217) In the pictures to
which the disembodied spirit "before his journey addresses his prayers
to the various gods, and then enters upon his labours. He attacks with
spear in hand the crocodiles, lizards, scorpions and snakes which beset
his path; and passing through these dark regions he at length reaches
the land of the Amenti, whose goddess is a hawk standing upon a perch.
Here the sun's rays cheer his steps, and he meets amongst other wonders
the head of Horus rising out of a lotus-flower, the god Pthah, the
phoenix, his own soul in the form of a bird with a human head, and the
goddess Isis as a serpent of goodness. The soul then returns to the
mummy and puts life into its mouth."--(Sharpe, 'Egypt. Mythol.,' p. 65.)

<span id="fn_216"></span>[365:\*](gar53.htm#fr_218) The improvement is
probably only due to the French copyist.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[368:\*](gar53.htm#fr_219) This conjecture of
mine has at last been verified by that high authority in Assyrian
literature, Professor Sayce. He finds in the assemblage of siglæ on the
back of the Mithraic gem (Pl. Ll. 1) the regular cuneiform characters,
somewhat depraved, for *God*, and *Heaven* for BI and RI. Besides these,
he recognises at least three out of the Cypriote syllabary; some of the
rest remind him of the cypher alphabets of the East as given by that old
author Ibn Wahaby, of which Von Hammer has made a translation.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[371:\*](gar53.htm#fr_220) Discovered Feb.,
1544, in digging the foundations of the Chapel of the Kings of France,
in St. Peter's, Rome; and fully described by M. L. Fauno in his
'Antichità di Roma,' p. 151 published 1553.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[371:†](gar53.htm#fr_221) 'Sépultures
Gauloises,' chap. xiii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Masonic Origins](gar54)
