[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar67)  [Next](gar69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Transmission of Gnostic Symbols

The foregoing considerations seem to furnish a reasonable solution of
the problem set to the archæologist in the continued existence of
genuine Gnostic symbols (whether in their pristine significancy or as
mere dead forms, is for the Masons themselves to judge) still paraded
before us as things holy and full of meaning. Treasured up amongst the
Sufis of Persia, and the dark sectaries of the Lebanon, thence
transmitted to the Templars, and handed over by them to their legitimate
heirs the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, these signs maintain a perpetual
vitality. The famous *Pentacle* (Solomon's seal) of the Templars was,
thinks Nicolai with good reason, the powerful symbol, prescribed in the
Diagramma of the Ophites to be offered by the ascending soul to the
Genius of each sphere, to extort from them free passage to the supernal
Light: "O First and Seventh One (Ildabaoth, æon of Saturn), born to rule
with power, chief Word of the pure Intelligence! Perfect Work in the
sight of the Father and the Son; by presenting unto thee in this seal
the *sign of life*, I open the gate which thy power hath closed to

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

the world, and freely traverse thy domains." A sufficient reason this
for the constant appearance of this particular sigil upon tombstones of
every date. The reverence with which the Hindoos still regard the same
figure has been already noticed. In its five points lies concealed the
same expression of the virtues of that numeral as was conveyed to the
Grecian philosopher by the Delphic e; interpreted in the same sense as
by Plutarch, in the Middle Ages the Pentacle was held a sure protection
against all danger of fire--though found unavailing, alas! for its
knightly wearers; Béranger's dictum being too well verified,

"Les hérétiques n’ont pas trouvé  
 Onguent pour la brûlure,"

and was therefore regularly painted up in buildings that from their
destination were particularly liable to such risk, brew-houses amongst
the rest. This last custom explains how the pentacle came at last to
indicate the places where fermented liquors were on sale.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Illuminati](gar69)
