[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar75)  [Next](gar77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl_d"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
D](tn/pl_d.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_d.jpg)  
Plate D  
</span>

### PLATE D.

### SIGILS OF THE CNUPHIS SERPENT.

This class of figures has no connection with Gnosticism considered as a
development of Christianity; being nothing more than talismans for the
protection of the chest, as I have already shown from Galen. It is true
indeed that the Kabbalists of Alexandria sought to heighten the
*medicinal* efficiency of the ancient Pharaonic sigil by adding to it
formulæ of their own fashion, embodying the all-powerful Name, but this
did not endow the gem with any *spiritual* sense. The appellation
"Kabbalist" I shall always employ in this treatise in its strictest
acceptation, and the present is as good a place as any for stating my
reasons for doing so. It is the rule nowadays to treat the Kabbala as
the pure production of the Middle Ages, and such it probably is, in the
form under which it is now presented to us. I will not, indeed, go as
far as the most learned Rabbi of our times, and boldly assert that Moses
himself was a profound Kabbalist, although "the Wisdom of the
Egyptians," in which Holy Writ declares he was a proficient, was beyond
a doubt something of very much the same nature. Whatever unprejudiced
person will carefully read what I have adduced of the doctrines of
Sastri and of Marcus (themselves "converted" Jews) will find there the
regular system of the Kabbala fully developed, and its earliest and
Egyptian rudiments in the "Pistis Sophia" of Valentinus. No person
really acquainted with the history of religions can suppose that these
theosophists *invented* these rules of interpretation: they merely
transferred principles sanctioned by antiquity from the explanation of
the Old Testament to that of the New.

To return to our *Chnuphis*, *Chubis*, or *Chuphis* (for thus the Greeks
transliterated the Coptic *Kneph*) it is probable that the veneration in
which this sigil of the Pharaoh Nechepsi was held, was the true source
of the legend concerning Moses's elevation of the Brazen Serpent. At all
events, I know of an enamel picture of the scene (date, thirteenth
century) in which the Serpent, lifted up on the Cross, is figured with
the radiated lion's head, really as he is seen on these talismans. This
particular sigil is generally engraved on calcedony, varying in colour
from olive-green to waxy-white. The best executed have for material the
plasena traversed by an opaque white line (Pliny's *Iaspis
Graminatias*), the estimation of which as an amulet by the Orientals he
particularly mentions.

1\. The reverse of this gem reads *Chumis*, accompanied by a row of
vowels that appear to contain the word **ΙΕΗ**, which is, according to
Kabbala, an inferior title of God.

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

2\. The Serpent elevated above the *thymele*, Bacchic altar--a
combination betraying the influence of the Dionysiac Mysteries. He
declares in phonetic Hebrew, "I, I am the Good Spirit." The reverse of
this gem had been covered with a long invocation in minute characters;
now almost entirely lost by the fracture of the material in the fire to
which it had accompanied its owner. (New York.)

3\. This Chnuphis, of exceptionally fine work and yet finer material,
has each of the *seven* rays of the crown tipped by one of the seven
vowels that make up the Ineffable Name. The reverse exhibits the
serpent-entwined wand, (badge of the Egyptian priesthood) which
generally goes with this sigil, and doubtless added to its power.
Moses's rod and Aesculapius's club hence took their origin.

4\. Another Chnuphis, in the ordinary style. It is noticeable how the
gem-cutter has endeavoured to give variety to the endless repetition of
the same sigil, by altering the arrangement of the serpentine folds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate E. Monuments of the Serapis Worship](gar77)
