[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar76)  [Next](gar78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl_e"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
E](tn/pl_e.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_e.jpg)  
Plate E  
</span>

### PLATE E.

### MONUMENTS OF THE SERAPIS WORSHIP.

1\. Serapis, viewed as the Sun-god, enthroned; at his feet, the
triple-headed monster described by Macrobius. Before him stands Isis, or
Mother Earth, holding a bunch of wheat-ears and poppy-heads, to mark her
character. The legend is the invocation "Immaculate is Our Lady, Isis!"
A fine specimen of Alexandrian art, in a beautiful sard. (New York.)

2\. Venus, arranging her hair at a mirror, held up to her by a Cupid;
two Loves, hovering in the air, hold a myrtle-crown over her head. The
inscription "The Manifestation of Aroriph," occurs in a similar
connection upon a gem in the Paris Cabinet. It is hard to determine
whether she be the "nuda veritas," whose Kabbalistic revelation to
Marcus is given in my text; or merely a talisman for engendering love
towards the wearer; the material, magnetic hæmatite, supports the latter
acceptation. The reverse exhibits Horus, seated on the lotus, planted
upon the *baris*, which is constructed out of long papyrus-stalks lashed
together. He here takes the title of *Abraxas*, and is surrounded by
adoring triplets of all the animals held sacred by the Egyptians. The
symbol of the Sun is seen at his right.

3\. Bust of Serapis, very curious for the prayer surrounding it,
"Protect Jupiter!" a proof that Serapis is here regarded as the Supreme
Being, and the ancient Jupiter reduced to the rank of an astral Power;
as, indeed he was occasionally so understood in better times. Thus
Persius: "Saturnumque gravem nostro *Iove* fregimus una." (v. 50.)

4\. Isis, veiled, with the *tubulus* on her head, and leaning on a tall
sceptre, in the pose of the Roman Juno; for whom she might be mistaken
but for the invocation on the other side, "Baffle, Serapis, the Evil
Eye!" which declares the object of this talisman.

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

5\. Serapis, enthroned, seen in front face. Inscribed "Hermes," followed
by three letters, the initials of some then well-known address to that
god. Or if merely a private signature (Martial mentions a physician of
the name) the initials refer to his business. The God of the Shades was
a very fit patron for a professional who had doubtless done his best to
swell the ranks of his subjects. Red jasper. (New York.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate F. Ancient Egyptian Types Adapted to Gnostic Ideas](gar78)
