[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar84)  [Next](gar86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

<span id="img_pl_n"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
N](tn/pl_n.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_n.jpg)  
Plate N  
</span>

### PLATE N.

### GENERAL TALISMANS (*continued*).

1\. Universal Nature, symbolised in a highly poetic manner, combining
all her forces for the protection of the bearer. The *Eagle* of Jupiter
(Air); the *Dolphins* of Neptune (Water); the *Lion* of Sol (Fire), are
moulded into the mask of Pan, whose semi-bestial nature is of the
*Earth*, earthy.

Winckelmann, in describing an intaglio of the Stosch Cabinet (No. 1232)
Pan, playing upon his syrinx, seated in the centre of the Zodiac,
observes that the ancients considered this god as the "Type of the
Universe"; and saw in his horns and shaggy hairs mystic allusions to the
solar rays. For the same reason Apollo shared his Gryphon with Pan, and
Orpheus sings of him as "Attuning the harmony of the world with his
sportive music." Onyx cameo (Rollin and Feuardent).

2\. Isis, standing, with the *Asp*, badge of royalty, rising from her
forehead. The Coptic legend opens with the name of *Osiris*. The
characters in the inner circle seem to be Demotic--they are *not*
Palmyrene. I have published this gem, as being the finest example of the
class that has ever come to my knowledge, by the kind permission of its
owner, Mr. J. C. Robinson. Dark jasper. (On the reverse, a later hand
has inscribed the "Great Name," and the Seven Vowels, to adapt the
talisman to the new creed.)

Nos. 3 and 6 are very frequent forms, made up entirely of *siglae* and
*Numerals;* on which latter subject more shall be said further on.

4\. This spell, "Great is the *Name* of the One God," is the Jewish
defiance to its rival, "Great is the *Name* of Serapis,"--of which
Caylus publishes a beautiful example, in *relief*, of antique paste--a
material that indicates a large manufacture of the same article to meet
a constant demand.

5\. Certain astral Powers, represented by their then well-known symbols,
are enlisted, by this engraving, in the service of a lady, *Sabinia
Quinta*. A popular kind of talisman this; another very similar is known
to me, made for the benefit of one *Victorina*.

Pythagoras is perpetually referred to by Hippolytus as the real master
of the Gnostics in the application of *Numerals* to the expression of
things divine. He is known to have learned his system in Egypt; and
necessarily brought away with him the cyphers which he found employed
for the same purpose amongst his teachers. The primitive Egyptian
numerals were of the simplest nature, but their *abbreviations*
ultimately became distinct symbolical cyphers for the several days of
the months; and out of these cyphers the Arabs composed their own system
of notation. Hence it follows that many of the Gnostic *siglæ* may be no
more than numerals connected with the astrological use of the charm on
which they occur. In fact, Porphyry says of Pythagoras (in his Life')
that his famous 'Numbers' were merely hieroglyphs, whereby he expressed
ideas connected with his own philosophy. The so-called "Pythagorean
Numerals"

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

are shown in the MSS. of Boethius's Geometry, composed in the sixth
century. And that the "Numbers" of Pythagoras were Ten. appears from the
remark of Aristotle (Met. vii. 8) "that some philosophers maintained
that ideas and numbers were of the same nature, and amount to *Ten* in
all."

That the Numerals as written down by "the last of the Romans," were
Egyptian demotic characters in their origin is a very probable
conjecture; but it is a curious fact, and remarkably confirms what has
been said above, that several of them when viewed upside down assume the
exact form of our present Arabic cyphers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate O. Hindoo Symbols and Caste-Marks](gar86)
