[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl309)  [Next](wl311) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE DOUBLE INDICTMENT

*Zeus. Hermes. Justice. Pan. Several Athenians. The Academy. The Porch.
Epicurus. Virtue. Luxury. Diogenes. Rhetoric. A Syrian. Dialogue*

*Zeus*. A curse on all those philosophers who will have it that none but
the Gods are happy! If they could but know what we have to put up with
on men's account, they would not envy us our nectar and our ambrosia.
They take Homer's word for it all,--the word of a blind quack; ’tis he
who pronounces us blessed, and expatiates on heavenly glories, he who
could not see in front of his own nose. Look at the Sun, now. He yokes

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

that chariot, and is riding through the heavens from morn till night,
clothed in his garment of fire, and dispensing his rays abroad; not so
much breathing-space as goes to the scratching of an ear; once let his
horses catch him napping, and they have the bit between their teeth and
are off 'cross country, with the result that the Earth is scorched to a
cinder. The Moon is no better off: she is kept up into the small hours
to light the reveller and the diner-out upon their homeward path. And
then Apollo,--*he* has his work cut out for him: with such a press of
oracular business, it is much if he has any ears left to hear with: he
is wanted at Delphi; the next minute, he must be off to Colophon; then
away to Xanthus; then back at a trot to Clarus; then it is Delos, then
Branchidae;--in short, he is at the beck of every priestess who has
taken her draught of holy water, munched her laurel-leaf, and made the
tripod rock; it is now or never; if he is not there that minute to reel
off the required oracle, his credit is gone. The traps they set for him
too! He must have a dog's nose for lamb and tortoise in the pot, or his
Lydian customer <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) departs, laughing
him to scorn. As for Asclepius, he has no peace for his patients: his
eyes are acquainted with horror, and his hands with loathsomeness;
another's sickness is his pain. To say nothing of the work that the
Winds have to get through, what with sowing and winnowing and getting
the ships along; or of Sleep, always on the wing, with Dream at his side
all night giving a helping hand. Men have to thank us for all this:
every one of us contributes <span class="margnote"><span
id="145:2">2</span></span>his share to their well-being. And the others
have an easy time of it, compared to me, to me the King and Father of
all. The annoyances I have to put up with! the worry of thinking of all
these things at once! I must keep an eye on all the rest, to begin with,
or they would be making some silly mistake; and as for the work I have
to do with my own hands, there is

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

no end to it; such complications! it is all I can do to get through with
it. It is not as if I had only the main issues to attend to, the rain
and hail and wind and lightning, and as soon as I had arranged them
could sit down, feeling that my own particular work was over: no,
besides all that, I must be looking every way at once, Argus-eyed for
theft and perjury, as for sacrifice; the moment a libation has been
poured, it is for me to locate the savoury smoke that rises; for me it
is to hear the cry of the sick man and of the sailor; at one and the
same moment, a hecatomb demands my presence at Olympia, a battle in the
plain of Babylon; hail is due in Thrace, dinner in Ethiopia; ’tis too
much! And do what I may, it is hard to give satisfaction. Many is the
time that all besides, both Gods and men of plumed helm, have slept the
long night through, while unto Zeus sweet slumber has not come nigh. If
I nod for a moment, behold, Epicurus is justified, and our indifference
to the affairs of Earth made manifest; and if once men lend an ear to
that doctrine, the consequences will be serious: our temples will go
ungarlanded; the streets will be redolent no longer of roast meat, the
bowl no longer yield us libation; our altars will be cold, sacrifice and
oblation will be at an end, and utter starvation must ensue. Hence like
a pilot I stand up at the helm all alone, tiller in hand, while every
soul on board is asleep, and probably drunk; no rest, no food for me,
while I ponder in my mind and breast on the common safety; and my
reward? to be called the Lord of all! I should like to<span
class="margnote"><span id="146:3">3</span></span> ask those philosophers
who assign us the monopoly of blessedness, when they suppose we find
time for nectar and ambrosia among our ceaseless occupations. Look at
the mildewed, cob-webbed stack of petitions mouldering on their files in
our chancery, for want of time to attend to them: look only at the cases
pending between men and the various Arts and Sciences; venerable relics,
some of them! Angry protests against the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

delays of the law reach me from all quarters; men cannot understand that
it is from no neglect of ours that these judgements have been postponed;
it is simply pressure of business--pressure of blessedness, if they will
have it so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="147:4">4</span></span>*Her*. I myself,
father, have heard a great deal of dissatisfaction expressed on Earth,
only I did not like to mention it to you. However, as you have
introduced the subject yourself, I may say that the discontent is
general: men do not venture to express their resentment openly, but
there are mutterings in corners about the delay. It is high time they
were all put out of their suspense, for better or for worse.

*Zeus*. And what would you have me do, my boy? hold a session at once?
or shall we say next year?

*Her*. Oh, at once, by all means.

*Zeus*. To work, then: fly down, and make proclamation in the following
terms: All litigant parties to assemble this day on Areopagus: Justice
to assign them their juries from the whole body of the Athenians, the
number of the jury to be in proportion to the amount of damages claimed;
any party doubting the justice of his sentence to have the right of
appeal to me. And you, my daughter, take your seat by the side of the
Dread Goddesses <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21), cast lots for the
order of the trials, and superintend the formation of juries.

<span class="margnote"><span id="147:5">5</span></span>*Just*. You would
have me return to Earth, once more to be driven thence in ignominious
flight by the intolerable taunts of Injustice?

*Zeus*. Hope for better things. The philosophers have quite convinced
every one by this time of your superiority. The son of Sophroniscus was
particularly strong on your merits: he laid it down that Justice was the
highest Good.

*Just*. Yes; and very serviceable his dissertations on Justice were to
him, were they not, when he was handed over to the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eleven, and thrown
into prison, and drank the hemlock? Poor man, he had not even time to
sacrifice the cock he owed to Asclepius. His accusers were too much for
him altogether, and *their* philosophy had Injustice for its object.

*Zeus*. But in those days philosophy was not generally known<span
class="margnote"><span id="148:6">6</span></span>, and had but few
exponents; it is not surprising that the scale turned in favour of
Anytus and Meletus. But now it is different: look at the number of
cloaks and sticks and wallets that are about; everywhere philosophers,
long-bearded, book in hand, maintain your cause; the public walks are
filled with their contending hosts, and every man of them calls Virtue
his nurse. Numbers have abandoned their former professions to pounce
upon wallet and cloak; these ready-made philosophers, carpenters once or
cobblers, now duly tanned to the true Ethiopian hue, are singing your
praises high and low. 'He that falls on shipboard strikes wood,' says
the proverb; and the eye, wheresoever it fall, will light on
philosophers.

*Just*. Yes, father, but they frighten me: they quarrel so<span
class="margnote"><span id="148:7">7</span></span> among themselves; and
when they talk about me, they only expose their own little minds. And,
from what I hear, most of those who make so free with my name show no
inclination at all to put my principles into practice. I may count upon
finding their doors closed to *me*: Injustice has been beforehand with
me.

*Zeus*. Come, child, they are not all so bad, and if you can find a few
honest men it will be something. Now, off with you both, and see if you
can't get a few cases settled up to-day.

*Her*. Well, Justice: yonder is our road: straight in the line<span
class="margnote"><span id="148:8">8</span></span> for Sunium, to the
foot of Hymettus, taking Parnes on our right; you see those two hills?
You have quite forgotten the way, I suppose, in all this time? Now, now:
weeping? why so vexed? There is nothing to fear. Things are quite
different in these days: the Scirons and Pityocampteses and Busirises
and

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Phalarises who
used to frighten you so are all dead: Wisdom, the Academy, the Porch,
now hold sway everywhere. They are all your admirers; their talk is all
of you; they yearn to see you descend to them once more.

*Just*. Tell me, Hermes,--you if any one must know the truth; you are
generally busy either in the Gymnasium or else in the Market, making
proclamation to the Assembly,--what are the Athenians like now? shall I
be able to live with them?

*Her*. We are brother and sister, it is only right that I should tell
you the truth. Well then, Philosophy has made a considerable change for
the better in most of them; at the worst, their respect for the cloth is
some check on their misdeeds. At the same time--not to conceal
anything--you will find villains amongst them; and you will find some
who are neither quite philosophers nor quite knaves. The fact is,
Philosophy's dyeing process is still going on. Some have absorbed the
full quantity of dye; these are perfect specimens of her art, and show
no admixture of other colours; with them you will find a ready
reception. But others, owing to their original impurities, are not yet
completely saturated; they are better than the generality of mankind,
but they are not all they should be; they are piebald or spotted or
dappled. Others again there are who have contented themselves with
merely rubbing a fingertip in the soot on the outside of the cauldron,
and smearing themselves with that; after which they consider the dyeing
<span class="margnote"><span id="149:9">9</span></span>process complete.
But you, of course, will only live with the best. Meanwhile, here we
are, close to Attica; we must now leave Sunium on our right, and diverge
towards the Acropolis. Good: *terra firma*. You had better sit down
somewhere here on the Areopagus, in the direction of the Pnyx, and wait
whilst I make Zeus's proclamation. I shall go up into the Acropolis;
that will be the easiest way of making every one hear the summons.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

*Just*. Before you go, Hermes, tell me who this is coming along; a man
with horns and a pipe and shaggy legs.

*Her*. Why, you must know Pan, most festive of all Dionysus's followers?
He used to live on Mount Parthenius: but at the time of the Persian
expedition under Datis, when the barbarians landed at Marathon, he
volunteered in the Athenian service; and ever since then he has had the
cave yonder at the foot of the Acropolis, a little past the Pelasgicum,
and pays his taxes like any other naturalized foreigner. Seeing us so
near at hand, I suppose he is coming up to make his compliments.

*Pan*. Hail, Justice and Hermes<span class="margnote"><span
id="150:10">10</span></span>!

*Just*. Hail, Pan; chief of Satyrs in dance and song, and most gallant
of Athens' soldiers!

*Pan*. But what brings you here, Hermes?

*Her*. Justice will explain; I must be off to the Acropolis on my
errand.

*Just*. Zeus has sent me down, Pan, to preside in the law-court.--And
how do you like Athens?

*Pan*. Well, the fact is, I am a good deal disappointed: they do not
treat me with the consideration to which I am entitled, after repelling
that tremendous barbarian invasion. All they do is to come up to my cave
two or three times a year with a particularly high-scented goat, and
sacrifice him: I am permitted to look on whilst they enjoy the feast,
and am complimented with a perfunctory dance. However, there is some
joking and merrymaking on the occasion, and that I find rather fun.

*Just*. And, Pan,--have they become more virtuous under the<span
class="margnote"><span id="150:11">11</span></span> hands of the
philosophers?

*Pan*. Philosophers? Oh! people with beards just like mine; sepulchral
beings, who are always getting together and jabbering?

*Just*. Those are they.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

*Pan*. I can't understand a word they say; their philosophy is too much
for me. I am mountain-bred; smart city-language is not in my line;
sophists and philosophers are not known in Arcadia. I am a good hand at
flute or pipe; I can mind goats, I can dance, I can fight at a pinch,
and that is all. But I hear them all day long, bawling out a string of
hard words about virtue, and nature, and ideas, and things incorporeal.
They are good enough friends when the argument begins, but their voices
mount higher and higher as they go on, and end in a scream; they get
more and more excited, and all try to speak at once; they grow red in
the face, their necks swell, and their veins stand out, for all the
world like a flute-player on a high note. The argument is turned upside
down, they forget what they are trying to prove, and finally go off
abusing one another and brushing the sweat from their brows; victory
rests with him who can show the boldest front and the loudest voice, and
hold his ground the longest. The people, especially those who have
nothing better to do, adore them, and stand spellbound under their
confident bawlings. For all that I could see, they were no better than
humbugs, and I was none too pleased at their copying my beard. If there
were any use in their noise, if the talking did any good to the public,
I should not have a word to say against them: but, to tell you the plain
unvarnished truth, I have more than once looked out from my peep-hole
yonder and seen them--

<span class="margnote"><span id="151:12">12</span></span>*Just*. Hush,
Pan: was not that Hermes making the proclamation?

*Pan*. I thought so.

*Her. Be it known to all men that we purpose on this seventh day of
March to hold a court of justice, and Fortune defend the right! All
litigant parties to assemble on Areopagus, where Justice will assign the
juries and preside over the trials in person. The juries to be taken
from the whole Athenian people; the pay to be sixpence* 

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

*for each case; the number of jurors to vary with the nature of the
accusation. Any parties who had commenced legal proceedings and have
died in the interim to be sent up by Aeacus. Any party doubting the
justice of his sentence may appeal; the appeal to he heard by Zeus*.

*Pan*. Talk about noise! how they shout! And what a hurry they are in to
get here! See how one hales another up the hill! Here comes Hermes
himself. Well, I leave you to your juries and your evidence; you are
accustomed to it. I will return to my cave, and there play over one of
those amorous ditties with which I love to upbraid Echo. As to rhetoric
and law-pleadings, I hear enough of those every day in this very court
of Areopagus.

*Her*. We had better summon the parties, Justice<span
class="margnote"><span id="152:13">13</span></span>.

*Just*. True. Only look at the crowd, bustling and buzzing about the
hilltop like a swarm of wasps!

*First Ath*. I've got you, curse you.

*Second Ath*. Pooh! a trumped-up charge.

*Third Ath*. At last! you shall get your deserts this time.

*Fourth Ath*. Your villany shall be unmasked.

*Fifth Ath*. My jury first, Hermes.

*Sixth Ath*. Come along: into court with you, rascal.

*Seventh Ath*. You needn't throttle me.

*Just*. Do you know what I think we had better do, Hermes? Put off all
the other cases for to-morrow, and only take to-day the charges brought
by Arts, Professions, and Philosophies. Pick me out all of that kind.

*Her*. Drink *v*. the Academy, *re* Polemon, kidnapped.

*Just*. Seven jurors.

*Her*. Porch *v*. Pleasure. Defendant is charged with seducing
Dionysius, plaintiff's admirer.

*Just*. Five will do for that.

*Her*. Luxury *v*. Virtue, *re* Aristippus.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

*Just*. Five again.

*Her*. Bank *v*. Diogenes, alleged to have run away from plaintiff's
service.

*Just*. Three only.

*Her*. Painting *v*. Pyrrho. Desertion from the ranks.

*Just*. That will want nine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="153:14">14</span></span>*Her*. What
about these two charges just brought against a rhetorician?

*Just*. No, those can stand over; we must work off the arrears first.

*Her*. Well, these cases are of just the same kind. They are not old
ones, it is true, but they are very like those you have taken, and might
fairly be heard with them.

*Just*. That looks rather like favouritism, Hermes. However, as you
like; only these must be the last; we have got quite enough. What are
they?

*Her*. Rhetoric *v*. a Syrian <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22), for
neglect; Dialogue *v*. the same, for assault.

*Just*. And who is this Syrian? There is no name given.

*Her*. That is all: the Syrian rhetorician; he can have a jury without
having a name.

*Just*. So! here on Areopagus I am to give juries to outsiders, who
ought to be tried on the other side of the Euphrates? Well, give him
eleven, and they can hear both cases.

*Her*. That's right; it will save a lot of expense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="153:15">15</span></span>*Just*. First
case: the Academy *versus* Drink. Let the jury take their seats. Mark
the time,' Hermes. Drink, open the case. . . . Not a word? can you do
nothing but nod?--Hermes, go and see what is the matter with her.

*Her*. She says she cannot plead, she would only be laughed at; wine has
tied her tongue. As you see, she can hardly stand.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

*Just*. Well, there are plenty of able counsel present, ready to shout
themselves hoarse for sixpence; let her employ one of them.

*Her*. No one will have anything to do with such a client in open court.
But she makes a very reasonable proposal.

*Just*. Yes?

*Her*. The Academy is always ready to take both sides; she makes a point
of contradicting herself plausibly. 'Let her speak first on my behalf,'
says Drink, 'and then on her own.'

*Just*. A novel form of procedure. However, go on, Academy; speak on
both sides, if you find it so easy.

*Acad*. First, gentlemen of the jury, let me state the case for<span
class="margnote"><span id="154:16">16</span></span> Drink, as her time
is now being taken.

My unfortunate client, gentlemen, has been cruelly wronged: I have torn
from her the one slave on whose loyalty and affection she could rely,
the only one who saw nothing censurable in her conduct. I allude to
Polemon, whose days, from morning to night, were spent in revel; who in
broad daylight sought the publicity of the Market in the company of
music--girls and singers; ever drunk, ever headachy, ever garlanded. In
support of my statements, I appeal to every man in Athens to say whether
he had ever seen Polemon sober. But in an evil hour for him, his revels,
which had brought him to so many other doors, brought him at length to
my own. I laid hands on him, tore him away by brute force from the
plaintiff, and made him my own; giving him water to drink, teaching him
sobriety, and stripping him of his garlands. He, who should have been
sitting over his wine, now became acquainted with the perverse, the
harassing, the pernicious quibbles of philosophy. Alas! the ruddy glow
has departed from his cheek; he is pale and wasted; his songs are all
forgotten; there are times when he will sit far on into the night,
tasting neither meat nor drink, while he reels out the meaningless
platitudes with which I have so abundantly

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

supplied him. I have even incited him to attack the character of my
client, and to utter a thousand base insinuations against her good fame.

The case of Drink is now complete. I proceed to state my own. Let my
time be taken.

*Just*. What will the defendant have to say to that, I wonder? Give her
the same time allowance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="155:17">17</span></span>*Acad*.
Nothing, gentlemen of the jury, could sound more plausible than the
arguments advanced by my learned friend on her client's behalf. And yet,
if you will give me your favourable attention, I shall convince you that
the plaintiff has suffered no wrong at my hands. This Polemon, whom
plaintiff claims as her servant, so far from having any natural
connexion with her, is one whose excellent parts entitle him to claim
kinship and affinity with myself. He was still a boy, his powers were
yet unformed, when plaintiff, aided and abetted by Pleasure--ever her
partner in crime--seized upon him, and delivered him over into the
clutches of debauchery and dissipation, under whose corrupt influence
the unfortunate young man utterly lost all sense of shame. Those very
facts that plaintiff supposed to be so many arguments in her favour will
be found, on the contrary, to make for my own case. From early morning
(as my learned friend has just observed) did the misguided Polemon, with
aching head and garlanded, stagger through the open market to the noise
of flutes, never sober, brawling with all he met; a reproach to his
ancestors and his city, a laughing-stock to foreigners. One day he
reached my door. He found it open: I was discoursing to a company of my
disciples, as is my wont, upon virtue and temperance. He stood there,
with the flute-girl at his side and the garlands on his head, and sought
at first to drown our conversation with his noisy outcry. But we paid no
heed to him, and little by little our words produced a sobering effect,
for Drink had not entire possession of him:

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

he bade the flute-girl cease, tore off his garlands, and looked with
shame at his luxurious dress. Like one waking from deep sleep, he saw
himself as he was, and repented of his past life; the flush of
drunkenness faded and vanished from his cheek, and was succeeded by a
blush of shame; at last, not (as plaintiff would have you believe) in
response to any invitation of mine, nor under any compulsion, but of his
own free will, and in the conviction of my superiority, he renounced his
former mistress there and then, and entered my service. Bring him into
court. You shall see for yourselves, gentlemen, what he has become under
my treatment. Behold that Polemon whom I found drunk, unable to speak or
stand upright, an object of ridicule: I turned him from his evil ways; I
taught him sobriety; and I present him to you, no longer a slave, but a
decent and orderly citizen, a credit to his nation. In conclusion let me
say that the change I have wrought in him has won me the gratitude not
only of Polemon himself but of all his friends. Which of us has been the
more profitable companion for him, it is now for the jury to decide.

*Her*. Come, gentlemen, get up and give your votes. There is no time to
be lost; we have other cases coming on.

*Just*. Academy wins, by six votes to one.

*Her*. I am not surprised to find that Drink has one adherent<span
class="margnote"><span id="156:19">19</span></span>. Jurors in the case
of Porch *v*. Pleasure *re* Dionysius take their seats! The lady of the
frescoes <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) may begin; her time is
noted.

*Porch*. I am not ignorant, gentlemen, of the attractions of<span
class="margnote"><span id="156:20">20</span></span> my adversary. I see
how your eyes turn in her direction; she has your smiles, I your
contempt, because my hair is close-cropped, and my expression stern and
masculine. Yet if you will give me a fair hearing, I fear her not; for
justice is on my side. Nay, it is with these same meretricious
attractions of hers

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

that my accusation is concerned: it was by her specious appearance that
she beguiled the virtuous Dionysius, my lover, and drew him to herself.
The present case is in fact closely allied with that of Drink and the
Academy, with which your colleagues have just dealt. The question now
before you is this: are men to live the lives of swine, wallowing in
voluptuousness, with never a high or noble thought: or are they to set
virtue above enjoyment, and follow the dictates of freedom and
philosophy, fearing not to grapple with pain, nor seeking the degrading
service of pleasure, as though happiness were to be found in a pot of
honey or a cake of figs? These are the baits my adversary throws out for
fools, and toil the bugbear with which she frightens them: her artifices
seldom fail; and among her victims is this unfortunate whom she has
constrained to rebel against my authority. She had to wait till she
found him on a sick-bed; never while he was himself would he have
listened to her proposals. Yet what right have *I* to complain? She
spares not even the Gods; she impugns the wisdom of Providence; she is
guilty of blasphemy; you have a double penalty to impose, if you would
be wise. I hear that she has not even been at the pains of preparing a
defence: Epicurus is to speak for her! She does not stand upon ceremony
with you, gentlemen.--Ask her what Heracles would have been, what your
own Theseus would have been, if they had listened to the voice of
pleasure, and shrunk back from toil: their toils were the only check
upon wickedness, which else must have overrun the whole Earth. And now I
have done; I am no lover of long speeches. Yet if my adversary would
consent to answer a few questions, her worthlessness would soon appear.
Let me remind you, gentlemen, of your oath: give your votes in
accordance with that oath, and believe not Epicurus, when he tells you
that the Gods take no thought for the things of Earth.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

*Her*. Stand down, madam. Epicurus will now speak on behalf of pleasure.

*Epi*. I shall not detain you long, gentlemen of the jury; there<span
class="margnote"><span id="158:21">21</span></span> is no occasion for
me to do so. If it were true, as the plaintiff asserts, that Dionysius
was her lover, and that my client by means of drugs or incantations had
constrained him to withdraw his affections from the plaintiff and
transfer them to herself,--if this were true, then my client might
fairly be accused of witchcraft, nor could her wicked practices upon her
rival's admirers escape condemnation. On the other hand, if a free
citizen of a free state, deciding for himself in a matter where the law
is silent, takes a violent aversion to this lady's person, concludes
that the blessedness with which she promises to crown his labours is
neither more nor less than moonshine, and accordingly makes the best of
his way out of her labyrinthine maze of argument into the attractive
arms of Pleasure, bursts the bonds of verbal subtlety, exchanges
credulity for common sense, and pronounces, with great justice, that
toil is toilsome, and that pleasure is pleasant,--I ask, is this
shipwrecked mariner to be excluded from the calm haven of his desire,
and hurled back headlong into a sea of toil? is this poor suppliant at
the altar of Mercy--in other words of Pleasure--is he to be delivered
over into the power of perplexity,--and all on the chance that his hot
climb up the steep hill of Virtue may be rewarded with a glimpse of that
celebrated lady on the top, and his life of toil followed by a hereafter
of happiness? We could scarcely ask for a better judge of the matter
than Dionysius himself. He was as familiar with the Stoic doctrines as
any man, and held at one time that virtue was the only Good: but he
presently discovered that toil was an evil: he then chose what seemed to
him the better course. He would no doubt observe that those philosophers
who had so much to say on the subject of patience and endurance under
toil were secretly the servants

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

of Pleasure, carefully abiding by her laws in their own homes, though
they made so free with her name in their discourses. They cannot bear to
be detected in any relaxation, or any departure from their principles:
but, poor men, they lead a Tantalus life of it in consequence, and when
they *do* get a chance of sinning without being found out, they drink
down pleasure by the bucketful. Depend on it, if some one would make
them a present of Gyges's ring of invisibility, or Hades's cap, they
would cut the acquaintance of toil without further ceremony, and elbow
their way into the presence of Pleasure; they would all be Dionysiuses
then. As long as Dionysius was well, he thought that there was some good
in all this talk about endurance; but when he fell ill, and found out
what pain really was, he perceived that his body was of another school
than the Porch, and held quite other tenets: he was converted, realized
that he was flesh and blood, and from that day ceased to behave as if he
were made of marble; he knew now that the man who talks nonsense about
the iniquity of pleasure

But toys with words: his thoughts are bent elsewhither.

And now, gentlemen, I leave you to your vote.

<span class="margnote"><span id="159:22">22</span></span>*Porch*. Not
yet! Let me ask him a few questions.

*Epi*. Yes? I am ready.

*Porch*. You hold toil to be an evil?

*Epi*. I do.

*Porch*. And pleasure a good?

*Epi*. Unquestionably.

*Porch*. Do you recognize the distinction between *differentia* and
*indifferentia*? between *praeposita* and *rejecta*?

*Epi*. Why, certainly.

*Her*. Madam, this discussion must cease; the jury say they do not
understand word-chopping. They will now give their votes.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

*Porch*. Ah; I should have won, if I could have tried him with my third
figure of *self-evidents*.

*Just*. Who wins?

*Her*. Unanimous verdict for Pleasure.

*Porch*. I appeal to Zeus.

*Just*. By all means. Next case, Hermes.

*Her*. Luxury *v.* Virtue, *re* Aristippus; Aristippus must appear<span
class="margnote"><span id="160:23">23</span></span> in person.

*Vir*. I ought to speak first. Aristippus is mine; his words and his
deeds alike proclaim him mine.

*Lux*. On the contrary, any one who will observe his garlands and his
purple robes and his perfumes will agree that he is mine.

*Just*. Peace! This suit must stand over, until Zeus has decided the
appeal *re* Dionysius. The cases are similar. If Porch wins her appeal,
Aristippus shall be adjudged to Virtue: if not, Luxury must have him.
Bring the next case. By the way, those jurors must not have their fee;
they have not earned it.

*Her*. So the poor old gentlemen have climbed up all this way for
nothing!

*Just*. Well, they must be content with a third. Now go away, all of
you, and don't be cross; you shall have another chance.

*Her*. Diogenes of Sinope wanted! Bank, it is for you to speak<span
class="margnote"><span id="160:24">24</span></span>.

*Diog*. Look here, Madam Justice, if she doesn't stop bothering, I shall
have assault and battery to answer for before long, instead of
desertion; my stick is ready.

*Just*. What is the meaning of this? Bank has run away, and Diogenes
after her, with his stick raised. Poor Bank! I am afraid she will be
roughly handled. Call Pyrrho.

*Her*. Here is Painting, but Pyrrho has never come up<span
class="margnote"><span id="160:25">25</span></span>. I knew how it would
be.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

*Just*. And what was his reason?

*Her*. He holds that there is no such thing as a true decision.

*Just*. Then judgement goes against him by default. Now for the Syrian
advocate. The indictments were only filed a day or two ago; there was no
such hurry. However--. We will first take the case in which Rhetoric is
plaintiff. How people crowd in to hear it!

*Her*. Just so: the case has not had time to get stale, you see; it has
the charm of novelty, the indictment, as you say, having only been filed
yesterday. The prospect, too, of hearing the Syrian defend himself
against two such plaintiffs as Rhetoric and Dialogue, one after the
other, is a great attraction. Well, Rhetoric, when are you going to
begin?

<span class="margnote"><span id="161:26">26</span></span>*Rhet*. Before
all things, men of Athens, I pray the Gods that you may listen to me
throughout this trial with feelings not less warm than those that I have
ever entertained towards my country and towards each one of you, my
countrymen. And if, further, I pray them so to dispose your hearts that
you will suffer me to conduct my case in accordance with my original
intention and design, without interruption from my adversary, I shall be
asking no more than justice. When I listen to the defendant's words, and
then reflect upon the treatment I have received from him, I know not how
I am to reconcile the two. You will presently find him holding a
language scarcely distinguishable from my own: yet examine into his
conduct, and you will see, from the lengths to which he has already
gone, that I am justified in taking steps to prevent his going yet
further. But enough of preamble: I am wasting time that might be better
employed in accusing my adversary.

<span class="margnote"><span id="161:27">27</span></span>Gentlemen, the
defendant was no more than a boy--he still spoke with his native accent,
and might at any moment have exhibited himself in the garb of an
Assyrian--when I found him wandering up and down Ionia, at a loss for
employment.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I took him in
hand; I gave him an education; and, convinced of his capabilities and of
his devotion to me (for he was my very humble servant in those days, and
had no admiration to spare for any one else), I turned my back upon the
many suitors who sought my hand, upon the wealthy, the brilliant and the
high-born, and betrothed myself to this monster of ingratitude; upon
this obscure pauper boy I bestowed the rich dowry of my surpassing
eloquence, brought him to be enrolled among my own people, and made him
my fellow citizen, to the bitter mortification of his unsuccessful
rivals. When he formed the resolution of travelling, in order to make
his good fortune known to the world, I did not remain behind: I
accompanied him everywhere, from city to city, shedding my lustre upon
him, and clothing him in honour and renown. Of our travels in Greece and
Ionia, I say nothing: he expressed a wish to visit Italy: I sailed the
Ionian Sea with him, and attended him even as far as Gaul, scattering
plenty in his path.

For a long time he consulted my wishes in everything, was unfailing in
his attendance upon me, and never passed a night away from my side. But
no sooner had he secured an adequate<span class="margnote"><span
id="162:28">28</span></span> provision, no sooner did he consider his
reputation established, than his countenance changed towards me: he
assumed a haughty air, and neglected, nay, utterly abandoned me; having
conceived a violent affection for the bearded old person yonder, whom
you may know from his dress to be Dialogue, and who passes for a son of
Philosophy. With this Dialogue, in spite of the disparity of age, he is
now living; and is not ashamed to clip the wings of free, high-soaring
eloquence, and submit himself to the comedian's fetters of bald question
and answer. He, whose thoughts should have found utterance in thundering
oratory, is content to weave a puny network of conversation. Such things
may draw a smile from his audience, a nod, an unimpassioned wave of the
hand, a murmur of approbation:

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

they can never hope to evoke the deafening uproar of universal applause.
And this, gentlemen, is the fascination under which he looks coldly upon
me; I commend his taste! They say, indeed, that he is not on the best of
terms even with his beloved Dialogue; apparently I am not the only
victim of his <span class="margnote"><span
id="163:29">29</span></span>overweening pride. Does not such ingratitude
as this render him liable to the penalties imposed by the marriage-laws?
He leaves me, his lawful wife, to whom he is indebted alike for wealth
and reputation, leaves me to neglect, and goes off in pursuit of
novelty; and that, at a time when all eyes are turned upon me, when all
men write me their protectress. I hold out against the entreaties of
countless suitors: they knock, and my doors remain closed to them; they
call loudly upon my name, but I scorn their empty clamours, and answer
them not. All is in vain: he will not return to me, nor withdraw his
eyes from this new love. In Heaven's name, what does he expect to get
from him? what has Dialogue but his cloak?

In conclusion, gentlemen: should he attempt to employ my art in his
defence, suffer him not thus unscrupulously to sharpen my own sword
against me; bid him defend himself, if he can, with the weapons of his
adored Dialogue.

*Her*. Now there, madam, you are unreasonable: how can he possibly make
a dialogue of it all by himself? No, no; let him deliver a regular
speech, just the same as other people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="163:30">30</span></span>*Syrian*. In
view, gentlemen, of the indignation that plaintiff has expressed at the
idea of my employing her gift of eloquence in order to maintain my cause
at large, I shall confine myself to a brief and summary refutation of
her charges, and shall then leave the whole matter to your discernment.

Gentlemen, all that the plaintiff has said is true. She educated me; she
bore me company in my travels; she made a Greek of me. She has each of
these claims to a husband's gratitude. I have now to give my reasons for
abandoning her,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

and cultivating the acquaintance of Dialogue: and, believe me, no motive
of self-interest shall induce me to misrepresent the facts. I found,
then, that the discreet bearing, the seemly<span class="margnote"><span
id="164:31">31</span></span> dress, which had distinguished her in the
days of her union with the illustrious demesman of Paeania <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24), were now thrown aside: I saw her tricked
out and bedizened, rouged and painted like a courtesan. My suspicions
were aroused, and I began to watch the direction of her eyes. To make a
long story short, our street was nightly infested with the serenades of
her tipsy gallants, some of whom, not content with knocking at our
doors, threw aside all restraint, and forced their way into the house.
These attentions amused and delighted my wife: she was commonly to be
seen leaning over the parapet and listening to the loose ditties that
were bawled up from below; and when she thought she was unobserved, she
would even open the door, and admit the gallant to her shameless
embraces. Such things were not to be endured: I was loth to bring her
into the divorce-court, and accordingly sought the hospitality of
Dialogue, who was my near neighbour.

Such, gentlemen, are the grievous wrongs that plaintiff has<span
class="margnote"><span id="164:32">32</span></span> suffered at my
hands. Even had the provocation I have described been wanting, my age (I
was then nearly forty years old) called upon me to withdraw from the
turmoil of the law-courts, and suffer the 'gentlemen of the jury' to
rest in peace. Tyrants enough had been arraigned, princes enough been
eulogized: it was time to retreat to the walks of Academy or the Lyceum,
there to enjoy, in the delightful society of Dialogue, that tranquil
discourse which aims not at noisy acclamations. I might say much more,
but I forbear: you, gentlemen, will give your votes in accordance with
the dictates of conscience. *Just*. Who wins?

*Her*. The Syrian has all votes but one.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="165:33">33</span></span>*Just*. And
that one a rhetorician's, I suppose. Dialogue will now address the same
jury. Gentlemen, you will remain and hear this second case, and will
receive a double fee.

*Dia*. If I had had my choice, gentlemen, I should have addressed you in
the conversational style to which I am accustomed, instead of delivering
a long harangue. However, I must conform to the custom of the
law-courts, though I have neither skill nor experience in such matters.
So much by way of exordium: and now for the outrage committed on me by
the defendant. In former days, gentlemen, I was a person of exalted
character: my speculations turned upon the Gods, and Nature, and the
*Annus Magnus*; I trod those aerial plains wherein Zeus on winged car is
borne along through the heights. My flight had actually brought me to
the heavenly vault; I was just setting foot upon the upper surface of
that dome, when this Syrian took it upon himself to drag me down, break
my wings, and reduce me to the common level of humanity. Whisking off
the seemly tragic mask I then wore, he clapped on in its place a comic
one that was little short of ludicrous: his next step was to huddle me
into a corner with Jest, Lampoon, Cynicism, and the comedians Eupolis
and Aristophanes, persons with a horrible knack of making light of
sacred things, and girding at all that is as it should be. But the
climax was reached when he unearthed a barking, snarling old Cynic,
Menippus by name, and thrust *his* company upon me; a grim bulldog, if
ever there was one; a treacherous brute that will snap at you while his
tail is yet wagging. Could any man be more abominably misused? Stripped
of my proper attire, I am made to play the buffoon, and to give
expression to every whimsical absurdity that his caprice dictates. And,
as if that were not preposterous enough, he has forbidden me either to
walk on my feet or to rise on the wings of poesy: I am a ridiculous
cross between prose and verse; a monster of incongruity; a literary
Centaur.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

*Her*. Now, Syrian: what do you say to that<span class="margnote"><span
id="166:34">34</span></span>?

*Syrian*. Gentlemen of the jury, I am surprised. Nothing could be more
unexpected than the charge Dialogue has brought against me. When I first
took him in hand, he was regarded by the world at large as one whose
interminable discussions had soured his temper and exhausted his
vitality. His labours entitled him to respect, but he had none of the
attractive qualities that could secure him popularity. My first step was
to accustom him to walk upon the common ground like the rest of mankind;
my next, to make him presentable, by giving him a good bath and teaching
him to smile. Finally, I assigned him Comedy as his yokefellow, thus
gaining him the confidence of his hearers, who until then would as soon
have thought of picking up a hedgehog as of venturing into the thorny
presence of Dialogue.

But I know what the grievance is: he wants me to sit and discourse
subtle nothings with him about the immortality of the soul, and the
exact number of pints of pure homogeneous essence that went to the
making of the universe, and the claims of rhetoric to be called a shadow
of a fraction of statecraft, or a fourth part of flattery. He takes a
curious pleasure in refinements of this kind; it tickles his vanity most
deliciously to be told that not every man can see so far into the ideal
as he. Evidently he expects *me* to conform to his taste in this
respect; he is still hankering after those lost wings; his eyes are
turned upwards; he cannot see the things that lie before his feet. I
think there is nothing else he can complain of. He cannot say that I,
who pass for a barbarian, have torn off his Greek dress, and replaced it
with one like my own: that would have been another matter; to deprive
him of his native garb were indeed a crime.

Gentlemen, I have made my defence, as far as in me lies: I trust that
your present verdict will confirm the former one.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

*Her*. Well I never! All ten are for you again. Only one dissentient,
and he the same one as before. True to his envious principles, he must
ever give his vote against his betters. The jurors may now leave the
court. The remaining cases will come on to-morrow.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[145:1](wl310.htm#fr_20) See *Croesus* in Notes.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[147:1](wl310.htm#fr_21) See *Erinnyes* in
Notes.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[153:1](wl310.htm#fr_22) i.e. Lucian. See
Introduction, § 1, Life.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[156:1](wl310.htm#fr_23) See *Poecile* in Notes.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[164:1](wl310.htm#fr_24) Demosthenes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Parasite, A Demonstration That Sponging Is A
Profession](wl311)
