<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu03)  [Next](tmu05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### SARVASĀRA-UPANISHAḌ <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

\[<span class="small">In the text, all the questions are given first and
then the answers follow. But the following arrangement is adopted to
facilitate reference.</span>\]

1\. What is Banḍha (bondage).

Āṭmā \[the Self\] falsely superimposing the body and others which are
not-Self upon Himself, and identifying Himself with them—this
identification forms the bondage of the Self.

2\. What is Moksha \[emancipation\]?

The freedom from that \[identification\] is Moksha.

3\. What is Aviḍyā (Nescience)?

That which causes this identification—that indeed is Aviḍyā.

4\. What is Viḍyā (knowledge)?

That which removes this identification is Viḍyā.

5\. What are (meant by) the states of Jāgraṭ \[the waking\], Swapna
\[the dreaming\], Sushupṭi \[the dreamless sleeping\] and Ṭurīya \[the
fourth\]?

Jāgraṭ is that \[state\] during which Āṭmā enjoys the gross objects of
senses as sound, etc., through the 14 organs <span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) as Manas, etc., having the sun and the rest
as their presiding deities.

Swapna is that \[state\] during which Āṭmā experiences, through the 14
organs associated with the Vāsanās \[affinities\],

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

of the waking condition, sound and other objects which are of the form
of the Vāsanās created for the time being, even in the absence of \[the
gross\] sound and the others. Āṭmā experiences Sushupṭi when it does not
experience sound and other objects of sense from the cessation of the
functions of the 14 organs, there being no special enjoying
consciousness on account of the absence of these organs.

Ṭurīya is that state during which Āṭmā is a witness to the existence of
the above-mentioned three states, though it is in itself without (their)
existence and non-existence and during which it is one uninterrupted
Chaiṭanya (consciousness) alone. And that Chaiṭanya is that which is
connected with the three states, which is without the three states, and
which is pare.

6\. What are the Annamaya, Prāṇamaya, Manomaya, Vijñānamaya and
Ānanḍamaya Kośas (sheaths)?

Annamaya sheath is the aggregate of the materials formed by food. When
the ten Vāyus (Vital airs), Prāṇas and others, flow through the Annamaya
sheath, then it is called the Prāṇamaya sheath. When Āṭmā connected with
the above two sheaths performs the functions of hearing, etc., through
the 14 organs of Man as and others, then it is called Manomaya sheath.

When in the (Antaḥ-karaṇa) internal organs connected with the above
three sheaths, there arise the modifications of contemplation,
meditation, etc., about the peculiarities of the sheaths, then it is
called Vijñānamaya sheath.

When the self-cause Jñāna is in its Self-bliss like the banyan tree in
its seed, though associated with these four sheaths caused by Ajñāna,
then it is called Ānanḍamaya sheath. Āṭmā which is associated with the
Upāḍhi \[vehicle\] of these sheaths is figuratively called Kośa.

7\. What is meant by Karṭā (actor), Jīva, Pañchavarga \[the five
groups\], Ksheṭrajña (the lord of the place), Sākshi \[the witness\],
Kūtasṭha and Anṭaryāmin (the latent guide)?

Karṭā (the actor) is the one who possesses the body and the internal
organs through their respective desires proceeding from the idea of
pleasure and pain. The idea of pleasure is that modification of the mind
known as love. The idea of pain is

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

that modification of the mind known as hate. The cause of pleasure and
pain are sound, touch, form, taste and odour.

Jīva is that Aḍhyāsi \[deluded one\] that thinks that this body, which
is obtained through the effects of good and bad Karmas, is one not so
obtained.

Pañchavarga (the five groups) are (1) Manas, *viz*., Manas, Buḍḍhi,
Chiṭṭa and Ahaṅkāra (creating uncertainty, certitude, flitting thought
and egoism), (2) Prāṇa, *i.e.*, Prāṇa, Apāna, Vyāna Samāna and Uḍāna,
(3) Saṭṭwa, *i.e.*, Saṭṭwa, Rajas, and Ṭamas. (4) the \[five\] elements:
earth, water, fire, Vāyu and Ākāś and (5) Ḍharma and its opposite
Aḍharma.

The original Aviḍyā which has the characteristics of the above 5 groups,
which does not perish without Āṭmā-Jñāna, which appears eternal through
the presence of Āṭmā and which is the vehicle for \[the manifestation
of\] Āṭmā, is the seed of the Liṅga \[subtle\] body. It is also called
Hṛḍaya-granṭhi \[the heart-knot\].

The Chaiṭanya \[consciousness\] which is reflected and shines in it is
Ksheṭrajña.

Sākshi \[the witness\] is that conscious one that is aware of the
appearance and disappearance \[of the three states\] of the knower, the
knowledge and the known, who is himself without \[or not affected by\]
this appearance and disappearance, and who is self-radiant.

Kūtasṭha is he who is found without exception in the Buḍḍhi of all
creatures from Brahma down to ants, and who is shining as Āṭmā and
dwells as witness to the Buḍḍhi of all creatures.

Anṭaryāmin is the Āṭmā that shines as the ordainer, being within all
bodies like the thread \[on which\] beads \[are strung\] and serving to
know the cause of the several differences of Kūtasṭha and others
associated with him.

8\. Who is Praṭyagāṭmā?

He is of the nature of truth, wisdom, eternity and bliss. He has no
vehicles of body. He is abstract wisdom itself, like a mass of pure gold
that is devoid of the changes of bracelet, crown, etc. He is of the
nature of mere consciousness. He is that which shines as Chaiṭanya and
Brahman. When He is

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

subject to the vehicle of Aviḍyā and is the meaning of the word "Ṭwam"
('Thou' in "Ṭaṭṭwamasi"), then He is Praṭyagāṭmā.

9\. Who is Paramāṭmā?

It is He who is associated with truth, wisdom, eternity, bliss,
omniscience, etc., who is subject to the vehicle of Māyā and who is the
meaning of the word "Ṭaṭ" (or 'That' in "Ṭaṭṭwamasi").

10\. What is Brahman?

Brahman is that which is free from all vehicles, which is the Absolute
Consciousness devoid of particularities, which is Saṭ (Be-ness), which
is without a second, which is bliss and which is Māyā-less. It is
different from characteristics of that expressed by the word "Ṭwam"
(Thou) subject to Upāḍhis (vehicles), or the characteristics of 'That'
expressed by the word "Ṭaṭ" subject to Upāḍhis. It is itself
differenceless and is seen as the Seat of everything. It is the pure,
the noumenal, the true and the indestructible.

And what is Saṭya (the true)?

It is the Saṭ (Be-ness) which is the aim pointed out by the Veḍas. It is
that which cannot be said to be Asaṭ (not-Be-ness). It is that which is
not affected by the three periods of time. It is that which continues to
exist during the three periods of time. It is that which is. It is one
without a second. It has not the differences of similarity or
dissimilarity; or it is that which is the source of all ideas. It is
that which does not perish even though space, time, matter, cause, etc.,
perish.

And what is Jñāna (wisdom)?

It is self-light. It is that which illuminates all. It is that Absolute
Consciousness which is without any obscuration. It is that Consciousness
which has no beginning or end, which is perpetual and which is the
witness to all modifications and their opposites.

And what is Ananṭa (the eternal)?

It is that which is without origin and destruction. It is that which is
not subject to the six changes (*viz*., birth, growth, manhood, decay,
old age and death). It is free from all Upāḍhis. It is that
Consciousness which, being all full and without

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

destruction, permeates the created universe composed of Avyakṭa and
others, like the earth in the modifications of clay, the gold in the
modifications of gold, and thread in the modifications of thread.

And what is Ānanḍa (bliss)?

It is the seat of all sentient beings, like the ocean of the water, is
eternal, pure, partless and non-dual, and is the sole essence of
Chiḍānanḍa (consciousness-bliss).

11\. Of how many kinds are substances?

There are three kinds, Saṭ (Be-ness), Asaṭ (not-Be-ness) and Miṭhyā
(Illusion).

Saṭ alone is Brahman. Asaṭ is that which is not. Miṭhyā is the illusory
ascription to Brahman of the universe that is not.

What is fit to be known is Brahman, the Āṭmā alone.

Brahma-Jñāna is the rooting out of all—bodies and such like—that are not
Self, and the merging in Brahman, the Saṭ. The universe of Ākāś and
others including Jīva is not-Āṭmā.

12\. What is Māyā?

The root of this not-Āṭmā is Māyā. She appears in Brahman like clouds,
etc., in the sky. She has no beginning but has an end. She is subject to
proof and not-proof. She neither is; nor is not; nor is she a
combination of both (Saṭ and Asaṭ). Her seat is indescribable. She has
the varieties of differences as extolled by the wise. It is she that
truly is not. Her nature is Ajñāna. She appears as Mūlaprakṛṭi,
Guṇa-Sāmya (a state where the three Guṇas are found in
equilibrium), <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) Aviḍyā (Nescience) and
other forms, transforming herself into the form of the universe. Thus
does a knower of Brahman cognize her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[13:1](tmu04.htm#fr_1) This Upanishaḍ and the
next form a glossary of some of the terms of Veḍānṭa. 'Sarva-Sāra' is
the all-essence or quintessence.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[13:2](tmu04.htm#fr_2) They are the 5 organs of
sense, the 5 organs of action and the 4 of Anṭaḥ-karaṇa (the internal
organ), *viz*., Manas, Buḍḍhi, China and Ahaṅkāra. Each is animated by a
Ḍevaṭā or intelligential principle.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[17:1](tmu04.htm#fr_3) This refers to that
slumbering or latent state of the universe—called also Mahā-Sushupṭi
when the Guṇas are in equilibrium; on re-awakening into activity when
the Guṇas are disturbed, Mūlaprakṛṭi is called by the different names of
Māyā, Aviḍyā, Ṭamas, etc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Nirālamba-Upanishaḍ of Śukla-Yajurveḍa](tmu05)

</div>
