<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu01)  [Next](tmu03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

### ॐ

### FOREWORD

FOR the first time it is, I believe, that the English translation of so
many as 30 Upanishaḍs is being put forth before the public in a
collected form. Among the Hinḍū Scriptures, the Veḍas hold the
pre-eminent place. The Upanishaḍs which are culled from the
Āraṇyaka-portions of the Veḍas—so-called because they were read in the
Araṇya (forest) after the learner had given up the life of the world—are
regarded as the Veḍānṭa, or the end or final crown of the Veḍas. Veḍānṭa
is also the end of all knowledge, since the word Veḍas means according
to its derivation 'knowledge'. Rightly were the Upanishaḍs so
considered, since their knowledge led a person to Āṭmā, the goal of
life. The other portion of the Veḍas, *viz*., Samhiṭas and Brāhmaṇas,
conferred upon a man, if he should conform to the requisite conditions,
the mastery of the Universe only which is certainly inferior to Āṭmā. It
is these Upanishaḍs that to the western philosopher Schopenhauer were
the "solace of life".

There are now extant, in all, 108 Upanishaḍs, of which the principal or
major 12 Upanishaḍs commented upon by Śri Śaṅkarāchārya and others were
translated into English by Dr. Roer and Rāja Rājenḍra Lāl Miṭra and
re-translated by Max Muller in his "Sacred Books of the East," together
with one other Upanishaḍ called *Maiṭrāyaṇī*. Of the rest, 95 in number,
two or three Upanishaḍs have appeared in English up to now, but never so
many as are here presented to the public, so far as I am aware.

Many years ago, the late Sunḍara Śastri, a good Sanscrit Scholar and
myself worked together to put into English garb the Upanishaḍs that had
not been attempted before, and

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

succeeded in publishing most of those which are here gathered in the
monthly issues of *The Theosophist*. The Karmic agents willed that my
late co-worker should abandon his physical garment at a premature age.
Then I resolved upon throwing up my worldly business of pleading the
cause of clients before the bench for that of pleading the cause of God
before the public. The incessant travel in that cause since then for
over 18 years from place to place in all parts of India left me no
leisure until now to republish all the above translations in a book
form. But when this year a little rest was afforded me, I was able to
revise them as well as add a few more. I am conscious of the many faults
from which this book suffers and have no other hope in it than that it
will serve as a piece of pioneer work, which may induce real Yogins and
scholars to come into the field and bring out a better translation.

There are many editions of the Upanishaḍs to be found in Calcutta,
Bombay, Poona, South India and other places. But we found that the South
Indian editions, which were nearly the same in Telugu or Granṭha
characters, were in many cases fuller and more intelligible and
significant. Hence we adopted for our translation South Indian editions.
The edition of the 108 Upanishaḍs which the late Tukaram Tatya of Bombay
has published in Ḍevanāgari characters approaches the South Indian
edition. As the South Indian edition of the Upanishaḍs is not available
for the study of all, I intend to have the recensions of that edition
printed in Ḍevanāgari characters, so that even those that have a little
knowledge of Sanscrit may be able to follow the original with the help
of this translation.

*Transliteration*

In the transliteration of Sanscrit letters into the English alphabet
certain difficulties present themselves. Let me take first the letter
\#. There are three letters in Sanscrit \#, \#, and \#. They are
differently pronounced and one should not be confounded with another.
For the first letter we have the English equivalent *S* and for the last
*Sh*. But for the second one we

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

have none whatsoever. The prominent writers in the field of Theosophy
have been transliterating this letter into *Sh*. Hence in writing the
word \#\#\# they made it *Kāshi* in the English language. They utter it
also in the same manner. To a South Indian ear, it is rather grating.
The manṭras especially depend for their efficacy upon proper
pronunciation. When we therefore utter the words wrongly, there is
committed according to Sanscrit writers, Varṇa-Haṭyā-Ḍosha or the sin of
the murder of letters or words. In my translation I have represented the
letter \# by Ś and not by *Sh*, since I consider the latter to be a
mistake. Other transliterations are:—

<span id="img__00300"></span> ![](img/_00300.jpg)

It would be well if our leaders of thought conferred together and came
to some agreement upon the question of transliteration.

*The Order of the Upanishaḍs*

The Upanishaḍs translated have been classified under the headings of (1)
Veḍānṭa, (2) Physiology, (3) Manṭra, (4) Sannyāsa and (5) Yoga. But
these are not hard and fast divisions. For instance in the Sannyāsa and
Yoga Upanishaḍs, manṭras also are given. But in the Manṭric Upanishaḍs,
Manṭras alone are given.

*Veḍānṭa and Yoga Upanishaḍs*

The Upanishaḍs that come under the headings of Veḍānṭa and Yoga are the
most important. But it is the latter Upanishaḍs that are most occult in
their character, since it is they that give clues to the mysterious
forces located in nature and man, as well as to the ways by which they
maybe conquered. With reference to Veḍānṭa, the ancient teachers thereof
have rightly ordained that none has the right to enter upon a study of
it, unless he has mastered to a slight degree at least the
Sāḍhana-Chaṭushtaya, or four means of salvation. He should not, only be
convinced in theory of the fact that Āṭmā

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

is the only Reality, and all else are but the ephemeral things of the
world, but he should also have outgrown in practice the craving for such
transitory worldly things: besides he should have developed a fair
mastery over the body and the mind. A non-compliance with these
precedent conditions leads men into many anomalies. The orthodox and the
clever without any practice are placed in a bad predicament through a
study of these Upanishaḍs. In such Upanishaḍs as *Maiṭreya* and others,
pilgrimages to holy places, the rituals of the Hinḍūs, ceremonial
impurities at the time of birth and death, Manṭras, etc., are made light
of. To the orthodox that are blind and strict observers of rites and
ceremonies, statements like these give a rude shock. Hence Upanishaḍs
are not meant for persons of this stamp. Nor are they intended tor mere
intellectual people who have no knowledge of practice about them, and
are immersed in the things of the world. Some of us are aware of the
manner in which men with brains alone have made a travesty of the
doctrine of Māyā. Not a few clever but unprincipled persons actually
endeavour to justify arguments of all kinds of dissipations and wrong
conduct by the assertion that it is all Māyā. The old Ṛshis were fully
aware of the fact that Veḍānṭa would be desecrated by those that had not
complied with its precedent conditions. Only when the desires and the
self are overcome and the heart is made pure, or as Upanishaḍic writers
put it, the heart-knot is broken, only then the Āṭmā in the heart will
be truly realised: and then it is that the Āṭmā in all universe is
realised also, the universe being then seen as Māyā. But so long as the
Āṭmā in the heart is not realised through living the life, the universe
will not be realised as Māyā, and "God everywhere" will be but in words.

One special point worthy of notice in the Upanishaḍs is that all the
knowledge bearing upon a subject is not put forward in one and the same
place. We have to wade through a mass of materials and a number of
Upanishaḍs, ere we can have a connected view of a subject. In modern
days when 'a subject is taken up, all the available information is given
in one place in a systematic manner. But not so in the Upanishaḍs.

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Take the subject
of Prāṇas which refer to life itself. In one Upanishaḍ, one piece of
information is given, another in another and so on. And unless we read
them all together and reconcile the seemingly discrepant statements, we
cannot have a complete and clear knowledge of the subject. This process
was adopted by the Ṛshis, probably because they wanted to draw out
thereby the intellectual and spiritual faculties latent in the disciple,
and not to make him a mere automaton. In these days when knowledge is
presented in a well-assimilated form, it is no doubt taken up easily but
it does not evoke the latent reasoning power so much. When therefore the
disciple went in the ancient days to the teacher for the solution of a
difficulty, having been unable to find it himself after hard thinking,
it was understood easily and permanently because of the previous
preparation of the mind, and was also reverently appreciated as a boon
and godsend, because of the difficulty previously experienced. The
function of the teacher was not only to explain the difficult points to
the taught, but also to make him realise those things of which
understanding was sought. As an illustration, we might take the case of
the soul. The Guru not only explained the difficult passages or points
relating to the soul, but also made the disciple leave the body or
bodies and realise himself as the soul. As we cannot get such Gurus in
the outer world nowadays, the only thing left to do instead is to secure
the publication of simple treatises on matters of Veḍānṭa and Yoga for
the benefit of the public. I hope, I shall before long be able to make a
start in this direction.

In studying the Upanishaḍs on Veḍānṭa and Yoga, we find certain
peculiarities which throw a light on their greatness. Both of them lay
stress upon certain centres in the human body for development. The 12
major Upanishaḍs as well as the Veḍānṭa Upanishaḍs herein published deal
with the heart and the heart alone; while the Yoga Upanishaḍs treat of
many centres including the heart. For the purpose of simplification, all
the centres may be divided under the main headings of head, heart and
the portion of the body from the navel downwards.

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

But why? The key which will unlock these secrets seems to be this. All
religions postulate that the real man is the soul, and that the soul has
to reach God. Christianity states that God created the soul in His own
image and that the soul has to rise to the full stature of God in order
to reach Him. Hinduism says that Jīvāṭmā (the human soul) is an Amśa or
portion of Paramāṭmā, or God, which is to eventually unfold the powers
of God, and compares it with a ray of the sun of God, or a spark out of
the fire of God. In all religions, there is an unanimity of opinion that
the soul is a likeness of God, having God's powers in latency to be
unfolded hereafter. Let us therefore first understand the attributes of
God. He is said to have omnipresence, omniscience and omnipotence.
Hinḍūism translates these ideas into Saṭ, Chiṭ and Ānanḍa. They are
eternal existence, infinite knowledge, and unlimited power. The soul
identifying itself with the body thinks it lives for the life-term of
the body only; cooped up by the brain, it imagines, it has only the
knowledge circumscribed by the brain; carried away by the pleasures of
the senses, it whirls about in the midst of them as if they constituted
the Real Bliss. But when it wakes up from the dream of the lower things
of the body and glances upwards to the higher world of Spirit, it
discovers its delusions and finds itself to be of the same nature as the
God above, who is eternal, all-knowing and all-powerful. And this
discovery has to be made by each soul in the human body, in which it is
functioning, through the three main centres of head, heart and navel.
Through the heart, it cuts the heart-knot and realises its all-pervading
character when it realises its eternity of existence; through the brain,
it rises beyond it through its highest seat, *viz*., Sahasrāra which
corresponds to the pineal gland in the physical body, and obtains its
omniscience; through the navel, according to the Upanishaḍs—it obtains a
mastery over that mysterious force called Kuṇdalinī which is located
therein, and which confers upon it an unlimited power—that force being
mastered only when a man arises above Kāma or passion. Psychologists
tell us that desires when conquered lead to the development of will.
When will is developed to a great degree,

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

naturally great power, or omnipotence, ensues: our statement is that
Kuṇdalinī when conquered leads to unlimited powers and perfections, or
Siḍḍhis like Aṇimā, etc., and that Kuṇdalinī can only be conquered
through rising above the desires of the senses.

From the foregoing it is clear that the Veḍānṭa Upanishaḍs are intended
only for those devotees of God that want to have a development of the
heart mainly, and not of the brain and the navel, and that the Yogic
Upanishaḍs are intended for those that want to have an all-round
development of the soul in its three aspects. Here I may remark that Śri
Śaṅkarāchārya and other commentators commented upon the 12 Upanishaḍs
only, since other Upanishaḍs treating of Kuṇdalinī, etc., are of an
occult character and not meant for all, but only for the select few who
are fit for private initiation. If they had proceeded to comment upon
the minor Upanishaḍs also, they would have had to disclose certain
secrets which confer powers and which are not meant, therefore, for all.
It would be nothing but fatal to the community, were the secrets leading
to the acquisition of such powers imparted indiscriminately to all. In
the case of dynamite, the criminal using it may be traced, since it is
of a physical nature, but in the case of the use of the higher powers,
they are set in motion through the will, and can never be traced through
ordinary means. Therefore in the Upanishaḍ called *Yoga-Kuṇdalinī*, the
final truths that lead to the realisation of the higher powers are said
to be imparted by the Guru alone to the disciple who has proved himself
worthy after a series of births and trials.

In order to expound the Upanishaḍs, especially those that bear upon
Yoga, some one who is a specialist in Yoga—better still, if he is an
Adept—should undertake the task of editing and translating them. The
passages in Yoga Upanishaḍs are very mystic sometimes; sometimes there
is no nominative or verb, and we have to fill up the ellipses as best as
we can.

One more remark may be made with reference to the Upanishaḍs. Each
Upanishaḍ is said to belong to one of the Veḍas. Even if we take the 12
Upanishaḍs edited by Max Muller and others, we find some of them are to
be found in the existing

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Veḍas and others
not. Why is this? In my opinion this but corroborates the statement made
by the Vishṇu-Purāṇa about the Veḍas. It says that at the end of each
Ḍwāpara Yuga, a Veḍa-Vyāsa, or compiler of the Veḍas, incarnates as an
Avaṭāra of Vishṇu—a minor one—to compile the Veḍas. In the Yugas
preceding the Kali Yuga we are in, the Veḍas were "one" alone though
voluminous. Just before this Kali Yuga began, Kṛshṇa-Ḍwaipāyana
Veḍa-Vyāsa incarnated, and, after withdrawing the Veḍas that were not
fit for this Yoga and the short-lived people therein, made with the aid
of his disciples a division of the remaining portions into four. Hence
perhaps we are unable to trace the Veḍas of which some of the extant
Upanishaḍs form part.

<span class="smallcaps">K. Narayanaswami</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Adyar</span>, *March* 1914.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. Mukṭikopanishaḍ of Śukla-Yajurveḍa](tmu03.md)

</div>
