<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu02)  [Next](tmu04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### MUKṬIKOPANISHAḌ

### of

### ŚUKLA-YAJURVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">Addressing</span> with devotion and obedience
Śrī-Rāma—the Lord Hari, at the end of His Samāḍhi, who being Himself
changeless is the witness of the thousands of changes of Buḍḍhi, and who
ever rests in Swarapa-Ḍhyāna (the meditation on Reality) while seated
under the bejewelled dome of the palace in the lovely city of Ayoḍhyā,
in the midst of Sīṭā, Bharaṭa and Soumiṭri (Lakshmaṇa) Śaṭrughna and
others, eulogised day and night by Sanaka and other hosts of Munis, as
well as by Vasishtha, Śuka, and other devotees of Vishṇu—Hanūmān, after
praising them, asked: "O Rāma, Thou art Paramāṭmā of the nature of
Sachchiḍānanḍa. O foremost of the family of Raghu, I make prostrations
to Thee again and again. O Rāma, I wish to know for the sake of
emancipation, Thy nature as it really is. O Rāma, be Thou gracious
enough to tell me that by which I shall be easily released from the
bondage of mundane existence and by which I shall attain salvation."

(Śrī-Rāma replied:) "O mighty-armed one, well asked: hearken then to the
truth uttered by Me. I am well established in Veḍānṭa (or the end of
Veḍas or knowledge). Have thou recourse to Veḍānṭa well."

(Hanūmān again asked:) "O foremost of Raghus, what are Veḍānṭas? where
do they abide? Pray enlighten me." (Śrī-Rama replied:) "O Hanūmān,
listen to Me. I shall truly describe

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

to you the nature of Veḍānṭa. Through the expiratory breath of
Myself—Vishṇu, the Veḍas were generated as many. Like the oil in the
sesamum seeds, Veḍānṭa is well established (or latent) in the Veḍas."

(Hanūmān asked again:) "O Rāma, how many are the Veḍas and their
branches? O Rāghava, what are the Upanishaḍs? Please, through Thy grace,
tell me truly."

(Śrī-Rāma said:) "Through the divisions of Ṛgveḍa and others, the Veḍas
are said to be four in number. Their branches are many. So also the
Upanishaḍs. In Ṛgveḍa, there are branches, 21 in number. O son of Vāyu,
there are 109 branches in Yajurveḍa. O conqueror of enemies, there are
1,000 branches in Sāmaveḍa. O best of Monkeys, there are 50 branches in
Aṭharvaṇaveḍa. In each branch, there is one Upanishaḍ. Whoever with
devotion to Me studies even one of the Ṛks (hymns) in these, attains the
state of absorption, rare for the Munis to attain."

(Hanūmān asked:) "O Rāma, some excellent Munis have said there is one
kind of salvation only, while others \[stated that salvation is
attained\] through the uttering of Thy name or the initiation into
Ṭāraka (Om) at Kāśī (Benares); others through Sāṅkhya-Yoga, others
through the Yoga of Devotion; other Mahāṛshis through the meditation
upon the meaning of Mahāvākyas (the sacred sentences of the Veḍas).
Salvation is stated to be of four kinds through the divisions of Sālokya
and others."

(Śrī-Rāma replied:) "There is only one true emancipation. O Kapi
(Monkey), even a person addicted to evil practices attains the salvation
of Sālokya (My world) through the uttering of My name, but not of other
worlds. Should one die in Brahma-nā.la (the lotus-stalk—also street) in
Kāśī, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) he attains My Ṭāraka (Manṭra.md).
Such a person attains salvation without any rebirth; wherever he may die
in Kāśī, Maheśwara initiates him by whispering My Ṭāraka (Manṭra) into
his right ear. Such person, freed from all sins, attains My Swarūpa
(Form). It is this that is termed Sālokya-Sārūpya salvation. The
twice-born who is of virtuous conduct and who, without diverting his

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

intelligence on any other, meditates upon Me, the All-Āṭmā, attains
Sāmīpya (nearness) to Me.

"It is this that is termed Sālokya-Sārūpya-Sāmīpya salvation. The
twice-born who according to the path opened by the teacher, meditates
upon My immutable Reality attains Sāyujya (absorption) into Me, like the
caterpillar into the wasp. This is the Sāyujya salvation which is
productive of Brāhmic bliss and auspicious. Thus these kinds of
salvation arise through the Upāsanā (worship) of Me.

"The only means by which the final emancipation is attained is through
Māṇdūkya-Upanishaḍ alone, which is enough for the salvation of all
aspirants. If Jñāna is not attained thereby, study the 10 Upanishaḍs;
thou shalt soon attain Jñāna , and then My Seat. O son of Añjanā, if thy
Jñāna is not made firm, practise (study) well the 32 Upanishaḍs. Thou
shalt get release. If thou longest after Viḍehamukṭi (or disembodied
salvation), study the 108 Upanishaḍs. I will truly state in order the
(names of the) Upanishaḍs with their Śānṭi (purificatory Manṭras).
Hearken to them. (They are:) Īśa, Kena, Katha, Praśna, Muṇda, Māṇdūkya,
Ṭiṭṭiri, Aiṭareya, Chhānḍogya, Bṛhaḍāraṇyaka, Brahma, Kaivalya, Jābāla,
Śweṭāśwaṭara, Hamsa, Āruṇi, Garbha, Nārāyaṇa, (Parama)-Hamsa,
(Amṛṭa)-Binḍu, (Amṛṭa)-Nāḍa, (Aṭharva)-Śira, (Aṭharva)-Śikhā,
Maiṭrāyaṇī, Kaushīṭaki, (Bṛhaṭ)-Jābāla, (Narasihma)-Ṭāpanī,
Kālāgniruḍra, Maiṭreyī, Subāla, Kshurikā, Manṭrikā, Sarvasāra,
Nirālamba, (Śuka)-Rahasya, Vajrasūchikā, Ṭejo-(Binḍu), Nāḍa-(Binḍu),
Ḍhyāna-(Binḍu), (Brahma)-Viḍyā, Yoga-Ṭaṭṭwa, Āṭmaboḍhaka, Parivrāt
(Nāraḍa-Parivrājaka), (Ṭri)-Śikhī, Sīṭā, (Yoga)-Chūdā-(Maṇi) Nirvāṇa,
Maṇdala-(Brāhmaṇa), Ḍakshiṇā-(Mūrṭi), Śarabha, Skanḍa,
(Tripāḍvibhūṭi)-Mahā-Nārāyaṇa, Aḍwaya-(Ṭāraka), (Rāma)-Rahasya,
(Rāma)-Ṭāpanī, Vāsuḍeva, Muḍgala, Śāṇdilya, Paiṅgala, Bhikshu,
Mahaṭ-Śāriraka, (Yoga)-Śikhā, Ṭurīyāṭīṭa, Sannyāsa,
(Paramahamsa)-Parivrājaka, Akshamālikā, Avyakṭa, Ekākshara,
(Anna)-Pūrṇā, Sūrya, Akshi, Aḍhyāṭma, Kuṇdikā, Sāviṭrī, Āṭmā, Pāśupaṭa,
Parabrahma, Avaḍhūṭa, Ṭripuraṭāpanī, Ḍevī, Ṭripurā, Kara, Bhāvanā,
(Ruḍra)-Hṛḍaya, (Yoga)-Kuṇdalinī, Bhasma-(Jābāla) Ruḍrāksha, Gaṇapaṭi,
Ḍarśana, Tārasāra,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mahāvākya,
Pañchabrahma, (Prāṇa)-Agnihoṭra, Gopāla-Ṭāpanī, Kṛshṇa, Yājñavalkya,
Varāha, Śātyāyanī, Hayagrīva, Ḍaṭṭāṭreya, Gāruda, Kali-(Sanṭāraṇa),
Jābāla, Soubhāgya, Saraswaṭīrahasya, Bahvricha, and Mukṭika. These 108
(Upanishaḍs) are able to do away with the three Bhāvanās \[of doubt,
vain thought, and false thought\], conferring Jñāna and Vairāgya, and
destroying the three Vāsanās \[of book-lore, world and body\].

"The twice-born—after learning the 108 Upanishaḍs, together with the
Śānṭi as prescribed both before and after from the mouth of a Guru well
versed in the observances of Vedic knowledge and study—become
Jīvanmukṭas till the destruction of their Prārabḍha; in course of time
as Prārabḍha is destroyed, they attain My disembodied salvation. There
is no doubt of it. O son of Vāyu, these 108 Upanishaḍs, which are the
essence of all the Upanishaḍs, and are capable of destroying all sins
through their mere study, have been imparted by Me to you as a disciple.
This science of the 108 Upanishaḍs taught by Me, is an occult one, and
will free persons from bondage, whether they read them with or without
knowledge. To gratify the desire of a supplicant, a kingdom may be given
or wealth, but never shall the 108 Upanishaḍs be imparted to an atheist,
an ungrateful person, one intent on vicious actions, one having no
devotion towards Me, or one who loses his path in the cave of books. On
no account shall they be given to one devoid of devotion. O Māruṭi, it
is only after a thorough examination that they should be imparted to a
disciple doing service (to a Guru), to a well-disposed son, or to one
devoted to Me, following good observances, belonging to a good family,
and being of good intelligence. Whoever studies or hears the 108
Upanishaḍs attains Me. There is no doubt of this. This is stated in the
Ṛk (verse) thus—Viḍyā (Saraswaṭī) went to a Brāhmaṇa (and addressed him)
thus: 'Protect me. I shall be thy treasure. Do not confide me to the
envious, to one not treading the right path, or to the rogue. Then I
shall be potent.' Impart this Āṭmanishtha-Viḍyā relating to Vishṇu to
one after well examining him, who had studied much, is alert,
intelligent, observant of the vow of celibacy, and serving \[the
Guru\]."

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Then Hanūmān asked Śrī-Rāmachanḍra to relate the Śānṭi of each Upanishaḍ
according to the divisions of Ṛgveḍa and others to which they belong. To
which Śrī-Rāma replied: "Aiṭareya, Kaushīṭaki, Nāḍa-(Binḍu), Āṭmā-Boḍha,
Nirvāṇa, Muḍgala, Akshamālikā, Ṭripurā, Soubhāgya and Bahvricha—these 10
Upanishaḍs are of Ṛgveḍa and have the Śānṭi beginning with
'Vāṅme-Manasi, etc'. Īśa, Bṛhaḍāraṇyaka, Jābāla, Hamsa, (Parama)-Hamsa,
Subāla, Manṭrikā, Nirālamba, Ṭriśikhī-Brāhmaṇa, Maṇdala-Brāhmaṇa,
Aḍwaya-Ṭāraka, Paiṅgala, Bhikshu, Ṭurīyāṭīṭa, Aḍhyāṭma, Tārasāra,
Yājñavalkya, Śātyāyanī, and Mukṭika—these 19 Upanishaḍs are of Śukla
Yajurveḍa and have the Śānṭi beginning with 'Pūrṇamaḍa, etc'.

"Katha, Ṭiṭṭiri, Brahma, Kaivalya, Śwetāśwaṭara, Garbha, Nārāyaṇa,
(Amṛṭa)-Binḍu, (Amṛṭa)-Nāḍa, Kālāgniruḍra, Kshurikā, Sarvasāra,
Śukarahasya, Ṭejo-(Binḍu), Ḍhyāna-(Binḍu), (Brahma)-Viḍyā, Yoga-Ṭaṭṭwa,
Ḍakshiṇā-(Mūrṭi), Skanḍa, Śāriraka, (Yoga)-Śikhā, Ekākshara, Akshi,
Avaḍhūṭa, Kara, (Ruḍra)-Hṛḍaya, (Yoga)-Kuṇdalinī, Pañchabrahma,
(Prāṇa)-Agnihoṭra, Varāha, Kali-(Sanṭāraṇa), and Saraswaṭīrahasya,—these
32 Upanishaḍs are of Kṛshṇa Yajurveḍa and have the Śānṭi beginning with
'Sahanāvavaṭu, etc'.

"Kena, Chhānḍogya, Āruṇi, Maiṭrāyaṇī, Maiṭreyī, Vajrasūchikā,
(Yoga)-Chūdā-(Mani), Vasuḍeva, Mahaṭ-Sannyāsa, Avyakṭa, Kuṇdikā,
Sāviṭrī, Ruḍrāksha, Jābāla, Ḍarśana, and Jābāli,—these 16 Upanishaḍs are
of Sāmaveḍa and have the Śānti beginning with 'Āpyāyanṭu, etc'.

"Praśna, Muṇdaka, Māṇdūkya, (Aṭharva)-Śira, (Aṭharva)-Śikhā,
(Bṛhaṭ)-Jābāla, (Nṛsihma)-Ṭāpanī, (Nāraḍa-Parivrājaka), Sīṭā, Śarabha,
Mahā-Nārāyaṇa, (Rāma)-Rahasya, (Rāma)-Ṭāpanī, Śāndilya,
(Paramahamsa)-Parivrājaka, (Anna)-Pūrṇā, Sūrya, Āṭmā, Pāśupaṭa,
Parabrahma, Ṭripuraṭāpanī, Ḍevī, Bhāvanā, Bhasma-(Jābāla), Gaṇapaṭi,
Mahāvākya, Gopāla-Ṭāpanī, Kṛshṇa, Hayagrīva, Ḍaṭṭāṭreya, and
Gāruda,—these 31 Upanishaḍs of Aṭharvaṇa-Veḍa have the Śānṭi commencing
with 'Bhaḍram-Karṇebhiḥ, etc'.

"Persons desirous of emancipation and having developed the four means of
salvation should, with presents in their hands,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

approach a Guru full of faith, of good family, proficient in Veḍas,
scripture-loving, of good qualities, straightforward, intent upon the
welfare of all beings, and an ocean of compassion; and after studying
under him, according to the rules, the 108 Upanishaḍs, he should ever be
going through the process of studying, thinking and reflecting upon
them. With the cessation of the three bodies through the destruction of
Prārabḍha, they attain the state of Plenum without any Upāḍhis like the
ether in the pot (after the pot is broken). This is the embodied
salvation, this is the final emancipation. Therefore even those in
Brahmaloka through the studying of Veḍānṭa from the mouth of Brahmā
attain with Him the final emancipation. Hence to all these is stated the
final emancipation through the Jñāna path, and not through Karma,
Sāṅkhya-Yoga, and other Upāsanās. Thus is the Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Aḍhyāya</span> II

Again Māruṭi (Hanūmān) addressed Śrī-Rāmachanḍra thus: "What is
Jīvanmukṭi? what is Viḍehamukṭi? what is the authority therein? what
about its perfection? what is the object of such a perfection?"

(Śrī-Rāma replied:) "The Ḍharma of a man's Chiṭṭa that has the
characteristics of agency and enjoyment is fraught with pains and hence
tends towards bondage. The control of it (the Chiṭṭa) is Jīvanmukṭi.
Viḍehamukṭi follows when through the extinction of Prārabḍha, the
removal of the vehicles \[of the bodies\] takes place like the ether in
the pot \[after the pot is broken\]. The authority on the points of
Jīvanmukṭi and Viḍehamukṭi is the 108 Upanishaḍs. Its object \[of
perfection\] is the attaining of eternal bliss through the removal of
the pains of agency, etc. This has to be achieved through human efforts.
Like progeny obtained through the Puṭrakāmeshti sacrifice, wealth in
trade, or heaven through the Jyoṭishtoma sacrifice, so Jīvanmukṭi is
gained through Samāḍhi arising through Veḍānṭic study, and accomplished
through human efforts. It has to be won through the extinction of all
Vāsanās. Regarding it, there are verses

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

thus: 'The efforts of man are stated to be of two kinds, those that
transcend scriptures and those that are according to scriptures. Those
that transcend scriptures tend to harm while those that are according to
scriptures tend to Reality.' To men, true Jñāna does not arise through
the Vāsanās of the world, scripture and body. Vāsanā is divided into
two, the pure and the impure. If thou art led by the pure Vāsanās, thou
shalt thereby soon reach by degrees My Seat. But should the old impure
Vāsanās land thee in danger, they should be overcome through efforts.
This river of Vāsanās towards objects, which flows in the pure and
impure paths, should be diverted to the pure path through human efforts.
The impure ones have to be transmuted into the pure. That which is
diverted from the impure turns towards the pure. So also the reverse.
This child, Chiṭṭa has to be fondled through human efforts. O killer of
enemies, it is only when through means of practice both Vāsanās quite
abandon thee, that thou wilt be able to realise the effects of \[such\]
practice. Even in the case of doubt, the pure Vāsanās alone should be
practised.

"O son of Vāyu, there is nothing wrong in the increase of the pure
Vāsanās. The extinction of Vāsanās, Vijñāna and the destruction of Manas
\[as these three\] when practised together for a long time are regarded,
O great and intelligent one, as fruitful. So long as these are not
equally practised again and again, so long the \[Supreme\] Seat is not
attained, even after the lapse of hundreds of years. Even should one of
these \[three\] be practised for a long time, it will not yield its
fruit like a Manṭra imperfectly done. Through the practice of these for
a long time, the firm knots of the heart are cut, without doubt, like
the breaking of the threads in a lotus-stalk rent in twain. The illusory
Samsāric Vāsanā that has arisen through the practice of \[many\]
hundreds of lives never perishes except through the practice of Yoga for
a long time. Therefore, O Somya \[disciple\], after having put away to a
distance the desire of enjoyment through discriminative human effort,
resort to these three alone. The wise know that a mind associated with
Vāsanā tends to bondage, while a mind well freed from

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vāsanā is said to
be an emancipated one. O Mahā-kapi \[great Monkey\] practise the state
of a mind devoid of Vāsanā. Vāsanā perishes through well-conducted
deliberation and truth. Through the absorption of Vāsanās, Manas attains
quiescence like a lamp \[without oil\]. He whose mind, devoid of
destruction, is \[centred\] on Me as of the nature of Chinmāṭra
\[consciousness alone\], abandoning the [Vāsanās](errata.htm#0.md), is no
other than Myself of the nature of Sachchiḍānanḍa. Whether
[Samāḍhi](errata.htm#1.md) and Karma are performed or not, one who has a
supreme Chiṭṭa with a heart devoid of all desires is an emancipated
person. He whose mind is freed from Vāsanās is not subject to the fruits
arising from the performance or non-performance of actions, or Samāḍhi
or Jñāna. Except through the entire giving up of Vāsanās and through
Mouna \[the observance of silence towards objects\], the Supreme Seat is
not attained. Though devoid of Vāsanās, the eye and other organs are
involuntarily prompted to their (respective) external objects through
habit. Just as the eye without any desire sees without any effort the
objects that fall on it, so also the undaunted man of intelligence
enters into the affairs \[of the world\] without any desire. O Māruṭi,
the Munis know that as Vāsanā which is manifested through the
consciousness of objects, which is of the nature of the object itself,
and which is the cause of the origination and absorption of Chiṭṭa. This
excessively fluctuating Chiṭṭa is the cause of birth, dotage and death,
due to the identification of itself with objects practised firmly \[for
a long time\]. Like the analogy of the seed and the tree, the vibration
of Prāṇa arises through Vāsanā and (*vice versa*) the Vāsanā through the
former—these forming the seed of Chiṭṭa. To the tree of Chiṭṭa, there
are two seeds: the vibration of Prāṇa and Vāsanā. Should either of them
perish, both perish soon. Through the actions of the world being done
without attachment, through the abandoning of the \[thought of the\]
reality of the universe and the conviction of the destructibility of the
body, Vāsanā does not arise. Through the complete giving up of Vāsanā,
Chiṭṭa becomes not-Chiṭṭa. When the mind does not think at all, being
completely devoid of Vāsanā, then dawns the state of mindlessness which
confers the

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

great peace. So long as you are without a mind of \[true\]
discrimination and are not a knower of the Supreme Seat, so long should
you follow whatever has been decided by the teacher and the authorities
of the sacred books. When your sins are burnt up and you are a knower of
the Reality without any anxiety, then all the good Vāsanās even should
be given up.

"The destruction of Chiṭṭa is of two kinds, that with form and that
without form. \[The destruction of\] that with form is of the
Jīvanmukṭā; (the destruction of), that without form being of the
Viḍehamukṭa. O son of Vāyu, hearken to \[the means of\] the destruction
of Chiṭṭa. That is said to be the destruction of Chiṭṭa when it,
associated with all the attributes of Maiṭri (friendship) and others,
becomes quiescent \[without any resurrection\]. There is no doubt of it.
Then the Manas of a Jīvanmukṭa is free from fresh rebirth; to him, there
is the destruction of Manas with form. But to the Viḍehamukṭa, there is
the destruction of Man as without form. It is Manas that is the root of
the tree of Samsāra with its thousands of shoots, branches, tender
leaves and fruits. I think it to be Saṅkalpa alone. In order that the
tree of Samsāra may wither soon, dry up its root through the quiescence
of Saṅkalpa. There is only one means to control one's mind. That is to
destroy the mind as soon as it rises. That is the (great) dawn. In the
case of the wise, the mind is destroyed: but in the case of the
ignorant, it is indeed a fetter. So long as the mind is not destroyed
through the firm practice of the One Reality, so long as Vāsanās are
prancing about in the heart like Veṭāla (goblin) in the night-time. The
Vāsanās of enjoyment of one who has destroyed the egoism of Chiṭṭa and
controlled the organs, the enemies, decay like lotuses in mid-winter.
Pressing one hand against the other, setting teeth against teeth, and
forcing one limb against the other, he should first conquer his mind.

"It is not possible on the part of the one-thoughted to control the mind
by sitting up again and again except through the approved means. As a
vicious rutting elephant is not subject to control except through the
goad, so in the matter of the control of the mind, the effective means
are the attainment of

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

spiritual knowledge, association with the wise, the entire abdication of
all Vāsanās and the control of prāṇas. While such are the \[prescribed\]
means, should persons try to control the mind through violence, they are
like those that search in darkness, having thrown aside the light (in
their hands). Those who endeavour to control the mind through force are
but trying to bind a mad elephant with the filaments of a lotus-stalk.

To the tree of the mind having the ever-growing branches of
modifications, there are two seeds. One is the fluctuation of Prāṇa, and
the other is the firmness of Vāsanā. The \[One\] All-pervading
Consciousness is agitated by the fluctuation of Prāṇa. The means of
Ḍhyāna by which \[the one\] Jñāna is attained through the
one-pointedness of the mind is now imparted to you. After duly resolving
back the things originated \[in the universe\] with all their changes,
meditate upon that which remains—\[*viz*.\], Chinmāṭra (the
consciousness alone), which is also Chiḍānanḍa (conscious-bliss). The
wise say that the interval experienced by Yogins after the inspiration
and before the (next) expiration is \[the internal\] Kumbhaka (cessation
of breath); while the interval of complete equilibrium after expiration
and before the next inspiration is the external Kumbhaka. Through the
force of the practice of Ḍhyāna, the current of the modification of
Manas devoid of Self that is of Brāhmic nature is said to be Samprajñāṭa
Samāḍhi, while the mind with the utter quiescence of modifications that
confers upon one supreme bliss is said to be Asamprajñāṭa-Samāḍhi that
is dear unto Yogins. This \[state\] that is devoid of light, Manas and
Buḍḍhi, and that is of the nature of Chiṭ (consciousness merely) is
styled by the Munis Aṭaḍvyāvṛṭṭi Samāḍhi (a Samāḍhi that does not care
or require the aid of another). It is Plenum above, below and in the
middle, and is of the nature of Śiva (auspiciousness). This noumenal (or
occult) Samāḍhi is itself Viḍhi-Mukha (sanctioned by books or Brahmā).

"The clinging to objects without previous or subsequent deliberation
through intense thought \[or longing\] is stated to be Vāsanā. O chief
of Monkeys, whatever is meditated upon by a person with ardent
impetuosity without any other Vāsanā

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —that he soon
becomes. A person that is entirely subject to Vāsanā becomes of the
nature of that. When he regards this \[universe\] as Saṭ \[the
Reality\], then he is subject to delusion. Because of the many strong
Vāsanās, he does not abandon the nature of the universe. This person of
wrong vision sees everything under infatuation like one deluded. Vāsanās
are of two kinds—the pure and the impure. The impure ones are the cause
of rebirth, while the pure are the destroyers of it. The impure are said
by the wise to be of the nature of intense Ajñāna, associated with the
great Ahaṅkāra and generative of rebirth. Of what avail is the chewing
again and again of the many Śāsṭric stories to one that has abandoned
the seed of rebirth, having turned it into a burnt one? O Māruṭi, thou
shouldst with effort seek the effulgence within. O tiger of Monkeys,
whoever, after having abandoned the visible and the invisible, is as the
One alone is not a mere knower of Brahman but is Brahman itself. One who
having studied the four Veḍas and the various books does not cognize the
reality of Brahman is like the ladle ignorant of the taste of the
dainty. Therefore what other advice of indifference can be imparted to a
person that has not attained the indifference to the impure Vāsanā of
delusion \[or body\]? This body is very impure while the one \[Āṭmā\]
that dwells in it is very pure. When the differences between the two are
\[thus\] known, what then may be ordained as the purification? The
bondage of Vāsanā is the \[real\] bondage, while the destruction of
Vāsanā is salvation. After wholly abandoning the Vāsanās, give up even
the desire for salvation. After first giving up the Vāsanā of objects
dependent upon the Vāsanā of the mind, attract unto thyself the pure
Vāsanās associated with Maiṭri \[friendship\] and others. Though engaged
in the world with these pure Vāsanās, give up them too and retire within
the quiescent desires and become of the form of the longing after Chiṭ
alone. Then, O Māruṭi! giving up that also associated as it is with
Manas and Buḍḍhi, mayst thou now left alone become firm in Me in
Samāḍhi. O son of Vāyu! always worship My Reality that is destructive of
pains, without sound, touch, form, decay, taste, destruction or smell,
and without name and

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Goṭra \[clan\]. I
am that non-dual One (Brahman) that is of the nature of the visible
(Jñāna), like unto the Ākāś, supreme, always shining, without birth,
non-dual, without destruction, without attachment and pervading all. I
am the All, and of the nature of salvation. One should ever meditate
upon Me thus: 'I am of the form of the visible \[Jñāna\], the pure, of
changeless nature and have really no objects in Me. I am the ever-full
Brahman, transverse and across, up and down.' Also meditate upon Me
thus: 'I am birthless, deathless, ageless, immortal, self-shining,
all-pervading, destructionless, causeless, pure beyond the effect (of
the universe) and ever content.' When one's body becomes a prey to time,
he gives up the state of Jīvanmukṭi, as the wind attains the motionless
state.

"The following is said in the *Ṛg* \[-Veḍa\] also: Like the eye which is
spread in the Ākāś (seeing all things without any obstacle), so the wise
ever see the Supreme. Seat of Vishṇu. The Brāhmaṇas that have ever the
Divine vision praise in diverse ways and illumine the Supreme Seat of
Vishṇu."

<span class="smallcaps">Om-Ṭaṭ-Saṭ is the Upanishaḍ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](tmu03.htm#fr_0.md) There is a street in Kāsī
called Brahma-nāla.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Sarvasāra-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu04.md)

</div>
