<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu07)  [Next](tmu09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

### AMṚṬABINḌU <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md)-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>. Manas (mind) is said to be of two
kinds, the pure and the impure. That which is associated with the
thought of desire is the impure, while that which is without desire is
the pure. To men, their mind alone is the cause of bondage or
emancipation. That mind which is attracted by objects of sense tends to
bondage, while that which is not so attracted tends to emancipation. Now
inasmuch as to a mind without a desire for sensual objects there is
stated to be salvation, therefore an aspirant after emancipation should
render his mind ever free from all longing after material objects. When
a mind freed from the desires for objects and controlled in the heart
attains the reality of Āṭmā, then is it in the Supreme Seat. Till that
which arises in the heart perishes, till then it (Manas) should be
controlled. This only is (true) wisdom. This only is true Ḍhyāna
(meditation). Other ways are but long or tedious. It (Brahman) is not at
all one that can be contemplated upon. It is not one that cannot be
contemplated upon. It is not capable of contemplation, (and yet) it
should be contemplated upon. Then one attains Brahman that is devoid of
partiality. Yoga should be associated with Swara (sound, accent).
(Brahman) should be meditated upon without Swara. By meditating without
Swara upon Brahman, that which is cannot become non-existent. Such a
Brahman is partless, devoid of fancy and quiescent (or free from the
action of mind). Whoever cognizes "I" to be that Brahman

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

attains certainly Brahman. A wise man having known that Brahman, that is
without fancy, without end, without cause, or example, beyond inference
and without beginning, is emancipated. There is (for him then) no
destruction, no creation, no person in bondage, no devotee, no aspirant
for salvation, no emancipated person. This is the truth. Āṭmā that
should be contemplated upon is One in (the three states), the waking,
the dreaming, and the dreamless sleep. There is no rebirth to him who
goes beyond the three states. The one Bhūṭāṭmā of all beings is in all
beings. Like the moon (reflected) in water, he appears as one and as
many. While a pot is being carried (from one place to another), the Ākāś
(ether) that is within it is not carried (along with it). As the pot
alone is carried, Jīva (within the body) may be likened to the Ākāś.
Like the pot, the body has various kinds of forms. The body which
perishes again and again is not conscious of its own destruction. But he
(the Jīva) knows (it) always. He who is enveloped by the Māyā of sound,
is never able to come to (or see) the sun (of Parabrahman) from the
darkness (of ignorance). Should such darkness be cleared, then he alone
sees the non-dual state. Parabrahman is Śabḍākshara. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) What remains after the cessation of
Śabḍa-Veḍas, that is Akshara (indestructible)', should be meditated upon
by a learned man who wishes to secure quiescence to his Āṭmā.

Two Viḍyās (sciences) are fit to be known, *viz*., Śabḍabrahman and
Parabrahman. One who has completely mastered Śabḍabrahman attains
Parabrahman. Having studied well the books, the learned man should
persevere studiously in Jñāna (the acquisition of knowledge) and Vijñāna
(Self-realisation according to such knowledge). Then he should discard
the whole of the books, as a person in quest of grain gives up the
straw. Though there are cows of different colours, yet their milk is of
the same colour. Like milk is seen Jñāna, and like cows are seen the
different kinds of forms (in the universe). As ghee is latent in milk,
so is Vijñāna (Self-realisation) latent in every being. Through churning
always the Manas with the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

churning-stick of Manas and the string of Jñāna, Parabrahman that is
partless, calm and quiescent should be brought out like fire from the
wood. I am that Brahman. That Vāsuḍeva who is support of all beings, who
lives in all and who protects all creatures is Myself. That Vāsuḍeva is
Myself.

Such is the Upanishaḍ.

<span class="smallcaps">Om-Ṭat-Saṭ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[34:1](tmu08.htm#fr_10.md) Lit., the immortal germ.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[35:1](tmu08.htm#fr_11.md) It is the indestructible
known through the sound or the Veḍas.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Āṭmaboḍha-Upanishaḍ of Ṛgveḍa](tmu09.md)

</div>
