<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu08)  [Next](tmu10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### ĀṬMABOḌHA <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### ṚGVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>. Prostrations to Nārāyaṇa wearing
conch, discus, and mace, <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13) by whom the
Yogi is released from the bondage of the cycle of rebirth through the
utterance of Him who is of the form of Praṇava, the Om, composed of the
three letters A, U, and M, who is the uniform bliss and who is the
Brahmapurusha (all-pervading Purusha). Om. Therefore the reciter of the
Manṭra "Om-namo-Nārāyaṇāya" reaches the Vaikuṇtha world. It is the
heart-Kamala (lotus), *viz*., the city of Brahman. It is effulgent like
lightning, shining like a lamp. It is Brahmaṇya (the presider over the
city of Brahman) that is the son of Ḍevakī. It is Brahmaṇya that is
Maḍhusūḍana (the killer of Maḍhu). It is Brahmaṇya that is Puṇdarīkāksha
(lotus-eyed). It is Brahmaṇya, Vishṇu that is Achyuṭa (the
indestructible). He who meditates upon that sole Nārāyaṇa who is latent
in all beings, who is the causal Purusha, who is causeless, who is
Parabrahman, the Om, who is without pains and delusion and who is
all-pervading—that person is never subject to pains. From the dual, he
becomes the fearless non-dual. Whoever sees this (world) as manifold
(with the differences of I, you, he, etc.), passes from death to death.
In the centre of the heart-lotus is Brahman, which is the All, which has
Prājñā as Its eye and which is established in Prajñāna <span
id="fr_14"></span>[3](#fn_14) alone. To creatures,

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prajñāna is the
eye and Prājñā is the seat. It is Prajñāna alone that is Brahman. A
person who meditates (thus), leaves this world through Prajñāna, the
Āṭmā and ascending attains all his desires in the Supreme Swarga
deathless. Oh! I pray Thee, place me in that nectar-everflowing
unfailing world where Jyoṭis (the light) always shines and where one is
revered. (There is no doubt) he attains nectar also. Om-namaḥ.

I am without Māyā. I am without compare. I am solely the thing that is
of the nature of wisdom. I am without Ahaṅkāra (I-am-ness). I am without
the difference of the universe, Jīva and Īśwara. I am the Supreme that
is not different from Praṭyagāṭmā (individual Āṭmā). I am with
ordinances and prohibitions destroyed without remainder. I am with
Āśramas (observances of life) well given up. I am of the nature of the
vast and all-full wisdom. I am one that is witness and without desire. I
reside in My glory alone. I am without motion. I am without old
age—without destruction—without the differences of My party or another.
I have wisdom as chief essence. I am the mere ocean of bliss called
salvation. I am the subtle. I am without change. I am Āṭmā merely,
without the illusion of qualities. I am the Seat devoid of the three
Guṇas. I am the cause of the many worlds in (My) stomach. I am the
Kūtasṭha-Chaiṭanya (supreme Cosmic-mind). I am of the form of the Jyoṭis
(light) free from motion. I am not one that can be known by inference. I
alone am full. I am of the form of the stainless salvation. I am without
limbs or birth. I am the essence which is Saṭ itself. I am of the nature
of the true wisdom without limit. I am the state of excellent happiness.
I am One that cannot be differentiated. I am the all-pervading and
without stain. I am the limitless and endless Saṭṭwa alone. I am fit to
be known through Veḍānṭa. I am the one fit to be worshipped. I am the
heart of all the worlds. I am replete with Supreme Bliss. I am of the
nature of happiness, which is Supreme Bliss. I am pure, secondless, and
eternal. I am devoid of beginning. I am free from the three bodies
(gross, subtle, and causal). I am of the nature of wisdom. I am the
emancipated One. I have a wondrous form. I am free from impurity.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I am the One
latent (in all). I am the equal Āṭmā of eternal Vijñāna. I am the
refined Supreme Truth. I am of the nature of Wisdom-Bliss alone.

Though I cognize as the secondless Āṭmā by means of discriminative
wisdom and reason, yet is found the relation between bondage and
salvation. Though to Me the universe is gone, yet it shines as true
always. Like the truth in the (illusory conception of a) snake, etc., in
the rope, so the truth of Brahman alone is, and is the substratum on
which this universe is playing. Therefore the universe is not. Just as
sugar is found permeating all the sugar-juice (from which the sugar is
extracted), so I am full in the three worlds in the form of the non-dual
Brahman. Like the bubbles, waves, etc., in the ocean, so all beings,
from Brahma down to worm, are fashioned in Me; just as the ocean does
not long after the motion of the waves, so to Me, there is no longing
after sensual happiness, being Myself of the form of (spiritual) Bliss.
Just as in a wealthy person the desire for poverty does not arise, so in
Me who am immersed in Brāhmic Bliss, the desire for sensual happiness
cannot arise. An intelligent person who sees both nectar and poison
rejects poison; so having cognized Āṭma, I reject those that are
not-Āṭmā. The sun that illuminates the pot (both within and without) is
not destroyed with the destruction of the pot; so the Sākshī (witness)
that illuminates the body is not destroyed with the destruction of the
body. To Me there is no bondage; there is no salvation, there are no
books, there is no Guru; for these shine through Māyā and I have crossed
them and am secondless. Let Prāṇas (vital airs) according to their laws
be fluctuating. Let Manas (mind) be blown about by desire. How can pains
affect Me who am by nature full of Bliss? I have truly known Āṭmā. My
Ajñāna has fled away. The egoism of actorship has left Me. There is
nothing I should yet do. Brahman's duties, family, Goṭra (clan), name,
beauty, and class—all these belong to the gross body and not to Me who
am without any mark (of body). Inertness, love, and joy—these attributes
appertain to the causal body and not to Me, who am eternal and of
changeless nature. Just as an owl sees

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

darkness only in the sun, so a fool sees only darkness in the
self-shining Supreme Bliss. Should the clouds screen the eyesight, a
fool thinks there is no sun; so an embodied person full of Ajñāna thinks
there is no Brahman. Just as nectar which is other than poison does not
commingle with it, so I, who am different from inert matter, do not mix
with its stains. As the light of a lamp, however small, dispels immense
darkness, so wisdom, however slight, makes Ajñāna, however immense, to
perish. Just as (the delusion) of the serpent does not exist in the rope
in all the three periods of time (past, present, and future), so the
universe from Ahaṅkāra (down) to body does not exist in Me who am the
non-dual One. Being of the nature of Consciousness alone, there is not
inertness in Me. Being of the nature of Truth, there is not non-truth to
Me. Being of the nature of Bliss, there is not sorrow in Me. It is
through Ajñāna that the universe shines as truth.

Whoever recites this Āṭmaboḍha-Upanishaḍ for a Muhūrṭa (48 minutes) is
not born again—yea, is not born again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[37:1](tmu09.htm#fr_12) This Upanishaḍ treats of
Āṭmic instruction.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[37:2](tmu09.htm#fr_13) The three symbols stand
for Ākāsa, Manas, and Buḍḍhi.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[37:3](tmu09.htm#fr_14) In the Māṇdūkya
Upanishaḍ, Prājñā is said to be the Jīva in the third state and Prajñāna
is its attribute. Prajñāna is Prakarsha Jñāna or special wisdom, *viz*.,
of looking over the past and the future.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 8. Skanḍa-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu10)

</div>
