<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu11)  [Next](tmu13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### AḌHYĀṬMA-UPANISHAḌ <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md)

### OF

### ŚUKLA-YAJURVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> One Aja (unborn) is ever located in
the cave (of the heart) within the body. (Pṛṭhivī) the earth is His
body; though He pervades the earth, it does not know Him. The waters are
His body; though He pervades the waters, they do not know Him. Agni is
His body; though He pervades agni, it does not know Him. Vāyu is His
body; though He pervades vāyu, it does not know Him. Ākāś is His body;
though He pervades ākāś, it does not know Him. Manas is His body; though
He pervades manas, it does not know Him. Buḍḍhi is His body; though He
pervades buḍḍhi, it does not know Him. Ahaṅkāra is His body; though He
pervades ahaṅkāra, it does not know Him. Chiṭṭa is His body; though He
pervades chiṭṭa, it does not know Him. Avyakṭa is His body; though He
pervades avyakṭa, it does not know Him. Akshara is His body; though He
pervades akshara, it does not know Him. Mṛṭyu is His body; though He
pervades mṛṭyu, it does not know Him. He who is the inner soul of all
creatures and the purifier of sins, is the one divine Lord Nārāyaṇa.

The wise should through the practice of deep meditation of Brahman leave
off the (recurrent) conception of "I" and mine" in the body and the
senses which are other than Āṭmā. Having known himself as Praṭyagāṭmā,
the witness of buḍḍhi and its actions, one should ever think "So’ham"
("I am That") and leave off the idea of Āṭmā in all others. Shunning the
pursuits of the world, the body and the Śāsṭras, set about removing the
false attribution of self. In the case of a Yogin staying always in his
own Āṭmā, his mind parishes having known his Āṭmā as the Āṭmā of all,
through inference, Veḍas

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and self-experience. Never giving the slightest scope to sleep, worldly
talk, sounds, etc., think of Āṭmā, (in yourself) to be the (supreme)
Āṭmā. Shun at a distance like a chaṅdāla (the thought of) the body,
which is generated out of the impurities of parents and is composed of
excreta and flesh. Then you will become Brahman and be (in a) blessed
(state). O Sage, having dissolved (Jīva-) Āṭmā into Paramāṭmā with the
thought of its being partless, like the ether of a jar in the universal
ether, be ever in a state of taciturnity. Having become that which is
the seat of all Āṭmās and the self-resplendent, give up the macrocosm
and microcosm like an impure vessel. Having merged into Chiḍāṭmā, which
is ever blissful, the conception of "I" which is rooted in the body, and
having removed the (conception of) Liṅga (here the sign of
separateness), become ever the Kevala (alone). Having known "I am that
Brahman" in which alone the universe appears like a town in a mirror,
become one that has performed (all) his duty, O sinless one. The
ever-blissful and the self-effulgent One being freed from the grip of
ahaṅkāra attains its own state, like the spotless moon becoming full
(after eclipse).

With the extinction of actions, there arises the extinction of chinṭā.
From it arises the decay of vāsanās; and from the latter, arises moksha;
and this is called Jīvanmukṭi. Looking upon everything in all places and
times as Brahman brings about the destruction of vāsanās through the
force of vāsanās of sāṭṭvic nature. Carelessness in Brahmanishthā by (or
meditation of Brahman) should not in the least be allowed (to creep in).
Knowers of Brahman style (this) carelessness, in Brāhmic science, as
death (itself). Just as the moss (momentarily) displaced (in a tank)
again resumes its original position, in a minute, so Māyā envelops even
the wise, should they be careless (even for a moment). He who attains
the Kaivalya state during life becomes a Kevala even after death of his
body. Ever devoted to samāḍhi, become a nirvikalpa (or the changeless
one), O sinless. one. The granṭhi (or knot) of the heart, full of
ajñāna, is broken completely only when one sees his Āṭmā as secondless
through nirvikalpa samāḍhi.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Now, having strengthened the conception of Āṭmā and well given up that
of "I" in the body, one should be indifferent as he would be towards
jars, cloth, etc. From Brahma down to a pillar, all the upāḍhis are only
unreal. Hence one should see (or cognize) his Āṭmā as all-full and
existing by itself (alone). Brahma is Swayam (Āṭmā); Vishṇu is Āṭmā;
Ruḍra is: Āṭma; Inḍra is Āṭmā; all this universe is Āṭmā and there is
nothing but Āṭmā. By expelling (from the mind) without any remainder all
objects which are superimposed on one's Āṭmā, one becomes himself
Parabrahman the full, the secondless and the actionless. How can there
be the heterogeneity of the universe of saṅkalpa and vikalpa in that One
Principle which is immutable, formless and homogeneous? When there is no
difference between the seer, the seen, and sight, there being the
decayless and Chiḍāṭmā, full like the ocean at the end of a Kalpa and
effulgent, all darkness, the cause of false perception, merges in it.
How can there be heterogeneity in that one supreme Principle which is
alike? How can there be heterogeneity in the highest Ṭaṭṭva which is
One? Who has observed any heterogeneity in sushupṭi (the dreamless
sleep), where there is happiness only? This vikalpa has its root in
chiṭṭa only. When chiṭṭa is not, there is nothing. Therefore unite the
chiṭṭa with Paramāṭman in its Praṭyāgāṭmic state. If one knows Āṭmā as
unbroken bliss in itself, then he drinks always the juice (or essence)
of bliss in his Āṭmā, whether internally or externally.

The fruit of vairāgya is boḍha (spiritual wisdom); the fruit of boḍha is
uparaṭi (renunciation); śānṭi (sweet patience) is attained out of the
enjoyment of the bliss of one's Ming, and this śānṭi is the fruit of
uparaṭi. If the latter in each of these is absent, the former is
useless. Nivṛṭṭi (or the return path) leads to the highest contentment
and (spiritual) bliss is said to be beyond all analogy. That which has
Māyā as its upāḍhi is the womb of the world; that true one which has the
attribute of omniscience, etc., and has the variegated mystery is
denoted by the word "Ṭaṭ" (that). That is called Apara (the other or
inferior) which shines through meditation upon the idea and the

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

world asmaṭ <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34.md) and the consciousness of
which is developed by antaḥkaraṇa. By separating the upāḍhis Māyā and
aviḍyā from Para and Jīva (cosmic and human Āṭmās respectively), one
realises Parabrahman which is partless and Sachchiḍānanḍa. Making the
mind dwell upon such sentences (or ideas) as the above constitutes
śravaṇa (hearing). It becomes manana (contemplation) when such ideas are
quieted (in one) through logical reasoning. When (their) meaning is
confirmed through these (two processes), the concentration of the mind
on it alone constitutes niḍiḍhyāsana. That is called samāḍhi in which
the chiṭṭa, rising above the conception of the contemplator and
contemplation, merges gradually into the contemplated, like a light
undisturbed by the wind. Even the mental states are not known (at the
time when one is within the scope of Āṭmā). But they are only inferred
from the recollection which takes place after samāḍhi. Through this
samāḍhi are destroyed crores of karmas which have accumulated during
cycles of births without beginning and pure ḍharma is developed. Knowers
of Yoga call this samāḍhi, ḍharma-megha (cloud), inasmuch as it showers
nectarine drops of karma in great quantities, when all the hosts of
vāsanās are destroyed entirely through this, and when the accumulated
karmas, virtuous and sinful, are rooted out. Then that in which speech
was hidden till now, appears no longer so, and shines as Saṭ; and direct
cognition reveals itself, like the myrobalan in the palm of the hand.
Vairāgya begins from where the vāsanās cease to arise towards objects of
enjoyment. The cessation of the rising of the idea of "I" is the highest
limit of buḍḍhi; uparaṭi begins from where the mental states once
destroyed do not again arise. That ascetic is said to possess
Sṭhiṭaprajñā who enjoys bliss always and whose mind is absorbed in
Brahman that is formless and actionless. That state of mind is termed
prajñā that realises the oneness of Brahman and Āṭmā after deep inquiry,
and that has the vṛṭṭi of nirvikalpa and chinmāṭra. He who possesses
this always is a Jivanmukṭa. He is a Jivanmukṭa who has, neither the
conception of "I" in the body and the senses, nor

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

the conception of another (different from himself) in everything else.
He is a Jivanmukṭa who sees through his prajñā no difference between his
own Āṭmā and Brahman as well as between Brahman and the universe. He is
a Jivanmukṭa who preserves equanimity of mind, either when revered by
the good or reviled by the vicious. One who has cognized the true nature
of Brahman is not subject to rebirth as before. But were he so
subjected, then he is not a true knower, the knowing of Brahman being
external only. A man is subject to prārabḍha <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35.md) so long as he is affected by pleasure,
etc. The attainment of a result is always preceded by action; and
nowhere is it without karma. Through the cognition "I am Brahman" are
destroyed the karmas accumulated during hundreds of crores of previous
births, like the actions in the dreaming state (that are destroyed)
during the waking state.

An ascetic having known himself as associateless and indifferent like
ether, is not at all affected by any of his karmas at any time. Just as
the ether is not affected by the alcoholic smell through its contact
with a pot, so Āṭmā is not affected by the guṇas produced by its upāḍhi.
The prārabḍha karma that has begun to act before the dawn of jñāna is
not checked by it; and one should reap its fruit, as in the case of an
arrow discharged at a target. An arrow that is discharged towards an
object with the idea that it is a tiger, does not stop when it (the
tiger) is found to be a cow; but it (even) pierces the mark through its
speed, without stopping. When one realises his Āṭmā as free from old age
and death, then how will prārabḍha affect him? Prārabḍha accomplishes
(its work) only when one considers his body as At ma. This conception of
Āṭmā as body is not at all a desirable one; so it should be given up
along with prārabḍha, since it is simply a delusion to attribute
prārabḍha to this body. How can there be reality to that which is
superimposed upon another? How can there be birth to that which is not
real? How can there be death to that which is not born? How can there be
prārabḍha to that which is unreal? The Veḍa speaks of prārabḍha in an
external sense only, to satisfy those

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

foolish persons that doubt, saying: "If jñāna can destroy all the
results of ajñāna (such as body, etc.), then whence is the existence of
this body to such a one?" but not to inculcate to the wise the existence
of the body.

Āṭmā is all-full, beginningless, endless, immeasurable, unchangeable,
replete with Saṭ, Chiṭ, and Ānanḍa, decayless, the one essence, the
eternal, the differentiated, the plenum, the endless, having its face
everywhere, the one that can neither be given up nor taken up, the one
that can neither be supported nor be made to support, the guṇaless, the
actionless, the subtle, the changeless, the stainless, the
indescribable, the true nature of one's Āṭmā, above the reach of speech
and mind, the one full of Saṭ, the self-existent, the immaculate, the
enlightened, and the incomparable; such is Brahman, one only without a
second. There are not in the least many. He who knows his Āṭmā himself
through his own cognition, as the one who is not restricted by any, is a
Siḍḍha (one that has accomplished his object), who has identified his
Āṭmā with the one changeless Āṭmā. Whither is this world gone, then? How
did it appear? Where is it absorbed? It was seen by me just now, but now
it is gone. What a great miracle! What is fit to be taken in? and what
to be rejected? What is other (than Āṭmā)? And what is different (from
It)? In this mighty ocean of Brahman full of the nectar of undivided
bliss, I do not see, hear, or know anything. I remain in my Āṭmā only
and in my own nature of Saṭ, Ānanḍarūpa. I am an asaṅga (or the
associateless). I am an asaṅga. I am without any attributes. I am Hari
(the Lord taking away sin). I am the quiescent, the endless, the
all-full and the ancient. I am neither the agent nor the enjoyer.

I am the changeless and the decayless. I am of the nature of pure
enlightenment. I am the one and the perpetual bliss.

This science was imparted to Apānṭaraṭama who gave it to Brahma,. Brahma
gave it to Ghora-Aṅgiras. Ghora-Aṅgiras gave it to Raikva, who gave it
to Rāma. And Rāma gave it to all beings. This is the teaching of
Nirvāṇa; and this is the teaching of the Veḍas; yea, this is the
teaching of the Veḍas. Thus ends the Upanishaḍ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[55:1](tmu12.htm#fr_33.md) This Upanishaḍ is also
called Ṭurīyāṭīṭa Avaḍhūṭa Upanishaḍ.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[58:1](tmu12.htm#fr_34.md) I and its inflexions.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[59:1](tmu12.htm#fr_35.md) The result of past karma
now enjoyed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. Subala-Upanishaḍ of Śukla-Yajurveḍa](tmu13.md)

</div>
