<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu24)  [Next](tmu26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

### YOGAṬAṬṬVA-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">I shall</span> now describe yoga-ṭaṭṭva
(yoga-truth) for the benefit of yogins who are freed from all sins
through the hearing and the studying of it. The supreme Purusha called
Vishṇu, who is the great yogin, the great being and the great ṭapasvin,
is seen as a lamp in the path of the truth. The Grandfather (Brahmā)
having saluted the Lord of the universe (Vishṇu) and having paid Him due
respects, asked Him (thus): "Pray, explain to us the truth of yoga which
includes in it the eight subservients." To which Hṛshīkeśa (the Lord of
the senses or Vishṇu) replied thus: "Listen. I shall explain its truth.
All souls are immersed in happiness and sorrow through the snare of
māyā. Kaivalya, the supreme seat, is the path which gives them
emancipation, which rends asunder the snare of māyā, which is the
destroyer of birth, old age and disease and which enables one to
overcome death. There are no other paths to salvation. Those who go
round the net of Śāsṭras are deluded by that knowledge. It is impossible
even for the Ḍevas to describe that indescribable state. How can that
which is self-shining be illuminated by the Śāsṭras? That only which is
without parts and stains and which is quiescent beyond all and free from
decay becomes the jīva (self) on account of the results of past virtues
and sins. How did that which is the seat of Paramāṭmā, is eternal, and
above the state of all existing things and is of the form of wisdom and
without stains attain the state of jīva? A bubble arose in it as in
water and in this (bubble) arose

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

ahaṅkāra. To it arose a ball (of body) made of the five (elements) and
bound by ḍhāṭus. Know that to be jīva which is associated with happiness
and misery and hence is the term jīva applied to Paramāṭmā which is
pure. That jīva is considered to be the kevala (alone) which is freed
from the stains of passion, anger, fear, delusion, greed, pride, lust,
birth, death, miserliness, swoon, giddiness, hunger, thirst, ambition,
shame, fright, heart-burning, grief and gladness.

"So I shall tell you the means of destroying (these) sins. How could
jñāna capable of giving moksha arise certainly without yoga? And even
yoga becomes powerless in (securing) moksha when it is devoid of jñāna.
So the aspirant after emancipation should practise (firmly) both yoga
and jñāna. The cycle of births and deaths comes only through ajñāna and
perishes only through jñāna. Jñāna alone was originally. It should be
known as the only means (of salvation). That is jñāna through which one
cognises (in himself) the real nature of kaivalya as the supreme seat,
the stainless, the partless, and of the nature of Sachchiḍānanḍa without
birth, existence and death and without motion and jñāna.

"Now I shall proceed to describe yoga to you. Yoga is divided into many
kinds on account of its actions: (*viz*.,) Manṭrayoga, Layayoga,
Hathayoga, and Rājayoga. There are four states common to all these:
(*viz*.,) Ārambha, Ghata, Parichaya, and Nishpaṭṭi. O Brahmā, I shall
describe these to you. Listen attentively. One should practise the
Manṭra along with its māṭrikās (proper intonations of the sounds) and
others for a period of twelve years; then he gradually obtains wisdom
along with the siḍḍhis, (such as) aṇimā, etc. Persons of weak intellect
who are the least qualified for yoga practise this. The (second)
Laya-yoga tends towards the absorption of the chiṭṭa and is described in
myriads of ways; (one of which is)—one should contemplate upon the Lord
who is without parts (even) while walking, sitting, sleeping, or eating.
This is called Laya-yoga. Now hear (the description of) Hatha-yoga. This
yoga is said to possess (the following) eight subservients, yama
(forbearance), niyama (religious observance), āsana

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (posture),
prāṇāyāma (suppression of breath), praṭyāhāra (subjugation of the
senses), ḍhāraṇā (concentration), ḍhyāna, the contemplation on Hari in
the middle of the eyebrows and samāḍhi that is the state of equality.
Mahāmuḍrā, Mahābanḍha and Khecharī, Jālanḍhara, Uddiyāṇa, and
Mūlabanḍha, uttering without intermission Praṇava (<span
class="smallcaps">Om</span>) for a long time, and hearing the exposition
of the supreme truths, Vajrolī, Amarolī and Sahajolī, which form a
triad—all these separately I shall give a true description of. O
four-faced one (Brahma), among (the duties of) yama moderate eating—and
not others—forms the principal factor; and non-injury is most important
in niyama. (The chief postures are) four (*viz*.,) Siḍḍha, Paḍma, Simha
and Bhaḍra. During the early stages of practice, the following obstacles
take place, O four-faced one, (*viz*.,) laziness, idle talk, association
with bad characters, acquisition of manṭras, etc., playing with metals
(alchemy) and woman, etc., and mirage. A wise man having found out these
should abandon them by the force of his virtues. Then assuming Paḍma
posture, he should practise prāṇāyāma. He should erect a beautiful
monastery with a very small opening and with no crevices. It should be
well pasted with cow-dung or with white cement. It should be carefully
freed from bugs, mosquitoes and lice. It should be swept well every day
with a broom. It should be perfumed with good odours; and fragrant
resins should burn in it. Having taken his seat neither too high nor too
low on a cloth, deerskin and kuśa grass spread, one over the other, the
wise man should assume the Paḍma posture and keeping his body erect and
his hands folded in respect, should salute his tutelary deity. Then
closing the right nostril with his right thumb, he should gradually draw
in the air through the left nostril. Having restrained it as long as
possible, be should again expel it through the right nostril slowly and
not very fast. Thon filling the stomach through the right nostril, he
should retain it as long as he can and then expel it through the left
nostril. Drawing the air through that nostril by which he expels, he
should continue this in uninterrupted succession. The time taken in
making a round of the knee with the palm of the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

hand, neither very slowly nor very rapidly, and snapping the fingers
once is called a māṭrā. Drawing the air through the left nostril for
about sixteen māṭrās and having retained it (within) for about
sixty-four māṭrās, one should expel it again through the right nostril
for about thirty-two māṭrās. Again fill the right nostril as before (and
continue the rest). Practise cessation of breath four times daily
(*viz*.,) at sunrise, noon, sunset and midnight, till eighty (times are
reached). By a continual practice for about three months, the
purification of the nādis takes place. When the Midis have become
purified, certain external signs appear on the body of the yogin. I
shall proceed to describe them. (They are) lightness of the body,
brilliancy of complexion, increase of the gastric fire, leanness of the
body, and along with these, absence of restlessness in the body. The
proficient in yoga should abandon the food detrimental to the practice
of yoga. He should give up salt, mustard, things sour, hot, pungent, or
bitter, vegetables, asafœtida, etc., worship of fire, women, walking,
bathing at sunrise, emaciation of the body by fasts, etc. During the
early stages of practice, food of milk and ghee is ordained; also food
consisting of wheat, green pulse and red rice are said to favour the
progress. Then he will be able to retain his breath as long as he likes.
By thus retaining the breath as long as he likes, kevala kumbhaka
(cessation of breath without inspiration and expiration) is attained.
When kevala kumbhaka is attained by one, and thus expiration and
inspiration are dispensed with, there is nothing unattainable in the
three worlds to him. In the commencement (of his practice), sweat is
given out; he should wipe it off. Even after that, owing to the
retaining of the breath, the person practising it gets phlegm. Then by
an increased practice of ḍhāraṇā, sweat arises. As a frog moves by
leaps, so the yogin sitting in the Paḍma posture moves on the earth.
With a (further) increased practice, he is able to rise from the ground.
He, while seated in Paḍma posture, levitates. There arises to him the
power to perform extraordinary feats. He does (or should) not disclose
to others his feats of great powers (in the path). Any pain small or

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

great, does not affect the yogin. Then excretions and sleep are
diminished; tears, rheum in the eye, salivary flow, sweat and bad smell
in the mouth do not arise in him. With a still further practice, he
acquires great strength by which he attains Bhūchara siḍḍhi, which
enables him to bring under his control all the creatures that tread this
earth; tigers, śarabhas, <span id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_146)
elephants, wild bulls or lions die on being struck by the palm of the
yogin. He becomes as beautiful as the god of love himself. All females
being taken up with the beauty of his person will desire to have
intercourse with him. If he so keeps connection, his virility will be
lost; so abandoning all copulation with women, he should continue his
practice with great assiduity. By the preservation of the semen, a good
odour pervades the body of the yogin. Then sitting in a secluded place,
he should repeat Praṇava (<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>) with three
pluṭa-māṭrās (or prolonged intonation) for the destruction of his former
sins. The manṭra, Praṇava (<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>) destroys
all obstacles and all sins. By practising thus he attains the ārambha
(beginning or first) state.

"Then follows the ghata (second state)—one which is acquired by
constantly practising suppression of breath. When a perfect union takes
place between prāṇa and apāna, manas and buḍḍhi, or jīvāṭmā and
Paramāṭmā without opposition, it is called the ghata state. I shall
describe its signs. He may now practise only for about one-fourth of the
period prescribed for practice before. By day and evening, let him
practise only for a yāma (3 hours). Let him practise kevala kumbhaka
once a day. Drawing away completely the organs from the objects of sense
during cessation of breath is called praṭyāhāra. Whatever he sees with
his eyes, let him consider as Āṭmā. Whatever he hears with his ears let
him consider as Āṭmā. Whatever [he](errata.htm#13) smells with his nose
let him consider as Āṭmā. Whatever he tastes with his tongue let him
consider as Āṭmā. Whatever the yogin touches with his skin let him
consider as Āṭmā. The yogin should thus unwearied gratify his organs of
sense for a period of one yāma every day with great effort. Then various
wonderful powers are attained by the yogin, such as clairvoyance,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

clairaudience, ability to transport himself to great distances within a
moment, great power of speech, ability to take any form, ability to
become invisible, and the transmutation of iron into gold when the
former is smeared over with his excretion.

"That yogin who is constantly practising yoga attains the power to
levitate. Then should the wise yogin think that these powers are great
obstacles to the attainment of yoga, and so he should never take delight
in them. The king of yogins should not exercise his powers before any
person whatsoever. He should live in the world as a fool, an idiot, or a
deaf man, in order to keep his powers concealed. His disciples would,
without doubt, request him to show his powers for the gratification of
their own desires. One who is actively engaged in one's duties forgets
to practise (yoga); so he should practise day and night yoga without
forgetting the words of the guru. Thus passes the ghata state to one who
is constantly engaged in yoga practice. To one nothing is gained by
useless company, since thereby he does not practise yoga. So one should
with great effort practise yoga. Then by this constant practice is
gained the parichaya state (the third state). Vāyu (or breath) through
arduous practice pierces along with agni the Kuṇdalinī through thought
and enters the Sushumnā uninterrupted. When one's chiṭṭa enters Sushumnā
along with prāṇa, it reaches the high seat (of the head probably) along
with prāṇa.

"There are the five elements (*viz*.,) pṛṭhivī, āpas, agni, vāyu and
ākāś. To the body of the five elements, there is the fivefold ḍhāraṇā.
From the feet to the knees is said to be the region of pṛṭhivī, is
four-sided in shape, is yellow in colour and has the varṇa (or letter)
*La*. Carrying the breath with the letter *La* along the region of earth
(*viz*., from the foot to the knees) and contemplating upon Brahma with
four faces and four mouths and of a golden colour, one should perform
ḍhāraṇā there for a period of two hours. He then attains mastery over
the earth. Death does not trouble him, since he has obtained mastery
over the earth element. The region of āpas is said to

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

extend from the knees to the anus. Āpas is semi-lunar in shape and white
in colour and has *Va* for its bīja (seed) letter. Carrying up the
breath with the letter *Va* along the region of āpas, he should
contemplate on the God Nārāyaṇa having four arms and a crowned head, as
being of the colour of pure crystal, as dressed in orange clothes and as
decayless; and practising ḍhāraṇā there for a period of two hours, he is
freed from all sins. Then there is no fear for him from water, and he
does not meet his death in water. From the anus to the heart is said to
be the region of agni. Agni is triangular in shape, of red colour, and
has the letter *Ra* for its (bīja) seed. Raising the breath made
resplendent through the letter *Ra* along the region of fire, he should
contemplate on Ruḍra, who has three eyes, who grants all wishes, who is
of the colour of the midday sun, who is daubed all over with holy ashes
and who is of a pleased countenance. Practising ḍhāraṇā there for a
period of two hours, he is not burnt by fire even though his body enters
the fire-pit. From the heart to the middle of the eyebrows is said to be
the region of vāyu. Vāyu is hexangular in shape, black in colour and
shines with the letter *Ya*. Carrying the breath along the region of
vāyu, he should contemplate on Īśvara, the Omniscient, as possessing
faces on all sides; and practising ḍhāraṇā there for two hours, he
enters vāyu and then ākāś. The yogin does not meet his death through the
fear of vāyu. From the centre of the eyebrows to the top of the head is
said to be the region of ākāś, is circular in shape, smoky in colour and
shining with the letter *Ha*. Raising the breath along the region of
ākāś, he should contemplate on Saḍāśiva in the following manner, as
producing happiness, as of the shape of binḍu, as the great ḍeva, as
having the shape of ākāś, as shining like pure crystal, as wearing the
rising crescent of moon on his head, as having five faces, ten heads and
three eyes, as being of a pleased countenance, as armed with all
weapons, as adorned with all ornaments, as having Umā (the goddess) in
one-half of his body, as ready to grant favours, and as the cause of all
the causes. By practising ḍhāraṇā in the region of ākāś, he obtains

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

certainly the power of levitating in the ākāś (ether). Wherever he
stays, he enjoys supreme bliss. The proficient in yoga should practise
these five ḍhāraṇās. Then his body becomes strong and he does not know
death. That great-minded man does not die even during the deluge of
Brahma.

"Then he should practise ḍhāraṇā for a period of six ghatikās (2 hours,
24 minutes). Restraining the breath in (the region of) ākāś and
contemplating on the deity who grants his wishes—this is said to be
saguṇa <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_147) ḍhyāna capable of giving
(the siḍḍhis) aṇimā, etc. One who is engaged in nirguṇa <span
id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_147) ḍhyāna attains the stage of samāḍhi.
Within twelve days at least, he attains the stage of samāḍhi.
Restraining his breath, the wise one becomes an emancipated person.
Samāḍhi is that state in which the jīvāṭmā (lower self) and the
Paramāṭmā (higher self) are differenceless (or of equal state). If he
desires to lay aside his body, he can do so. He will become absorbed in
Parabrahman and does not require uṭkrānṭi (going out or up). But if he
does not so desire, and if his body is dear to him, he lives in all the
worlds possessing the siḍḍhis of aṇimā, etc. Sometimes he becomes a ḍeva
and lives honoured in svarga; or he becomes a man or an yaksha through
his will. He can also take the form of a lion, tiger, elephant, or horse
through his own will. The yogin becoming the great Lord can live as long
as he likes. There is difference only in the modes of procedure but the
result is the same.

"Place the left heel pressed on the anus, stretch the right leg and hold
it firmly with both hands. Place the head on the breast and inhale the
air slowly. Restrain the breath as long as you can and then slowly
breathe out. After practising it with the left foot, practise it with
the right. Place the foot that was stretched before on the thigh. This
is mahābanḍha and should be practised on both sides. The yogin sitting
in mahābanḍha and having inhaled the air with intent mind, should stop
the course of vāyu (inside) by means of the throat-muḍrā, and occupying
the two sides (of the throat) with speed. This is called mahāveḍha and
is frequently practised by the siḍḍhas. With the tongue thrust

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

into the interior cavity of the head (or throat) and with the eyes
intent on the spot between the eyebrows, this is called khecharīmuḍrā.
Contracting the muscles of the neck and placing the head with a firm
will on the breast, this is called the jālanḍhara (banḍha) and is a lion
to the elephant of death. That banḍha by which prāṇa flies through
Sushumnā is called uddiyāṇabaṇdha by the yogins. Pressing the heel
firmly against the anus, contracting the anus and drawing up the apāna,
this is said to be yonibanḍha. Through mūlabanḍha, prāṇa and apāna as
well as nāḍa and binḍu are united and gives success in yoga: there is no
doubt about this. To one practising in a reversed manner (or on both
sides) which destroys all diseases, the gastric fire is increased.
Therefore a practitioner should collect a large quantity of provisions,
(for) if he takes a small quantity of food, the fire (within) will
consume his body in a moment.

"On the first day, he should stand on his head with the feet raised up
for a moment. He should increase this period gradually every day.
Wrinkles and greyness of hair will disappear within three months. He who
practises only for a period of a yāma (twenty-four minutes) every day
conquers time. He who practises vajrolī becomes a yogin and the
repository of all siḍḍhis. If the yoga siḍḍhis are ever to be attained,
he only has them within his reach. He knows the past and the future and
certainly moves in the air. He who drinks of the nectar thus is rendered
immortal day by day. He should daily practise vajrolī. Then it is called
amarolī. Then he obtains the rājayoga and certainly he does not meet
with obstacles. When a yogin fulfils his action by rājayoga, then he
certainly obtains discrimination and indifference to objects. Vishṇu,
the great yogin, the grand one of great austerities and the most
excellent Purusha is seen as a lamp in the path of truth.

"That breast from which one suckled before (in his previous birth) he
now presses (in love) and obtains pleasure. He enjoys the same genital
organ from which he was born before. She who was once his mother will
now be wife and she who is now wife is (or will be) verily mother. He
who is now father will be

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

again son, and he who is now son will be again father. Thus are the egos
of this world wandering in the womb of birth and death like a bucket in
the wheel of a well and enjoying the worlds. There are the three worlds,
three veḍas, three sanḍhyās, (morning, noon and evening), three svaras
(sounds), three agnis, and guṇas, and all these are placed in the three
letters (<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>). He who understands that
which is indestructible and is the meaning of the three (<span
class="smallcaps">Om</span>)—by him are all these worlds strung. This is
the Truth, the supreme seat. As the smell in the flower, as the ghee in
the milk, as the oil in the gingelly seed and as the gold in the quartz,
so is the lotus situated in the heart. Its face is downwards and its
stem upwards. Its binḍu is downwards and in its centre is situated
manas. By the letter A, the lotus becomes expanded; by the letter U, it
becomes split (or opened), by the letter M, it obtains nāḍa; and the
arḍhamāṭrā (half-metre) is silence. The person engaged in yoga obtains
[the](errata.htm#14) supreme seat, which is like a pure crystal, which
is without parts and which destroys all sins. As a tortoise draws its
hands and head within itself, so drawing in air thus and expelling it
through the nine holes of the body, he breathes upwards and forwards.
Like a lamp in an air-tight jar which is motionless, so that which is
seen motionless through the process of yoga in the heart and which is
free from turmoil, after having been drawn from the nine holes, is said
to be Āṭmā alone."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_146"></span>[196:1](tmu25.htm#fr_159) An animal said to
have eight legs and to be stronger than lion.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[199:1](tmu25.htm#fr_161) .Lit., "with guṇas"
and "without guṇas".

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. Ḍhyānabinḍu-Upanishaḍ of Sāmaveḍa](tmu26)

</div>
