<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu22)  [Next](tmu24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

### NARAḌAPARIVRĀJAKA-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### AṬHARVAṆAVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>. Once upon a time, Nāraḍa, the
ornament of Parivrājakas (roaming ascetics), after roaming over all
worlds and cleansing, through merely by looking at the places of
pilgrimage able to impart rare religious merits, observed, with a mind
that had attained purity, without hate, quiescent and patient, and
indifferent towards all (objects), the forest of Naimiśa (the modern
Nimsār), filled with Ṛshis that were engaged in the contemplation of
Reality and had attained the greatness of the ordained bliss; (there)
through the recitation of stories about Hari (Vishṇu), associated with
the musical motes of Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Ḍha, and Ni (of the gamut),
able to impart indifference to objects and to make one look down upon
the universe, and instilling divine devotion, fixed and movable (or
mental and bodily), he entered (the forest), fascinating the crowds of
beings human, animal, Kimpurushas <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_103),
celestials, Kinnaras, <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_104) Apsaras
(Houris), and Uragas <span id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_105) (collected
there). (Thereupon the) great Ṛshis Śāunaka and others who had been
engaged for twelve years in saṭṭra sacrifice well-skilled in the
recitation of Veḍas, the knowers of all, and the good practisers of
ṭapas, observed Nāraḍa the son of Brahma and the devotee of the Lord,
and having

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

risen up, paid due respect to him. Then having with due respect
requested him to sit down, they also seated themselves and addressed him
thus: "O Lord, son of Brahma, what is the means of salvation for us? It
is meet that it should be communicated (to us)." Thus addressed, Nāraḍa
replied to them thus: "One born in a good family and fit to go through
the forty-four samskāras, upanayana and others, should, under a teacher
to whom he is devoted, study, after the recitation of the Veḍa of his
own śākhā (division), all the different branches of knowledge; then
should fulfil, according to the rules ordained, for twelve years the
observance of Brahmacharya (celibacy), such as the service of the guru,
etc.; then for twenty-five years the āśrama (order of life) of a
gṛhasṭha (householder), and for twenty-five years the āśrama of a
vānaprasṭha (forester). After thus practising well the fourfold
celibacy, <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_106) the sixfold <span
id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_107) householder's life, and the
fourfold <span id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_108) forester's life, and
having performed all the duties thereof, he should acquire the
fourfold <span id="fr_110"></span>[4](#fn_109) means of salvation; thus
the sannyāsin who gives up the desires along with the karmas of mind,
speech, and body in this samsāra as well as the vāsanā towards the
threefold desire (of son, wife, and wealth), and being without malice
and endowed with quiescence and patience, undisturbed in the order of
life of Paramahamsa, quits the body in the contemplation of Reality, is
an emancipated person. Such is the Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> II

All the Ṛshis, Śaunaka and others addressing Lord Nāraḍa said thus: "O
Lord, please tell us the rules of sannyāsa." At which, seeing them,
Nāraḍa replied: "It is but meet that we should know the whole truth from
the mouth of Brahmā

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Himself." After
the saṭṭra sacrifice was completed, he took the ṛshis along with him to
saṭyaloka; and after duly making prostrations to and eulogising Brahmā
engaged in meditation upon Brahman, he along with others was duly seated
under the orders of Brahmā. Then Nāraḍa addressed Brahmā thus: "Thou art
guru; thou art father; thou art the knower of the secret of all
learning; thou art the knower of all; thou shalt therefore tell me one
secret. Who else but thee is fit to tell the secret dear unto me? It is
this. Please tell us the rules of the real sannyāsa (asceticism)."

Thus prayed to by Nāraḍa, Brahmā surveyed all in the four quarters; and
after meditating for one muhūrṭa (48 minutes), and assuring himself that
the inquiry was truly for the purpose of escaping from the pain of
samsāra, Brahmā eyeing Nāraḍa, said thus: "The mystery that was imparted
before by Virāṭ-Purusha of illimitable form according to the
*Purusha-Sūkṭa-Upanishaḍ* is now being divulged to you. It is very
mysterious. It is fit to be hearkened to with great attention. O Nāraḍa,
one born in a good family and obedient to his parents, should, after the
performance of upanayana according to the rules, find a virtuous guru
that is other than his father, is of good custom and habits, of faith,
born of good family, a knower of Veḍas, a lover of Śāsṭras, of (good)
qualities and free from duplicity. Having made prostrations and rendered
useful service to him, he should respectfully acquaint him with his
intention. Having studied all departments of knowledge and rendered
service for twelve years, he should, under his (the guru's) orders,
marry a girl fit for his family and dear unto him. Then having performed
for twenty-five years the karmas incidental to a householder and
attained the status of a Brāhmaṇa that has performed sacrifices and the
rest, he should beget a son with the only desire of perpetuating the
family. After thus spending twenty-five years in the performance of
household ḍharma, he should bathe thrice daily for twenty-five years and
take only one meal in the fourth period; he should live alone in the
forest, after giving up his previous wanderings in city and village; and
without desire for fruit, should perform the karmas incidental to that
(forester's) order .of life, and be

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

without desire for objects seen and heard. Being skilled in the forty
samskāras, he should be devoid of desire for all, have a purified mind,
have burnt up desire, jealousy, envy and egoism, and have developed the
four means of salvation. Then he becomes fit for sannyāsa. Such is the
Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> III

Then Nāraḍa addressed the grandfather thus:

"O Lord, by whom, after attaining the qualifications of sannyāsa, is it
fit to be taken?" To which Brahma, replied: "After first expounding the
qualifications of sannyāsa, the rules of sannyāsa will then be stated.
Hearken carefully. A eunuch, the outcaste, the maimed, the lewd, the
deaf, the youth, the dumb, the heretic, the discus-bearer, the
Liṅga-wearer, the vaikhānasa (forester), the Haraḍhvaja (carrier of
Śiva's flag), the reciter of Veḍas for hire, the bald-headed, one
without (sacrificial) fire—all these, even though they have attained
vairāgya are unfit for sannyāsa. Even though they have become
sannyāsins, they are unfit to be initiated into the mahāvākyas (sacred
veḍic sentences). The Paramahamsa sannyāsin stated before (as fit to
take sannyāsa) is the one qualified. It is stated in the smṛṭis that he
is a parivrāt who is not afraid of others, as others are not afraid of
him. The eunuch, the limbless, the blind, the youth, the sinful, the
outcaste, the door-keeper, the vaikhānasa, the Haraḍhvaja, the chakrī
(discus-bearer), the Liṅgī (Liṅga-wearer), the heretic, the bald-headed,
one without fire (sacrifice), one that had undergone sannyāsa twice or
thrice, the reciter of Veḍas for hire—all these are not fit for regular
sannyāsa but only for āṭura-sannyāsa (*viz*., sannyāsa taken while a
person is afflicted, etc.). What is the opinion of āryas (Hinḍūs) on the
(fit) time for āṭura-sannyāsa (being taken)? The time when prāṇa (life)
is about to rise (out of the body) is called āṭura. The time other than
it is incapable of conferring (upon one) the path of salvation and is
not āṭura. Even in āṭura-sannyāsa, the wise should according to rules,
initiate themselves into sannyāsa after reciting the

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

manṭras again and again in the course of respective manṭras. There is no
difference between regular and āṭura-sannyāsa in the manṭras to be
uttered at the time of taking sannyāsa. There is no karma without
manṭras; (hence) karma needs manṭras. Anything done without manṭra
cannot be termed karma. Hence manṭras should not be given up. Any karma
done without manṭra is like an offering made in ashes. Through the
conciseness (of the performance) of the karmas, it is stated to be
āṭura-sannyāsa.

"Therefore, O Muni, the recitation of manṭras is stated to be in
āṭura-sannyāsa. One who is always duly doing agnihoṭra (fire-sacrifice)
should, when he quits (the house) for foreign places through
indifference, perform the prājāpaṭya sacrifice in water and then take up
sannyāsa. After completing in water the observances of karma through the
mind, or the recitation of manṭras, the wise man should attain sannyāsa.
Else he becomes a fallen man. When, in the mind, indifference to all
objects arises, then men should long after sannyāsa, (that being the
best time for it); otherwise they are fallen. One who attains vairāgya
should take sannyāsa. One who does not, should remain at home. That vile
twice-born with desire, should he take sannyāsa, reaches hell. That
Brāhmaṇa who is a celibate, who has under control his tongue, sexual
organ, stomach, and hand may become a sannyāsin without undergoing the
ceremony of marriage. Having known samsāra as one without sāra (or
essence) and not having undergone any marriage on account of the desire
to know the sāra (or essence of God), they become sannyāsins on account
of the practice of the supreme vairāgya. The characteristic of pravṛṭṭi
(path) is the performance of karma; that of nivṛṭṭi is jñāna. Therefore
placing jñāna in the forefront, the wise man should take up sannyāsa.
When the reality of the eternal Parabrahman is understood, then he
should take up one ḍaṇda (staff) and abandon the holy thread and tuft of
hair. Then he becomes fit to eat the alms-food (of sannyāsa), having
become devoted to Paramāṭmā, indifferent to those that are not-Paramāṭmā
and freed from all desires. He becomes fit to be the eater of

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

alms-food who preserves the same countenance when he is beaten, as when
he is worshipped or prostrated to. He becomes fit to be the eater of
alms-food who is of the firm certitude that he is no other than the
non-dual and indestructible Brahman, otherwise named Vāsuḍeva. He in
whom are existent śānṭi (control of the organs), śama (control of mind),
purity (of mind and body), saṭya (truth), sanṭosha (contentment), ārjava
(straightforwardness), poverty, and non-ostentatiousness should be in
the order of life of kaivalya (sannyāsa). When one does not, through
actions, mind, or speech, commit any sinful action to any being, then he
becomes fit for eating alms-food. Having become quiescent (through the
control of the mind), having practised the ten kinds of ḍharmas, having,
according to rules, studied veḍānṭa, and having paid the three debts (to
ḍevas, ṛshis, and piṭṛs), one should take up sannyāsa. Courage,
fortitude, the control of the body, honesty, purity of (mind and body),
control of the (inner) organs, shame, knowledge, truth, and absence of
anger—these ten are the characteristics of ḍharma. One who does not look
back (with pleasure) upon past enjoyments, nor forward into the future,
and one who does not rejoice in the present, is fit to become a
sannyāsin. One who is able to control within, the inner organs and
without, the external organs, may be in the order of life of kaivalya.
One who while in life is not affected by pleasures and pains, as the
body is unaffected by them after death, may be in the order of life of
kaivalya.

"An ascetic of the Paramahamsa (order) shall wear two loin-cloths, one
ragged cloth, and one staff. Nothing more is ordained (in his case).
Should he through desire wear more than these, he will fall into the
hell of raurava and be born into the womb of an animal. Having stitched
together old and clean cloths into one and having coloured it with red
(ochre), he should wear it as his upper cloth. He may be with one cloth
or even without it. He should roam about alone with the sole vision (of
Brahman), devoid of desires; but he may be in one place alone in the
rainy season. Having quite abandoned his family, including son and wife,
veḍānṭa, sacrifice, and the sacred thread, the ascetic should wander
incognito.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Having given up
all faults, such as passion, anger, pride, desire, and delusion, the
parivrāt (ascetic) should become one that owns nothing. He is a muni who
is devoid of love and hate, who regards equally a clod of earth, stone,
or gold, who does no injury to any living creature, and is freed from
all. That ascetic reaches salvation who is associated with Āṭmajñāna,
who is freed from ostentation and egoism, from doing injury and
tale-bearing. Through attraction to the senses, he becomes subject to
fault, there is no doubt: through their control, he gains perfection.
Lust when enjoyed is never gratified. Just as fire increases with the
oblation (of ghee, etc., poured into it) so also lust waxes strong (with
enjoyment). It should be known that that man who does not rejoice or
grieve through hearing, touching, eating, seeing, or smelling is a
jiṭenḍriya (conqueror of the organs). He whose speech and mind are well
brought under control attains, completely and always, all the fruits of
veḍānṭa.

"That Brāhmaṇa who is always afraid of respect as poison and always
longs after disrespect as nectar, sleeps soundly and rises happily even
though he is treated with disrespect. He moves about happily in this
world. The one who treats him with disrespect perishes. All cruel words
should be endured. None should be treated with disrespect. On account of
bodily relationship, none should be made inimical. No anger should be
directed in turn towards one who is angry. Soft words (only) should be
spoken, even when (violently) pulled by another. No untrue words should
be uttered, even should afflictions arise to the seven gates (of the
body). One desirous of bliss should dwell in this universe through the
aid of Āṭmā alone, intent upon Āṭmā, free from desires, and without the
desire of blessing (others). He becomes fit for salvation through the
control of the organs, the destruction of love and hate and non-injury
to beings. He should abandon (all identification with) this feeble,
perishable, and impure body of five elements whereof the bones are the
pillars, which is strung by the nerves, coated over with flesh and
blood, covered up by the skin, is of bad odour, full of urine and fæces
is ever haunted by dotage and miseries and is the seat of all ills. If
an ignorant man be fond of this body firmly knit together

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

with flesh, blood, pus, fæces, and urine, nerves, fat, and bones, he
would, *a fortiori*, be fond of hell. That (identification of the body
with the Self) is alone the seat of the Kālasūṭra hell. That is alone
the Mahā-Vīchi-Vāgura (hell). That is alone the Asipaṭravanaśreṇi
(hell). Such an idea of the body being the Self should be strenuously
abandoned, though all should perish. That love of the body is not fit to
be felt by one intent upon his welfare, just as a low-caste woman eating
dog's flesh is unfit to be touched.

"One (fit to reach salvation), after leaving all meritorious actions to
those dear to him and all sins to those not dear, attains the eternal
Brahman through ḍhyāna-yoga. Such a man, through the ordinances, gives
up little by little all associations, and being freed from all pairs of
opposites, remains in Brahman alone. On account of the accomplishment
(of salvation), he should be moving about alone and without any help. He
who having understood the effect of being alone never derogates from it,
is never left in want. The bowl, the foot of the tree, the tattered
robe,. the state of being without help, the equality of vision in all
these are the characteristics of the emancipated one. One intent upon
the welfare of all beings, with a quiescent mind, having the
three-knotted staff and bowl, and ever devoted to the One (Brahman),
after taking up sannyāsa, may enter a village. Such one is a bhikshu
(alms-taker). Should two unite, it is called miṭhuna (a pair or union);
with three, it becomes a grāma (or village); with more, it is a nagara
(or city). No city or village, or, miṭhuna should be made, and an
ascetic who commits these three (offences) falls from his duty. Through
such intercourse (of ascetics), all kinds of talks connected with the
king and alms, friendship, tale-bearing, and malice occur between them.
There is no doubt of it.

"He (the ascetic) should be alone and desireless. He should not converse
with anybody. The ascetic should ever be uttering the word Nārāyaṇa in
each sentence. Being alone, he should be meditating upon Brahman in all
mental, spoken, and bodily actions. He should neither rejoice at dying
or living. He should be anticipating the time when life will close. He
should

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

not be glad of dying; nor should he be glad of living. He should be
biding his time like a hireling (for his pay). An ascetic who plays the
part of the dumb, the eunuch, the lame, the blind, the deaf, and the
idiot is emancipated through the (above six) means. There is no doubt of
this. He who has not fondness for eating, saying that this is good and
that is bad, who speaks only words that are beneficial, true, and
moderate is said to be the dumb. He is a eunuch who is no more affected
by the sight of a sixteen years old girl than of a new-born female baby
or a hundred-years old woman. He who does not move about for more than
the distance of a yojana for alms or for the calls of nature is a lame
man. That parivrāt (ascetic) is said to be a blind man, who whether
sitting or walking, has his vision extended to no more than four yokes’
distance on the ground. He is said to be deaf who, though hearing words,
beneficial or non-beneficial, pleasant or painful to the mind, is as if
he does not hear them. That clever ascetic is said to be an idiot who is
ever in a state of sleep, as it were, having his organs non-agitated by
objects, even though near. He should never observe the following six—the
scenes of dancing, etc., gambling, lovely women, eatables, enjoyables,
and women in their monthly course.

"The ascetic should never in thought even think of others with the six
(*viz*.,) love, hate, pride, deceit, treachery, and the illusion (of
confounding them). To the ascetics, the following six are sinful: cot,
white cloth, the stories of women, love towards women, sleep during the
day, and vehicles. He who is engaged in Āṭmic contemplation should
carefully avoid a long journey. He should ever practise the upanishaḍic
viḍyā tending to salvation. The ascetic need not bathe daily. He need
not observe upavāsa (fast). He need not be one that had studied Veḍas.
He need not be one that is able to produce a commentary (lecture). He
should daily observe acts without sin, deceit, or falsehood. He who,
having withdrawn the organs within, like a turtle its limbs (within its
shell), is with the actions of the organs and the mind annihilated,
without desires, without possessing any object as his own, without
dualities, without prostrations, without the oblations to pity ḍevaṭās
(they being with desires), without

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

mine or I, without awaiting anything, without the desire to be happy,
and living in places where men do not live—he alone is emancipated.
There is no doubt of this.

"A celibate, or householder, or forester, who is (ever) vigilant, has
karma, devotion, and knowledge and is independent, after understanding
his peculiar tendency and having become indifferent (to his order of
life), may become an householder after ending the celibate life, or may
from the householder's life enter the life of a foresters and then the
life of an ascetic; or from the life of a celibate, or householder, or
forester may (directly) enter that of an ascetic. The moment vairāgya
arises in him, he may become an ascetic that moment, whether he is with
vraṭa (religious observance) or not, is snāṭaka <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_110) or not, or with a discontinued
fire-sacrifice or not. On account of that, some perform
Prājāpaṭya-sacrifice alone; or Āgneya-sacrifice may be performed. Is not
agni, prāṇa? Through this alone, one should perform that sacrifice only
which is connected with the three dhāṭus. The three ḍhāṭus are saṭṭva,
rajas, and ṭamas alone. With the manṭra,

<span id="img_14300"></span> ![](img/14300.jpg),

agni (fire) should be taken in. Thus it is said (in the Śruṭis):

<span id="img_14301"></span> ![](img/14301.jpg).

The agni from āhavanīya should be brought and taken in as before (with
the manṭras above mentioned). Should such an agni be not obtainable, the
homa (oblation) should be done in water with the manṭra,

<span id="img_14302"></span> ![](img/14302.jpg).

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After performing
homa, the water should be taken in and sipped. After uttering the
manṭra,

<span id="img_14303"></span> ![](img/14303.jpg),

he abandons the tuft of hair in the head, the holy thread, father, son,
wife, karma, veḍic study and manṭra and becomes an ascetic. The Śruṭis
say that a knower of Āṭmā should be engaged in meditation upon Brahman,
through the three manṭras tending to salvation."

Then Nāraḍa asked Brahma thus: "How can one, without the holy thread, be
a Brāhmaṇa?" To which Brahma replied: "The wise should, after shaving
(the head) together with the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

tuft of hair, cast off the holy thread. He should wear, as his sūṭra
(thread), the indestructible and supreme Brahman. On account of
(sūchanāṭ) its being an indication, it (thread) is called sūṭra. Sūṭra
is the Paramapaḍa (supreme seat). He by whom that sūṭra is known is
Brāhman. That sūṭra (thread of Brahman) in which is strung the whole
universe like beads on a sūṭra (string), should be worn by the yogin
that has known yoga and ṭaṭṭva. The wise man that is in supreme yoga
should abandon the outer sūṭra (thread). He who wears (in his heart)
this sūṭra of Brāhmic Reality is alone Brāhmaṇa. Through wearing this
higher sūṭra, it becomes not a rejected one, not an impure one. Those
only whose sūṭra is internal, having the holy thread as jñāna are the
real knowers of the sūṭra; they are said to possess the yajnopavīṭa
(holy thread). To those whose śikhā (tuft of hair) is jñāna, whose holy
thread is jñāna, and whose meditation is upon jñāna, jñāna alone is
supreme. It is said that jñāna alone is able to purify. That wise man
alone who possesses the jñāna-śikhā like the śikhā (flame) of agni
(fire) is said to possess śikhā (tuft of hair). Those that have mere
śikhā are no śikhīs. The Brāhmaṇas and others that are entitled to
perform the veḍic karmas are allowed to wear the (external) thread, only
as an auxiliary to the karmas. It is only veḍic. The knowers of Brahman
know that all Brāhmaṇya (the state of Brahman) accrues to him only that
has the jñānamaya śikhā (knowledge-tuft of hair) and the ṭanmaya (That
or Brahman-ful) upavīṭa (holy thread).

"Having known it, a Brāhmaṇa should take up sannyāsa. Such a sannyāsin,
should be, in order to bear the bodily afflictions, with one cloth,
bald-headed and without having anything as being required (for his use);
or according to rules, he may be (naked) as nature made his body, and
should abandon his son, friend, wife, trustworthy relatives, etc., as
well as all karmas and love for the universe, the loin-cloth, staff, and
covering. Enduring all pairs of opposites without cold or heat,
happiness or grief, fame or disgrace, without the six changes, I-ness,
malice, pride, ostentation, jealousy, slander of others, love and hate,
pleasure and pain, passion, anger, greed and

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

delusion and regarding his body as a mere carcase, without thinking of
all the things, internal and external, that are other than Self. Without
prostrations, without the worship of ḍevas and piṭṛs and without praise
or condemnation, he should wander about of his own accord. He should not
receive gold and others. For him, there is no invocation or dismissal
(of deities), manṭra or non-manṭra, meditation or worship, aim or
non-aim, others or not-others; without having another's or (his own)
settled place of residence, and having a firm conviction, he should be
in a desolate house or at the foot of trees, or in a temple, a plenteous
turfed spot, a potter's place or that of agnihoṭra or sacrifice, river,
tank, sand-heap, subterranean vault, cave, mountain-rill, the place
prepared for sacrifice or forest; or like the naked personages,
Śveṭakeṭu, Ṛbhu, Niḍāgha, Jadabharaṭa, Ṛshabha, Ḍurvāsas, Samvarṭaka,
Sanaṭsujāṭa, Vaiḍeha (Janaka), Vatasiḍḍha, Śuka, Vāmaḍeva, Ḍaṭṭāṭreya,
Raivaṭaka, and Goraksha, he should roam about as nature made him,
without being recognised and without any means of discovery of his
course of life, like a lad, or an insane man, or a ghost, with the
actions of a madman though not mad, after discarding in water the
three-knotted staff, the stringed sling (bag), vessel, bowl,
waist-string, loin-cloth, stick, and cloth. He should ever be engaged in
Āṭmic deliberation. Being in his natural state without being affected by
the pairs, without receiving anything, being ever settled firmly in the
Brāhmic path, having a pure mind, eating the food that is obtained
without asking, in the palm as vessel, or in another's vessel in order
to merely protect the body at the [time](errata.htm#9) required, being
of equal mind whether the object is gained or not, without having aught
of his own, always meditating upon Brahman, being with Āṭma-nishthā,
having eradicated all actions, virtuous and sinful, and having given up
all—that one who ever utters Brahma-Praṇava, that "I am Brahman" alone,
with the blissful and non-dual jñāna, and after rising above the three
bodies (to Brahman), like the analogy of the wasp and the worm, <span
id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_111) gives up the body as a

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

sannyāsin, is said to have done all his work (in this world). Such is
the Upanishaḍ."

### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> IV

"One who after giving up the world, the Veḍas, the objects and the
organs is in Āṭmā alone, attains the supreme abode. A good ascetic
should not make known his caste, name, goṭra (clan), etc., his place and
time, the Veḍas, etc. studied by him, his family, age, history,
observance, and conduct. He should neither converse with women nor
remember the women he had seen. He should give up all stories connected
with women. He should not even see the figure of a woman in a picture.
The mind of an ascetic who through delusion adopts the above four things
connected with women is necessarily affected and thereby perishes. The
following are prohibited (in his case): Thirst, malice, falsehood,
deceit, greed, delusion, the pleasant and the unpleasant, manual work,
lecture, yoga, kāma (passion), desire, begging, I-ness, mine-ness, the
obstinacy of curing diseases, penance, pilgrimage and the accomplishment
of fruits of manṭras, and medicines. He who performs these interdicted
things, goes into a debased state. A muni who has moksha as his supreme
seat should address such respectful words as "Please come, please go,
please stay, and welcome" to one, even though he be his intimate friend.
He should neither receive presents, etc., nor ask for them to be given
to others. Even in dream, an ascetic should never direct a person (to do
work for him). Even should he witness or hear of the happiness or grief
of his wife, brother, son, and other relatives, he should not be
affected thereby. He should abandon all joy and sorrow.

"To the ascetics controlling their mind, the following are their
svaḍharmas (own duties): Harmlessness, truth, honesty, celibacy,
non-coveting, humility, high-spiritedness, clearness of mind, steadiness
of mind, straightforwardness, non-attachment (to any), service to the
guru, faith, patience, bodily restraint, mental restraint, indifference,
firm and sweet words, endurance, compassion, shame, jñāna, vijñāna,
yoga, moderate food, and

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

courage. That paramahamsa of an ascetic in the order of life of a
sannyāsin who is without dualities, always follows the pure saṭṭvaguṇa
and sees all equally, is no other than the actual Nārāyaṇa Himself. He
may live one day in a village and five days in a city, but five months
in the wintry season. At other times he should live in other places
(such as forest, etc.). He should not live in a village for two days
(even); should he do so, desires and the rest will arise in him and
thereby he becomes fit for hell. He should live like a (harmless) worm
on the earth with his mind under control and with no settled place of
residence, at the end of the village where there are no persons. He may
live in the same place in the wintry season. He should roam about on the
earth with one or no cloth, with the one vision (of Brahman) alone, with
no desires (of objects), with no condemnation of the actions of the wise
and with meditation. That yogin of an ascetic should go about, observing
the duties of his order of life, and with the eyes cast on the earth, in
pure places. He should not roam about in night, midday or the two
twilight periods in which are places void or difficult to be waded
through or likely to injure living creatures. He may live for one day in
a village, for three days in a town, for two days in a hamlet and for
five days in a city. He may live in the wintry season (longer) in one
place surrounded fully by water. The ascetic should regard all creatures
as Self and dwell upon earth like the blind, the hunchback, the deaf,
the insane, and the dumb. The bahūḍaka and the forester should bathe
thrice a day. In the case of hamsa, one bath only is ordained; but none
in the case of a paramahamsa. In the case of the one having one staff,
seven things are ordained, *viz*., silence, yoga-posture, yoga,
endurance, solitariness, desirelessness, and equal vision over all.
Bathing being not prescribed for a paramahamsa, he should abandon all
the modifications of the mind only; what is the difference between the
worms and the men that rejoice over this ill-smelling body which is but
a collection of skin, flesh, blood, nerves, fat, marrow, bone, offal and
urine? What is the body but a collection of all, phlegm, etc.? And what
are the qualities, the vāsana of the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

body, effulgence, beauty, etc.? (They are opposed to one another.) The
ignorant man that is fond of this body, which is but a compound of
flesh, blood, the ill-smelling urine and offal, nerve, fat and bone,
will be fond of hell too. Though there is no difference between the
women's secret parts that cannot be described by words and an (ever)
oozing tubular wound, yet through the difference of the mind, (men are
deluded). Such men are said to be without prāṇa, (*viz*., dead) though
alive. Prostrations to those that sport in that piece of flesh which is
rent in twain and tainted with the breaking of the wind, etc. What more
revolting thing is there than this?

"To the wise, there is nothing to do, no sign (of identification). The
muni who is without 'mine' and fear, with quiescence, without duality
and eating leaf (alone), should ever be in meditation with either
loin-cloth or no cloth. A yogin who is thus in meditation becomes fit to
be Brahman. Though he may have some signs (of identification to pass
under this order of life or that), such signs are useless for gaining
moksha. The cause of salvation is jñāna alone. He is a (true) brāhmaṇa
who cannot be identified as saṭ (good person) or asaṭ, knower of
religious books or not, follower of good conduct or bad conduct.
Therefore that learned man who is without signs, a knower of ḍharma,
engaged in the actions of Brahman and a knower of the secret mysteries,
should roam about, incognito. He should go about on this earth without
any caste or order of life and without being (even) doubted (regarding
his identity) by any beings, like the blind, the idiot, or the mute.
Then (even) the angels become fond of him who has a quiescent mind. It
is the dictate of the Veḍas that the sign (of non-identification) itself
is Kaivalya."

Then Nāraḍa asked the Grandfather about the rules of sannyāsa. To which
Brahma- assented and said: "Before either the āṭura or regular sannyāsa
is taken, kṛchchhra penance should be done and then the eight śrāḍḍhas.
In each of the (eight) śrāḍḍhas, two brāhmaṇas should be fed, in lieu of
Viśveḍevas called Saṭyavasu and the (Ṭrimūrṭis called) Brahmā, Vishṇu,
and Maheśvara, in Ḍevaśrāḍḍha first; then in Ṛshiśrāḍḍha in lieu of
Ḍevaṛshi, Rājaṛshi, and Manushyaṛshi; then

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

in Ḍivyaśrāḍḍha, in lieu of Vasu, Ruḍra, and Āḍiṭyas; then in
manushyaśrāḍḍha in lieu of Sanaka, Sananḍana, Sanaṭkumāra, and
Sanaṭsujāṭa; then in bhūṭaśrāḍḍha, in lieu of the five great elements,
pṛṭhivī, etc., eye and other organs and the four kinds of collections of
bhūṭas; then in Piṭṛśrāḍḍha, in lieu of father, grandfather and
great-grandfather; then in māṭṛśrāḍḍha, in lieu of mother, mother's
father and mother's grandfather; and then in Āṭmaśrāḍḍha, in lieu of
himself, his father and grandfather or of himself, grandfather and
great-grandfather, should his father be alive. He should perform the
eight śrāḍḍhas in one day, or eight days, with the manṭras of his śākhā
in one yājñapaksha or eight yājñapakshas. Then he should worship and
feed the brāhmaṇas according to the rules contained in piṭṛyajña. Then
offering the piṇdas (balls of rice to the piṭṛs), he should gladden the
brāhmaṇas with the ṭāmbūla (nut and betel, etc.,) presents and dismiss
them. Then for the accomplishment of the remaining karmas, he should
pluck off seven hairs; then again for finishing the rest of the karmas,
he should hold seven or eight hairs and have the head shaved. Except his
arm-pit and secret parts, he should have the hairs of his head, whiskers
and mustache and nails shaved. After shaving, he should bathe and
perform the evening sanḍhyā, uttering Gāyaṭrī a thousand times. Then
performing brahmayajña, he should establish his own fire and acting up
to his śākhā, should perform the oblation of ghee according to what is
said therein till the ājya portion with those (manṭras beginning with)
Āṭmā, etc.; he should eat thrice the fried rice-powder, and then sipping
the water, he should maintain the fire; then seated north of the fire on
a deer-skin, he should be engaged in the study of Purāṇas; without
sleeping, he should bathe at the end of the four yāmas and after cooking
the oblation of (rice) in the fire, he should offer it to the fire in
sixteen oblations according to (the manṭras of) Purusha-Sūkṭa. Then
having done virajāhoma and sipped water, he should close it with the
gift (to brāhmaṇas) of cloth, golden vessel, and cows along with
presents of money and then dismiss Brahmā (who had been invoked). With
the prescribed manṭra, he should attract Agni (fire) unto

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

himself. After meditating upon and coming round and prostrating before
the fire, he should dismiss it. Then in the morning performing sanḍhyā
and uttering Gāyaṭrī a thousand times, he should make upaṣthāna
(worship) to the sun. Then descending into water up to the navel, he
should make arghya (water-offering) to the guardians of the eight
quarters; then he should give leave to Gāyaṭrī, making Sāviṭrī enter
into vyāhṛṭi.

The manṭra prescribed for this should be uttered through the mind and
voice in high, middling, and low tones. With the manṭra, a <span
id="img_15000"></span> ![](img/15000.jpg) the water should be sipped and
having taken the water with the two hands, it should be dropped on the
east. Having uttered <span id="img_15001"></span> ![](img/15001.jpg), he
should pluck his hair (yet left) and uttering the prescribed manṭra and
having torn off the sacred thread and taken it in the hand with water,
should utter <span id="img_15002"></span> ![](img/15002.jpg): 'go to the
ocean' and cast them down as oblation in water:—<span
id="img_15003"></span> ![](img/15003.jpg) Having uttered thrice and
saturated thrice (the water) with (the influence of) the manṭra, he
should sip the water; and then uttering the manṭras <span
id="img_15004"></span> ![](img/15004.jpg), etc., he should cast aside in
water the cloth and waist-cord. Having thought himself to be the
abdicator of all karmas, he, being in the meditation of his own Reality
as nature made him, should go as before northwards with hands upraised.
Should he be a sannyāsin learned (in the Veḍas, etc.), he should get
himself initiated into Praṇava from his teacher and go about at his own
free will with the thought of there being none other but his Self, and
feeding his body with fruits, leaves and water, live in mountains,
forest and temples. That lover of salvation who after sannyāsa roams
about naked in all places with his heart full of the enjoyment of Āṭmic
bliss, with the fruit of avoidance of karmas and maintaining his life
with fruits, juice, barks, leaves, roots and water should abandon his
body in mountain caves, uttering the Praṇava. But an aspirant after
wisdom, should he become a sannyāsin, should, after walking a hundred
steps, be addressed by the teacher and other Brāhmans thus: "O Mahābhāga
(very fortunate person), stay,

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

stay, wear the staff, cloth and bowl, come to the teacher in order to
learn the meaning of Praṇava manṭra vākya". He should then take up the
waist-cord, loin-cloth, red-coloured cloth and bowl. A bamboo staff
which is not injured from top to bottom, equal, beautiful, and not
spotted with black, should be worn by him, after sipping the water and
uttering the manṭra prescribed for the purpose. Then the bowl should be
taken up, after uttering the manṭra with the Praṇava preceding it:—<span
id="img_15100"></span> ![](img/15100.jpg) Then after first uttering (the
manṭra) <span id="img_15101"></span> ![](img/15101.jpg) he should take
up the waist-cord, loin-cloth and cloth with the āchamana (sipping of
water) preceding it.

"Thus consecrated with yoga and thinking that he had done all that
should be done, he should be firm in the observances of his order of
life. Thus is the Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> V

Then Nāraḍa said to the Grandfather thus:—

"You said that sannyāsa was the liberator of all karmas. Now you say
again that the sannyāsin is one that should be in the observance of his
āśrama (order of life). (How to reconcile the two?)" To which the
Grandfather replied thus: "To the jīva possessing the body, there are
three avasṭhās—the waking, the dreaming, and the dreamless sleeping with
ṭurya (the fourth). Those beings of Purushas that are subject to these
avasṭhās follow the observances, incidental to them, of karma, jñāna and
vairāgya." Nāraḍa said: "O Lord, if so, what are the differences of
different orders of sannyāsa? And what are the differences of their
observances? Please tell us truly."

Therefore the differences of sannyāsas, and the differences of
observances were related for the sake of Nāraḍa by Brahmā, after
assenting to his (Nāraḍa's) question thus:—

"Truly sannyāsa is of one kind only. On account of ajñāna, inability and
non-performance of karmas (of persons), it is divided into three and
then into four, thus: vairāgya-sannyāsa, jñāna-sannyāsa,
jñānavairāgya-sannyāsa and karma-sannyāsa.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The
vairāgya-sannyāsin is one who becomes an ascetic after being in a
vicious condition of lust, etc., and then, becomes disgusted with the
objects through his former good karmas. A jñāna-sannyāsin is one who
becomes an ascetic with the four means of salvation, after controlling
the organs through book-wisdom, and becoming familiar with the
experiences of the world of virtue and vice, after abandoning anger,
jealousy, envy, ahaṅkāra and all sannyāsa productive of identification,
after giving up the three vāsanās of the body, books and world, which
are of the form of desires for women, wealth and earth, and after
thinking that the whole of the universe should be given up, like vomited
food. A jñānavairāgya-[sannyāsin](errata.htm#10) is one who becomes an
ascetic as nature made him, after practising and enjoying all, and
having the body alone remaining, through jñāna and vairāgya, in the
realisation of the Reality. A karma-sannyāsin is one who, though he has
no vairāgya, becomes an ascetic by regularly passing from one āśrama to
another, from the celibate, to the householder and then to the forester.
A vairāgya-sannyāsin is one who becomes an ascetic from the celibate
order (directly), being as nature made him.

"(There is another fourfold classification.) The four kinds are:
viḍvaṭ-sannyāsa, jñāna-sannyāsa, viviḍishā-sannyāsa and karma-sannyāsa.
In karma-sannyāsa, there are two (sub-) divisions, nimiṭṭa (causal) and
animiṭṭa (non-causal). Āṭura-sannyāsa (on account of the cause of
approaching death, disease, etc.), is nimiṭṭa-sannyāsa. The krama
(regular) sannyāsa is animiṭṭa. Āṭura-sannyāsa is on account of
defective karmas. When sannyāsa is taken at the time of death, it is
called nimiṭṭa. Animiṭṭa is that when one becomes duly a sannyāsin when
the body is strong, (after being convinced) that all created things are
subject to destruction, that body and others should be given up, that
all Āṭmās (souls)—each one shining in the pure Akās, dwelling in all,
moving in the anṭariksha (middle world) as of the form of vāyu, in the
sacrificial pit as of the form of fire, in the moon, in all men, in the
supreme angels, in the form of truth, in ākāś, in the form of the conch,
pearl, fish, etc., in water, in the form of grain, etc., on earth, in
the form of the

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

limbs of Veḍas, in the form of the rivers from the mountains, in the
form of truth and the great one—are no other than Brahman and that
others are but perishable.

"There are six classes of sannyāsins—kutīchaka, bahūḍaka, hamsa,
paramahamsa, ṭurīyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa. Kutīchaka is one who wears the
tuft of hair, holy thread, staff, bowl, loin-cloth and tattered cloth,
who worships mother, father, and teacher, who has potsherd and sling,
who is uttering manṭras, who takes food in one and the same place, who
wears, vertically, the white earth (on the forehead as sect-mark) and
who has a staff. Bahūḍaka is one who, like kutīchaka, wears the tuft of
hair, tattered cloth, etc., as well as the three (sect-) marks, but who
eats eight morsels of food through getting alms. The hamsa is one who
wears matted hair and the three vertical sect-marks and eats the
alms-food without any limit (as to the morsel) and wears the bare
loin-cloth only. The paramahamsa is he who is without tuft of hair and
holy thread, begs food in one day from five houses, has one loin-cloth,
wears one red cloth alone and sacred ashes and has given up all. The
ṭurīyaṭīṭa is one who either may take fruits, eating them with his mouth
like cows, or if he is an eater of food, may beg food from three houses.
The naked man having the body alone has the bodily actions (quiescent),
like the dead body. Such an one is the ṭurīyāṭiṭa. The avaḍhūṭa is he
who is without any rules, gets his food (in his mouth), following the
course of the boa constrictor, <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_112)
from all persons except persons of ill-repute and outcastes, and is ever
engaged in the realisation of the Real. Should the āṭura-sannyāsin be
alive (after taking sannyāsa), he should take up regular sannyāsa. The
rules to be observed in the case of the (three), kutīchaka, bahūḍaka and
hamsa are the same as for the orders of life from the celibate to the
sannyāsin. For the three, paramahamsa upwards, they have no waist-cord,
loin-cloth, cloth, bowl and staff. They may get food from all castes and
should be as nature made them. Such are the rules.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

"At the time of the sannyāsa, the recitation of the Veḍas should be made
till the mind is cleared; and after casting aside in water the
waist-cord, loin-cloth, staff, cloth, bowl, etc., he should roam about.
He should be without even the slightest tattered cloth. He should
neither utter anything other than Praṇava, nor talk nor hear. He should
not study logic or grammar. He should not talk many words; they will but
pain his vocal organ. He should not converse with people through the
vocal organ. He should not talk in other language (than Samskṛṭ). He has
no worship of God and no witnessing of festivals; he should be free from
pilgrimage. The other rules of ascetics are: The kutīchaka should beg
alms in one house only; for the bahūḍaka, eight morsels in eight houses;
for the hamsa, there is no limit; for paramahamsa, he should beg with
his hand as the vessel in five houses; for the ṭurīyāṭiṭa, he should eat
fruits with his mouth like cows; (for avaḍhūṭa), he should take food
like a boa constrictor in all castes. The ascetic should not dwell in
one place for many days. He should not make prostrations to any one.
Among the ṭurīyāṭiṭa and avaḍhūṭa (ascetics), even though one is junior,
he should not make prostrations to another, a senior who has known the
Reality. He should not swim with his hands and cross the river. He
should not climb up a tree, nor get into a carriage. Nothing should be
purchased or sold (by him). No exchange should be made, no ostentation
for him. There is nothing for the ascetic to do. If there is anything
for him to do, he will perish. Therefore the only thing he is qualified
to do is reflection, etc.

"To the āṭuras and kutīchakas, the world they attain is bhūrloka and
bhuvarloka; to the bāhūḍakas, swargaloka; to the hamsas, ṭapoloka; to
the paramahamsas, saṭyaloka. To the ṭurīyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa, Kaivalya in
Āṭmā according to the analogy of the wasp and the worm through the
realisation of Reality. It is the command of the Veḍas that whatever
form one thinks of at the last (death) moment and before leaving the
body is attained by him and no other. Knowing it thus, he should not be
a practiser of anything but the realisation of Reality.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Through the
observance of any other, he goes to the world of that other. To one that
has attained jñāna-vairāgya, his salvation is in the Self, as there is
no other observance for him. The same one (Āṭmā) alone is styled Viśva
in the waking state, Ṭaijasa in the dreaming state and Prājña in the
dreamless sleeping state. Through the difference of states, there is the
difference of the agent presiding over them. To the fourteen organs (the
ten organs of sense and actions and the four organs of the mind in these
states,) the outer and inner vṛṭṭis (modifications) are the material
cause. There are four vṛṭṭis, *viz*., manas, buḍḍhi, ahaṅkāra and
chiṭṭa. Through the differences of actions of the vṛṭṭis, there arise
the differences of separate functions. When (the presiding agent is) in
the eyes, there is the waking state; in the throat, the dreaming state;
in the heart, the dreamless sleeping state; and in the head, the ṭurya
(or fourth) state. Knowing these and that the ṭurya is the
indestructible, one should not hear or see anything in the waking state,
as if he were in dreamless sleeping state, To such a one who does not
apparently know them, even the dreaming state forms the same (dreamless
sleeping) state. Such a one is termed Jīvanmukṭa. All the Veḍas say that
there is salvation to such a one.

"To the ascetic, there should be no desire of this world or the higher.
Then he will be one that will practise accordingly. Through the
practices of (the study of) books foreign to the realisation of Reality,
he becomes a useless person like a camel bearing saffron paint. To him,
there is no entry into yoga books, no study of sāṅkhya books, no
practise of manṭra or ṭanṭra. Should there be any entry into other books
(than the one treating of Reality), then it will be like an ornament to
a dead body. Like a cobbler, he should be beyond karma and knowledge and
unfit for salutation and repeating the names of the Lord. He will duly
get the benefit of the karmas (of his order of life). Having given up
all like the foam (separating itself) from the castor oil, having the
mental staff which controls the mind clinging to objects, having the
hand as the vessel (for eating) and having the quarters alone as the
cloth, the ascetic

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

should go about like a lad, idiot, or ghost. He should neither desire to
live nor die. Like a coolie abiding his appointed time (of pay), the
ascetic should bide his time (of death). One who lives by taking alms
without (the qualifications of) patience, wisdom, vairāgya and the
qualifications beginning with śama (control of mind) is the spoiler of
the order of life of an ascetic. There is no salvation obtained through
the mere assumption of the staff or making the head bald or other
disguise or through ostentatious observances. That man who has jñāna as
his staff is said to be the ēkaḍaṇdī (one having Brahman alone as the
staff). An ascetic who, having merely a wooden staff without jñāna, eats
all (indiscriminately) in all places, goes to the terrible hells called
Mahāraurava. (The sense of) greatness in his case is likened by the
ṛshis to the pig's dung. Having given it up, he should move about like a
worm. Food and cloth without being begged for by him should be obtained
involuntarily through the will of others. A naked (ascetic) may bathe at
the wish of another. A man who practises [the](errata.htm#11) meditation
upon Self in the dreaming state as in the waking is said to be the
foremost and first of Brahmavāḍins. He should neither grieve for things
not obtained, nor rejoice at things obtained. With the organs not
attached to objects, he should be engaged in the sole protection of
life. He should always look down upon the gains obtained with much
respect (shown to him). Through the gains obtained with much respect,
the ascetic though released becomes bound. What is meant by the
protection of life, is this: When the fire (of the hearth in a house)
had been extinguished and all have taken food, he may go to the houses
of caste people that are fit for taking alms from. The yogin who has his
hand only as his alms-bowl should not often take alms. He may take
(food) standing or sitting; so in the middle (of taking food), he may
sip water. Those who have pure mind should not over-step the limits like
the ocean. The great ones do not give up their self-restraint like the
sun. When the muni takes, like a cow, the food with the mouth only
(without the use of the hand), he becomes of equal vision to all beings.
Then

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

he becomes fit for salvation. He may, for alms, go from a forbidden
house to a non-forbidden one. He should go (for alms) to a house where
the door is ajar, but not to a house where it is closed. The muni who
has a dusty body, an uninhabited house or the foot of a tree as his
abode, without anything dear or not dear to him, sleeping where the sun
sets, without any fire-warship, without any settled place and with
patience and the organs under control, should live without any desire in
any place obtained. He who after going to the forest dwells with jñāna
as the sacrifice and the organs under his mastery and awaits his time
(of death), is fit to be of the nature of Brahman. A muni who goes about
with no cause for instilling fear into all beings need never have any
fear from them. One without any abhimāna (identification with body) or
egoism or dualities or doubt, never is angry, never hates, never lies
through the vocal organ. That person who, having visited all sacred
places, does not do any injury to any living creature and gets alms at
the proper time, is fit to be of the nature of Brahman. He should not
associate with a forester or householder. He should conduct himself in
such manner as not to be known to others. He should not be glad of
anything. He should roam about on earth like a worm, according to the
direction pointed out by the sun. He should not do or cause to do works
tending to (his) fame or pains or people's benefit. He should not be
inclined towards vicious books. He should not live dependent upon any.
He should give up all over-disputatious reasoning. He should not join
any party (fighting with another). He should not take any disciples. He
should not study many books. He should not discourse. Neither should he
commence any works. Without any distinguishing characteristics and
without letting others know his opinions, that wise man, or muni, ever
intent upon the Brāhmic vision, should exhibit himself to people like an
idiot, or a lad, or a mute person. He should neither do nor talk
anything. He should not think of a good or bad thing. Rejoicing in That
within himself, the muni should go about like an idiot. He should roam
about alone without associating with any, and

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

with the senses under control. The clever jñānī sporting in Āṭmā, ever
delighting in Āṭmā, looking upon all with equal vision like an
Āṭma-jñānī, and playing like a child, should wander about like an idiot.
That learned man versed in Brahma-viḍyā should talk like a madman. He
should follow the observances of cows (by eating with the mouth, causing
no trouble to anybody). A good jñānī whether pushed, disregarded,
slighted, beaten, or hindered by the vicious, or burnt by their acts, or
having urine and fæces thrown upon him by them, or afflicted in various
other ways, should always think well of them though pained, and thus
make them lift themselves through their own Selves. A yogin whether
praised or afflicted by others, never thinks of it in order to reach a
superior state in yoga. A yogin who is slighted by people, attains a
higher state in yoga. A yogin never goes against the actions of the
virtuous. He is the same whether people slight him or do not desire his
association. He should do all that is right through the actions of mind,
speech and body to all beings born out of the embryo or the egg, etc. He
should harbour no malice against any and give up all clinging to things.
The ascetic after giving up passion, anger, pride, desire, delusion and
other faults should be without fear. Eating alms-food, preserving
silence, ṭapas, special meditation, a good jñāna, and vairāgya—these are
said, in the opinion (of the great), to be the ḍharma of the ascetic.
Wearing the red cloth, and being ever in ḍhyāna-yoga, he should live
either at the foot of a tree, outside the village, or in the temple.
Daily he should live upon begging. He should not eat one food alone
(from one only). Till the mind becomes pure, the learned man should thus
be moving about. Then when the mind is purified, he may be anywhere as a
parivrājaka. Seeing Janārdaṇa in and out everywhere, preserving silence,
being without stain like vāyu, roaming everywhere, being equal in
happiness and pains, and with patience, eating whatever comes to hand,
equally regarding without any hate brāhmaṇa, cow, horse, beasts and
others, meditating through the mind upon Vishṇu that is Paramāṭmā and
Īśvara, thinking ever of Brāhmic

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

bliss and thinking himself to be Brahman alone—such a one having known
thus, regarding the staff to be no other than the certitude of the mind
as above, having no desire, being naked and having abandoned all samsāra
through the actions ever done through the mind, speech, and body,
attains salvation, according to the analogy of the wasp and the worm,
through the practice of the realisation of Reality without ever seeing
the universe. Such is the Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> VI

Nāraḍa addressing Brahma asked: "O Lord! You said of abhyāsa (practice)
according to the analogy of wasp and the worm. What is that practice?"

To which the Grandfather replied thus:—

"One (*viz*., an ascetic) should live with true speech and
jñāna-vairāgya and with the body alone as the remaining (possession).
Know jñāna alone as the body, vairāgya alone as prāṇa, śānṭi (mental
control) and ḍānṭi (bodily control) as the eyes, manas alone as the
face, buḍḍhi alone as kalā (parts of effulgence), the twenty-five
ṭaṭṭvas as the limbs, the avasṭhās as the five great elements, karma,
bhakṭi, jñāna, and vairāgya as the branches (or parts) and that the
waking, dreaming, dreamless sleeping, and ṭurya avasṭhās and the
fourteen organs as being of the nature of a pillar planted in the mud.
Though such is the case, the man who masters these through his buḍḍhi
like a boatman regarding the boat immersed in the mire, or the
elephant-driver regarding the elephant (under his control), and has
known that all else beside Self is illusory and destructible and become
indifferent, should ever utter: 'I am Brahman alone.' He should not know
anything as other than Self. A Jivanmukṭa who lives thus is a doer of
that which should be done. He should not discourse that he is other than
Brahman. But he should ever be discoursing: 'I am Brahman'. From the
waking, dreaming and dreamless sleeping states, he should reach the
ṭurya state and then ṭuryāṭīṭa (the state beyond ṭurya). The waking
state is in the day; the dreaming in the night and the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

dreamless sleeping in tie midnight. Each avasṭhā (or state) has its
sub-states. The functions of the fourteen organs, eye and others
mutually dependent are the following: The eyes perceive forms; the ears,
sounds; the tongue perceives tastes; the nose, odours; the vocal organ
speaks; the hand lifts; the leg walks; the anus excretes; the sexual
organ enjoys; the skin feels; the buḍḍhi perceives objects, being under
the control of the organs; through buḍḍhi, he understands; through
chiṭṭa, he thinks; through ahaṅkāra, he says I'. All these should be
abandoned. Through the identification with the house (the body), he,
like a householder, becomes a jīva thinking that the body is itself.

"The jīva is dwelling in this body. When he is in the eastern petal (of
the heart), he inclined to virtuous actions; in the south-eastern petal,
to sleep and laziness; in the southern petal, to cruel actions; in the
south-western petal, to sinful actions; in the western petal, to love of
sport (or to flirt); in the north-western petal, to travelling; in the
northern petal, to peace of mind; in the north-eastern petal, to jñāna;
in (the middle of) the pericarp, to vairāgya; in the filament, to
Āṭmā-deliberation. Such are the different aspects to be understood (in
the heart). The first living avasṭhā (of jīva) is the waking; the second
is the dreaming; the third is the dreamless sleeping; the fourth ṭurya;
that which is not these four is turyāṭīṭa. The one Lord alone that is
witness and without qualities appears (as many) through the differences
of Viśva, Ṭaijasa, Prājña, and Ṭatasṭha (the neutral). One should
(always) utter: 'I am Brahman alone.' Else in the waking state, (he is)
in the four states of the waking state and others: <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_113) in the dreaming state, (he is) in the
four states of the dreaming state and others; in the dreamless sleeping
state, (he is) in the four states of the dreamless sleeping and others;
in the ṭurya, (he is) in the four states of ṭurya and others; to the
turyāṭīṭa that is nirguṇa, such states are not. There is only one
witness in all the states of Viśva, Ṭaijasa and Prājña, who is presiding
over the gross, the subtle and the causal

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (bodies). Is
Ṭatasṭha the seer? or is he not? As (to Ṭatasṭha), there is the property
of seeing; the jīva that is affected by the egoism, etc., of agency and
enjoyment is not the seer. The one other than jīva (*viz*., Ṭatasṭha) is
not concerned (with egoism, etc.). If it is said that the jīva is not so
(concerned with egoism), then it is not a fact. Through the abhimāna of
the jīva, there is the abhimāna of the body. And (conversely) through
the abhimāna of the body, there is the abhimāna of the jīva. The state
of the jīva is as a screen (to screen Brahman) like (the pot and house
in) the pot-ākāś and the house-ākāś. Through such a screen, he reaches
self-realisation through the manṭra—'Hamsa-So’ham' <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_114) having the characteristics of
inspiration and expiration. Having known thus, if he should give up the
identification with the body, then he does not identify himself with the
body (*i.e.*, not attain the state of jīva). Such a one is stated to be
Brahman. Having given up abhimāna and anger, being content with moderate
food, having conquered the organs and having controlled the avenues (of
the organs), one should make the mind enter into meditation. The yogin
who has always controlled (his mind and organs) should ever diligently
commence his meditation in empty places, caves and forests. The knower
of yoga who is bent upon accomplishing the end should never be engaged
in giving feasts to Brāhmaṇas, in śrāḍḍha sacrifices, etc., or in going
to places of pilgrimages, festivals or crowds. The well-controlled yogin
should go about as if people had treated him with disrespect. He should
not go against the actions of the wise. That great ascetic is said to be
a ṭriḍanḍin (or having a three-knotted staff) who holds firmly the
three-ḍaṇda (control) of mind, speech, and body. That ascetic is said to
be a supreme person who begs alms-food of worthy brāhmaṇas, when smoke
has ceased and fire has been extinguished (in their houses). Is he not a
degraded ascetic who, though holding the staff and begging food, is
without vairāgya and is not intent upon the observances of his order? He
is an ascetic—not any other—who does

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

not go to the house where he expects to find special alms or which he
already visited. He is said to transcend all castes and orders of life
who realises the self-shining supreme Ṭaṭṭva that is without body and
organs, the all-witness, the real vijñāna that is of the form of bliss.
To the Āṭmā that is of the nature of jñāna, such an idea as: 'the order
of life, etc., is mine,' being generated out of māyā in this body, can
never exist. He who knows thus through veḍānṭa is beyond all castes and
orders of life. He from whom all castes and orders of life slip away
through Āṭmic vision, transcends them all and remains in Āṭmā alone.
That person is said by knower of the meaning of the Veḍas to be
aṭivarṇāśramī (beyond caste and order of life) who after crossing all
castes and orders of life abides in Āṭmā alone. Therefore, O Nāraḍa, the
castes and orders of life which are foreign (to Āṭmā) are attributed
falsely, by the ignorant, to Āṭmā. O Nāraḍa, for those that are
Brahma-jñānīs, there are no rules ordained nor prohibited; there is
nothing to be given up or not; similarly nothing else (for them). Having
attained indifference to all objects even up to Brahmā's seat, having
destroyed (or done away with) all fondness for everything, as for son,
relatives, wife, etc., and having faith in the path of salvation, and
through love of veḍānṭa-jñāna, he should approach a guru who is a knower
of Brahman with gift (in his hand). Having an equilibrated mind, he
should satisfy the guru for a long time through service, etc., and learn
with a steady firm mind the meaning of the sentences of the Veḍas. Then
being devoid of 'I' and 'mine' and of all attractions, and having
attained peace of mind, etc., he sees Āṭmā in himself. Through observing
the faults of samsāra, there arises indifference. There is no doubt that
sannyāsa arises in one who becomes disgusted with samsāra. The aspirant
after salvation who is called paramahamsa should, through the hearing,
etc., of veḍānṭa, practise Brahma-jñāna, which is the direct and chief
means of salvation. In order to attain Brahma-jñāna, the one named
paramahamsa should possess the qualities of the control of mind and
body, etc. He should always he a practiser of veḍānṭa, being master of
the mind, the body

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

and the organs, being without fear and egoism, with a firm mind, without
the pairs (of opposites), without attaching himself to any, having a
worn-out loin-cloth, and being bald-headed or naked. He should have the
great intelligence of the knower of veḍānṭa, a yogin without 'I' and
'mine' and being equal and friendly to friends and other beings. That
jñānī alone and none else is able to cross samsāra who has his mind at
peace. With the grace of the guru towards him, he should live with him
for one year. He should be careful to observe yama (restraint) and
niyama (religious observance). At the end of that (year), he should
attain the supreme jñāna-yoga, and roam about on this earth without
going against ḍharma; (or) at the end of one year, he should give up the
three orders of life and attain the chief āśrama (of sannyāsa), as well
as the supreme jñāna-yoga. Then, taking leave of the guru, he should
wander over the earth, having given up association (with wife, etc., as
well as anger, and being content with moderate food and having
controlled the senses. The householder who does not perform karma, and
the ascetic who performs karma—both become fallen through their perverse
doings. Each becomes intoxicated through seeing women. Each becomes
intoxicated through drinking alcohol. Therefore women, mere sight of
whom is poison, should be shunned at a distance. Such things as
conversation and proximity with, and sight of, women, dancing, singing,
using violence against persons, and disputatious arguments should be
given up. Therefore, O Nāraḍa, to such a one, there is neither bath nor
muttering of manṭras nor worship nor homa, nor means of accomplishment,
nor any karma of fire-sacrifice, etc., nor worshipping with flowers,
etc., nor karmas to the piṭṛs nor pilgrimages, nor religious
observances, nor ḍharmas, nor aḍharmas, nor any rules of observance, nor
any other worldly karmas. He should give up all karmas and worldly
observances. That yogin of an ascetic who is a learned person, having
his intelligence directed towards Reality, should never injure any worm
or insect, bird or tree. O Nāraḍa, roam through the world with vision
ever directed inwards, with purity, with mind under control, with a mind
that is full of Brahman

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

and all attraction given up within. The muni that goes about alone, does
(or should) not dwell in countries where there is no king. (In his
case), there is neither praise nor prostration, nor the propitiation of
ḍevas or piṭṛs. Thus the ascetic who has his abode changeful (in body),
or changeless (in Āṭmā), should be content with whatever he gets. Thus
is the Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> VII

The Grandfather, after eulogizing Nāraḍa who asked about the observance
of ascetics, replied thus:—

"The ascetic that has attained indifference (to objects), should stay in
one and the same place in the rainy season (for four months), and then
for (the remaining) eight months should wander alone. Then also the
ascetic should not stay in one and the same place for more than a day.
Like a deer that does not stay in one place on account of fear, he
should not stay in one place. He should not create an attraction (in his
mind) that may serve as an obstacle to his going about. He should not
cross a stream (by swimming) with his hand, nor ascend a tree, nor
witness the festival of a God, nor partake of regal food, nor do the
external worship of God. Having discarded all things other than the
Self, he should be with his body emaciated by taking food (from each
house) like the bees (from each flower). He should not increase the fat
(in the body); he should discard ghee like blood. Regarding such royal
food as flesh, sandal-coating, etc., as offal, the different tastes as
the degraded caste, the cloth as a defiled vessel, the oil-bath as
sexual union, the gladdening of a friend as urine, desires as cow's
flesh, the country known to him as the outcastes’ place, gold and women
as cobra or deadly poison, the place of assembly as the burning ground,
the capital of the town as the hell called Kumbhīpāka, and royal food as
balls of rice offered to the dead, he should be without any worship of
God other than the Self; and having given up all the actions of the
world and his own country, and ever thinking of the bliss of his Self
like the bliss arising from the discovery of a lost object, forgetting
his country and the

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

fondness for his body, and knowing that his body should be slighted like
a carcase, he should dwell away from son, relations and native place,
like a thief released from prison. Taking whatever comes to him without
effort, ever intent upon the realisation, through meditation, of
Brahma-Praṇava, being freed from all karmas, having burnt up all
passion, anger, greed, delusion, pride, malice, etc., having transcended
the three guṇas, being without the six human infirmities, <span
id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_115) without the six changes, <span
id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_116) speaking the truth and being opposed to
all savoury things, he should live for one day in a village, five days
in a town, five days in a sacred place, and five days in sacred waters.
With no settled place of residence and with a firm mind, he should dwell
alone in mountain caves without uttering falsehood. Two persons should
not join together. Should three join, there is created a village
thereby; with four, is formed a city. Therefore he should live alone in
a village. In it, the ascetic should not give scope to his fourteen
organs. Having attained wealth of vairāgya through the non-dissipated
jñāna, and having deliberated within himself that there is none other
than the Self, he should attain Jīvanmukṭi, having seen the Reality
everywhere. Till prārabḍha karma is over, he should understand the four
kinds of svarūpa <span id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_117) (in Ṭaṭṭvamasi)
and should live in the realisation of Reality, till his body falls (a
prey to death).

"To the kutīchaka there is (prescribed) a bath three times daily; to the
bahūḍaka, twice; to the hamsa, once; to the paramahamsa there is the
mental bath; to the turyāṭīṭa, there is the holy-ashes bath; to the
avaḍhūṭa, there is the wind as the bath. For the kutīchaka, there is the
vertical sect-mark; for the bahūḍaka, there is the three-lined
(horizontal) sect-mark; for the hamsa, both; for the paramahamsa, there
is the holy-ashes sect-mark; for the ṭuryāṭīṭa, there is the
spot-sect-mark; for the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

avaḍhūṭa or for the turyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa, there is none. For the
kutīchaka, shaving takes place once in two months; for the bahūḍaka,
once in four months; for the hamsa and paramahamsa, none, or if wanted,
once in a year; for the turyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa, none at all. The
kutīchaka should take the food in one (place only); the bahūḍaka should
take alms (in many places); for the hamsa and paramahamsa, the hand is
the vessel; the turyāṭīṭa, should take food with the mouth as the cow;
for the avaḍhūṭa, it is like the action of the boa constrictor (opening
the mouth and taking whatever comes into it). For the kutīchaka, there
are two cloths; for the bahūḍaka, there is one cloth; for the hamsa
there is a piece of cloth; and the paramahamsa should be naked or have
only a loin-cloth; in the case of the turyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa, they
should be as nature made them. For the hamsa and paramahamsa, there is
(prescribed) a deerskin, and for no others. For the kutīchaka and
bahūḍaka, there is the worship of the divine (image); for the hamsa and
paramahamsa, there is mental worship; for the turyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa,
there is the idea that they alone are Brahman. The kutīchaka and
bahūḍaka are entitled to manṭras and japas; the hamsa and paramahamsa,
to ḍhyāna (meditation); the turyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa are entitled to none;
but they are entitled to the initiation of the sacred sentences of the
Veḍas; so also the paramahamsa. The kutīchaka and bahūḍaka are not
entitled to initiate others; for them, there is (the uttering of) the
mental praṇava; for the hamsa and paramahamsa, there is the internal
praṇava (in the heart); for the turyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa, there is the
Brahma-praṇava (always). For the kutīchaka and bahūḍaka, there is
śravaṇa (hearing and study); for the hamsa and paramahamsa, there is
manana (thinking and remembering); for the turyāṭīṭa and avaḍhūṭa there
is niḍiḍhyāsana (profound meditation ever). For all these, there is
necessarily the meditation upon Āṭmā. Thus the aspirant after salvation
should ever be uttering the Praṇava which enables one to cross samsāra,
and be living as a Jivanmukṭa. Thus the ascetic, according to each one's
capacity, should ever be seeking the means to attain Kaivalya. Such is
the Upanishaḍ."

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> VIII

Then Nāraḍa, asked Parameshthī (Brahmā) to enlighten him, who had
surrendered himself to Him, about samsāra-ṭāraka (or that ṭāraka or
Praṇava which lifts one out of samsāra).

Assenting to which, Brahmā began thus: "Omkāra that is Brahman is the
vyashti (individual) and the samashti (cosmic). What is the individual?
What is the cosmic? Brahma-praṇava is of three kinds, samhāra-
(destructive) praṇava, sṛshti- (creative) praṇava, and ubhayāṭmaka
(belonging to both) praṇava, as being of two forms, internal and
external. (It is also eight:) Anṭaḥ-praṇava, Vyāvahārika-praṇava,
bāhya-praṇava, ārsha-praṇava, ubhayāṭmaka or virāt-praṇava,
samhāra-praṇava, brahma-praṇava, and arḍhamāṭrā praṇava. Om is Brahman.
Know that the manṭra of the one-syllabled Om is Praṇava. It has the
eight differences of akāra, ukāra, makāra, arḍhamāṭrā, nāḍa, binḍu,
kalā, and śakṭi. Know it is not four (alone). Akāra is associated with
ten thousand limbs; ukāra, with one thousand limbs; makāra with one
hundred limbs; arḍhamāṭrā is of the nature of endless limbs. That which
is saguṇa (associated with guṇas) is virāt- (preservation) praṇava; that
which is nirguṇa (not associated with guṇas) is samhāra- (or
destruction) praṇava; that which is associated with guṇas and is not so
associated, is uṭpaṭṭi- (or origination) praṇava. Pluṭa (the elongated
accent) is virāt: pluṭapluṭa is samhāra. The virāt-praṇava is of the
form of sixteen māṭrās and is above the thirty-six ṭaṭṭvas. The sixteen
māṭrās are thus: Akāra is the first māṭrā; ukāra is the second; makāra
is the third; arḍhamāṭrā is the fourth; nāḍa is the fifth; binḍu is the
sixth; kalā is the seventh; kalāṭīṭa is the eighth; śānṭi is the ninth;
śānṭyaṭiṭa is the tenth; unmanī is the eleventh; manonmanī is the
twelfth; purīṭaṭi is the thirteenth; ṭanumaḍhyamā is the fourteenth;
paṭi is the fifteenth; parā is the sixteenth. Then (again) having
sixty-four māṭrās and their division into the two, Prakṛṭi and Purusha
and resolving themselves into the one hundred and twenty-eight
differences of māṭrās, it becomes saguṇa and nirguṇa. Though
Brahma-praṇava is one only, it is the substratum of all, the support

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

of the whole universe, of the form of all aksharas (letters), time,
Veḍas, and Śiva. This Omkāra should be sought after, that is mentioned
in the Veḍas of the nature of the Upanishaḍs. Know that this Omkāra is
the Āṭmā that is indestructible during the three periods of time, past,
present, and future, able to confer salvation and eulogized by
Brahma-sound (Veḍas). Having experienced this one Om as immortal and
ageless, and having brought about the Brahma-nature in this body, become
convinced that your Āṭmā, associated with the three bodies, is
Parabrahman. Through Viśva and others (*viz*., Ṭaijasa, Prājña, and
Ṭurya) in order, the realisation of Parabrahman should be attained,
since Āṭmā is of four kinds through his identification with, and the
enjoying of, the gross as well as the enjoyer of the gross, the subtle
as well as the enjoyer of the subtle, and through his identification
(with the third body) enjoying bliss in the fourth. He has four feet.
The one presiding over the waking state is gross; and since he is the
enjoyer of Viśva (the universe), he becomes the sṭhūla-prajñā (gross
consciousness). He has nineteen <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_118)
facets and eight parts. He is pervading everywhere and the Lord. He is
the enjoyer of the gross and is the chaṭurāṭma called Viśva. He alone is
the Purusha called Vaiśvānara. He alone is Viśvajiṭ (the conqueror of
the universe). This is the first foot. When this Lord attains the
dreaming condition, he is the sūkshma-prajña (subtle consciousness). O
conqueror of all, he is the one having eight limbs, and there is none
else. He is the enjoyer of the subtle and is chaṭurāṭma, named Ṭaijasa
and the protector of elements. He alone is the Hiraṇyagarbha, presiding
over the gross (or subtle matter rather). He is said to form the second
foot. Sushupṭi (or the dreamless sleep) is that state where one sleeps
without any desire and where one sees not any dreams. The one identified
with this dreamless sleep is Prajñāna-ghana, is blissful, of the nature
of eternal bliss and the Āṭmā in all creatures; yet he is enjoyer of
bliss, has cheṭas (consciousness) as his (one) foot, is all-pervading,
indestructible,

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

chaṭurāṭmā and the Lord, and is named Prājña, the third foot. He alone
is the Lord of all, the knower of all, the subtle-thoughted, the latent
one, and the cause of all creation. He alone is the origin and the
destruction. These three (states) are obstacles to all creatures
obtaining (the final) peace. As is svapna, so is sushupṭi, it (also)
being said to be illusory. The chaṭurāṭmā, the fourth, as he is Saṭ,
Chiṭ and Ēkarasa (the one essence), ends as the fourth and follows (upon
the heels of each of the above states), is the knower of the means of
vikalpa-jñāna and is the anujñāṭā (the one following knower). Having
known them, and known as māyā the three vikalpas of sushupṭi, svapna and
ānṭara (the inner), even in this state, is he not (to be known as)
Saṭ-Chiṭ-Ēkarasa? This shall be expressed as differentiated thus: It is
not even the gross prajñā; nor is it the very subtle prajñā; nor is it
prajñā itself (of the causal body): O muni neither is it the trifling
prajñā; nor is it the non-prajñā; nor is it the dual prajñā; nor is it
the internal prajñā, though it is without prajñā; it is Prajñāna-ghana.
It can never be known by the organs; nor it can be known by the reason;
it cannot be grasped by the organs of action. It cannot be proved. It
cannot be reached by thought. It cannot be proved by analogy. It can be
realised by Self-realisation alone. It is with the waking state, etc. It
is the auspicious, with changes, without a second. Such a one is thought
to be Ṭurya. This alone is Brahman, Brahma-praṇava. This should be
known. There is no other Ṭurya. To the aspirants after salvation, it is
the support, like the sun everywhere; it is the Self-light. As it alone
is Brahman, this Brahma-Akās is shining always. Thus is the Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Upaḍeśa</span> IX

Nāraḍa asked: "Who is Brahma-swarūpa?" To which Brahma replied thus:
"Brahma-swarūpa is thus: Those who know that 'he (Brahman) is one and I
am another' are only paśus (animals). The real paśus (animals) are no
animals. The wise man who knows Brahman thus (as himself, and himself

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

as Brahman) escapes out of the mouth of death. There is no other path to
salvation.

"Is time the cause (of origination of universes)? <span
id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_119) or nature? or karma? or accident? or the
(great) elements? or Purusha? This should be considered. It is not the
union of them. (Then) there is the Āṭmā, but (jīva-) Āṭmā is not the
Lord, as it is subject to pleasures and pains. Those (Ṛshis) following
ḍhyāna-yoga have beheld, as the cause, the ḍevāṭma-śakṭi concealed by
its own qualities of that One that presides over all the causes
associated with time and Āṭma. Him (the Universal Soul), we consider as
the wheel which has one circumference, which is covered by three
(layers), which has sixteen end-parts, which has fifty spokes and twenty
counter-spokes, which has six times eight (nails), which has one rope of
various forms, which has the threefold path, and which has delusion
arising from the twofold cause. Him (we worship as a river) which has
(water) oozing out of the five currents (of organs), which is terrible
and crooked through the five causes (of elements), whose praṇas are the
five waves, which has buḍḍhi, etc., as the root cause, which has five
whirlpools, which is impelled by the velocity of the five pains, which
has fifty differences (or has the five miseries), and which has the five
obstacles. In this wheel of Brahman, which is the support of life and
the last abiding place of all beings, and which is infinite, is whirling
deluded the jīva, thinking that it is different from the one (Lord)
Ordainer. Being blessed by Him, he gains salvation through such (a
blessing). This is declared as Brahman, as the supreme and the
indestructible. In it, are the three (the enjoyer, the enjoyed and
enjoyment). Hence it is the firm abode (of all). The knowers of Brahman
having known Brahman within (the universe, etc.,) attain samāḍhi in
Brahman and are absorbed in Brahman. Īśvara upholds this universe,
closely associated with the destructible and the indestructible, which
are manifest and unmanifest; but the not-ruler of (jīva-) Āṭmā is bound
through the thought of its being the enjoyer; and having known the Lord
is freed from all

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

fetters. Both Īśvara and jīva are birthless; one (the former; is jñānī
and the other (latter) is ajñānī. (The goddess of) Brahmāṭma-śakṭi, is
birthless, is alone engaged (in this world), on account of the enjoyment
of the enjoyers. Āṭmā is endless. The universe is His form. He is not
the agent. Whoever knows the Brahman that is threefold (as jīva, Īśvara
and the universe) is released from bondage. It is praḍhāna alone that is
destructible. It is Īśvara that is immortal and indestructible. The one
Lord (Īśvara) ordains Praḍhāna and Purusha.

"The illusion of the universe disappears through meditation on union (or
absorption) and saṭṭva-bhāva of Parameśvara always. Through knowing the
Lord, aviḍyā and the rest are destroyed. Through the removal of such
pains, there is freedom from birth and death. Through the meditation of
that Parameśvara, the third body is acquired after this (physical) body,
all wealth is enjoyed, and he attains whatever should be attained. He
should know with certitude that all the three things (*viz*.,) the
enjoyer, the enjoyed, and enjoyment are nothing but Brahman, and are of
the nature of his own Self. There is none but It to be known. All Āṭmic
knowledge is through ṭapas (only). That, Brahman contains in itself all
excellence. Having known thus, whoever meditates upon the (Āṭmā-)
svarūpa, to him where then is grief? Where then is delusion? Therefore
the Virāt is the past, present, and future time, and is of
indestructible nature.

"Āṭmā, that is the atom of atoms and the greatest of the greatest, is in
the cave of the heart of all creatures. One without the thought of
objects and without grief, knows the Āṭmā capable of neither increase
nor decrease through the grace of Īśvara or through the non-attraction
to the objects of the senses. He (Āṭmā) walks speedily without legs,
lifts objects without hands, sees without eyes and hears without ears.
He knows all, but none knows Him. He is said to be the foremost
Mahā-Purusha. Having known Āṭmā that is bodiless in this fleeting body,
the great, the all-pervading, the support of all, with incomprehensible
power, fit to be known through the meaning, etc., of all the Upanishaḍs,
the supreme of the supreme, the supreme object fit to be known, the one
remaining after all,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

the all-knowing, the eternal, the foremost of all foremost beings, the
ordainer of all, the one fit to be worshipped by all angels, the one
without beginning, end, and middle, without limit or destruction, the
cause of Brahma, Vishṇu, and Ruḍra, the one that has all the universe
latent in himself, of the nature of the five elements with the expansion
of all the quintuplicated creation, without being enveloped by his own
limbs of quintuplicated objects, superior to the supreme, greater than
the greatest, of the nature of effulgence, the eternal and the
auspicious, the undaunted personage never grieves. One who has neither
given up vicious actions, nor controlled his organs, nor mastered his
mind, nor given up longing after fruits of actions though the mind is
undisturbed, nor brought his mind to one state (or point), will not
attain this Āṭmā.

"This (Brahman) is neither internal nor external consciousness; is
neither gross, nor jñāna, nor ajñāna; nor is it the state between the
waking and the dreaming states. It cannot be cognised by the organs; is
not subject to proof; is within. He who knows that which is by Itself
alone is an emancipated person."

The Lord Brahma said that he becomes an emancipated person. He who knows
Reality is a Parivrāt. Such a Parivrāt roams about alone. Through fear,
he is like a terrified deer. He will not be opposed to going anywhere.
Having given up all but his body, he will live like a bee, and without
considering others as foreign to himself; ever meditating upon Reality,
he attains liberation in himself. Such a Parivrāt will be without
delusion, without action or causing others to act, being absolved from
teacher, disciple, books, etc., and having abandoned all samsāra. Such a
Parivrāt roams about thus—without wealth, being happy, able to get
wealth (if wanted), having crossed jñāna and ajñāna as well as happiness
and grief, being Self-effulgence, being fit to be known by the Veḍas,
having known all, able to confer siḍḍhis and remaining himself as
Brahman, the Lord. Such a Parivrāt attains the supreme abode of Vishṇu,
from which a yogin that has gone to it does not return, and where the
sun and the moon do not shine. He does not return. Such is Kaivalya.
Such is the Upanishaḍ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[134:1](tmu23.htm#fr_104) A higher being with
the form of a horse but with a human head.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[134:2](tmu23.htm#fr_105) A higher being with a
human form but with the head of a horse.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[134:3](tmu23.htm#fr_106) A semidivine serpent
with a human face.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[135:1](tmu23.htm#fr_107) The four
Brahmacharyas are: (1) Gāyaṭrī; (2) Prājāpaṭya; (3) Vaiḍika; (4)
Naishtika.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[135:2](tmu23.htm#fr_108) The six Gṛhasṭhas
are: (1) Vārṭāvṛtṭi; *viz*., Agriculture; (2) Sālinavṛṭṭi; (3) Yāyāvara;
(4) Ghorasannyāsin; etc.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[135:3](tmu23.htm#fr_109) The four Vānaprasṭhas
are: (1) Auḍumbara; (2) Vaikhānasa; (3) Samprakshāli; (4) Pourṇama.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[135:4](tmu23.htm#fr_110) They are Viveka,
Vairagya, etc.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[143:1](tmu23.htm#fr_111) A celibate who has
completed his first Āsrama.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[145:1](tmu23.htm#fr_112) Referring to the idea
of the worm becoming the wasp, with the latter's frequent stinging.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[153:1](tmu23.htm#fr_113) The snake, or boa
constrictor, is said to remain in one place only on account of its huge
body, taking any food that may come to its mouth as it is lying there.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[160:1](tmu23.htm#fr_114) Probably "others"
refer to the subdivisions of the dreaming; so also of other states.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[161:1](tmu23.htm#fr_115) With Hamsa, there is
the inspiration, and with So’ham, there is the expiration.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[165:1](tmu23.htm#fr_116) The six human
infirmities are hunger, thirst, grief, delusion, dotage, and death.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[165:2](tmu23.htm#fr_117) The six changes are
birth, existence, growth, transformation, decrease, and annihilation.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[165:3](tmu23.htm#fr_118) "Ṭaṭ" has its two
aspects of the word and its meaning which is Nirguṇa. In "Ṭvam" also
there are two, *viz*., the disciple and the jīva.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[168:1](tmu23.htm#fr_119) The nineteen are the
five organs of sense, the five organs of action, the five prāṇas, and
the four of the mind.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[170:1](tmu23.htm#fr_120) The Sveṭāsvaṭara
Upanishaḍ begins thus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 22. Śāṇdilya-Upanishaḍ of Aṭharvaṇaveḍa](tmu24)

</div>
