<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu27)  [Next](tmu29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### AMṚṬANĀḌA-UPANISHAḌ <span id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_166)

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> wise, having studied the Śāsṭras and
reflected on them again and again and having come to know Brahman,
should abandon them all like a firebrand. Having ascended the car of Om
with Vishṇu (the Higher Self) as the charioteer, one wishing to go to
the seat of Brahmaloka intent on the worship of Ruḍra, should go in the
chariot so long as he can go. Then abandoning the car, he reaches the
place of the Lord of the car. Having given up māṭrā, liṅga, <span
id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_167) and paḍa, <span
id="fr_182"></span>[3](#fn_168) he attains the subtle paḍa (seat or
word) without vowels or consonants by means of the letter M without the
svara (accent). That is called praṭyāhāra when one merely thinks of the
five objects of sense, such as sound, etc., as also the very unsteady
mind as the reins of Āṭmā. Praṭyāhāra (subjugation of the senses),
ḍhyāna (contemplation), prāṇāyāma (control of breath), ḍhāraṇā
(concentration), tārka <span id="fr_183"></span>[4](#fn_169) and samāḍhi
are said to be the six parts of yoga. Just as the impurities of
mountain-minerals are burnt by the blower, so the stains committed by
the organs are burned by checking prāṇa. Through prāṇāyāmas should be
burnt the stains; through ḍhāraṇā, the sins; through praṭyāhāra,

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the (bad) associations; and through ḍhyāna, the godless qualities.
Having destroyed the sins, one should think of Ruchira (the shining).
Ruchira (cessation), expiration and inspiration—these three are
prāṇāyāma of (rechaka, pūraka and kumbhaka) expiration, inspiration and
cessation of breath. That is called (one) prāṇāyāma when one repeats
with a prolonged (or elongated) breath three times the Gāyaṭrī with its
vyāhṛṭis and Praṇava (before it) along with the śiras <span
id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_170) (the head) joining after it. Raising up
the vāyu from the ākāś (region, *viz*., the heart) and making the body
void (of vāyu) and empty and uniting (the soul) to the state of void, is
called rechaka (expiration). That is called pūraka (inspiration) when
one takes in vāyu, as a man would take water into his mouth through the
lotus-stalk. That is called kumbhaka (cessation of breath) when there is
no expiration or inspiration and the body is motionless, remaining still
in one state. Then he sees forms like the blind, hears sounds like the
deaf and sees the body like wood. This is the characteristic of one that
has attained much quiescence. That is called ḍhāraṇā when the wise man
regards the mind as saṅkalpa and merging saṅkalpa into Āṭmā,
contemplates upon his Āṭmā (alone). That is called tārka when one makes
inference which does not conflict with the Veḍas. That is called samāḍhi
in which one, on attaining it, thinks (all) equal.

Seating himself on the ground on a seat of kuśa grass which is pleasant
and devoid of all evils, having protected himself mentally (from all
evil influences), uttering raṭha-maṇdala, <span
id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_171) assuming either paḍma, svasṭika, or
bhaḍra posture or any other which can be practised easily, facing the
north and closing the nostril with the thumb, one should inspire through
the other nostril and retain breath inside and preserve the Agni (fire).
Then he should think of the sound (Om) alone. Om, the one letter is
Brahman; Om should not be breathed out. Through this divine manṭra (Om),
it should be done many times to rid himself of

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

impurity. Then as said before, the manṭra-.knowing wise should regularly
meditate, beginning with the navel upwards in the gross, the primary (or
less) gross and subtle (states). The greatly wise should give up all
(sight) seeing across, up or down, and should practise yoga always being
motionless and without tremor. The union as stated (done) by remaining
without tremor in the hollow stalk (*viz*., Sushumnā) alone is ḍhāraṇā.
The yoga with the ordained duration of twelve māṭrās is called
(ḍhāraṇā). That which never decays is Akshara (Om) which is without
ghosha (third, fourth, and fifth letters from K), consonant, vowel,
palatal, guttural, nasal, letter R and sibilants. Prāṇa travels through
(or goes by) that path through which this Akshara (Om) goes. Therefore
it should be practised daily, in order to pass along that (course). It
is through the opening (or hole) of the heart, through the opening of
vāyu (probably navel), through the opening of the head and through the
opening of moksha. They call it bila (cave), sushira (hole), or maṇdala
(wheel). <span id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_172)

(Then about the obstacles of yogi). A yogin should always avoid fear,
anger, laziness, too much sleep or waking and too much food or fasting.
If the above rule be well and strictly practised each day, spiritual
wisdom will arise of itself in three months without doubt. In four
months, he sees the ḍevas; in five months, he knows (or becomes)
Brahmanishtha; and truly in six months he attains Kaivalya at will.
There is no doubt.

That which is of the earth is of five māṭrās (or it takes five māṭrās to
pronounce Pārṭhiva-Praṇava). That which is of water of four māṭrās; of
agni, three māṭrās; of vāyu, two; and of ākāś, one. But he should think
of that which is with no māṭrās. Having united Āṭmā with manas, one
should contemplate upon Āṭmā by means of āṭmā. Prāṇā is thirty <span
id="fr_187"></span>[2](#fn_173) digits long. Such is the position (or
range) of prāṇas. That is called Prāṇa which is the seat of the external
prāṇas. The breaths by

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

day and night are numbered as 1,13,180. <span
id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_174) (Of the prāṇas) the first (*viz*.,)
Prāṇa is pervading the heart; Apāna, the anus; Samāna, the navel; Uḍāna,
the throat; and Vyāna, all parts of the body. Then come the colours of
the five prāṇas in order. Prāṇa is said to be of the colour of a
blood-red gem (or coral); Apāna which is in the middle is of the colour
of Inḍragopa (an insect of white or red colour); Samāna is between the
colour of pure milk and crystal (or oily and shining), between both
(Prāṇa and Apāna): Uḍāna is apāṇdara (pale white); and Vyāna resembles
the colour of archis (or ray of light). That man is never reborn
wherever he may die, whose breath goes out of the head after piercing
through this maṇdala (of the pineal gland). That man is never reborn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_166"></span>[216:1](tmu28.htm#fr_180) The Upanishaḍ
treating of Nāḍa (spiritual sound) which is Amṛṭa (nectar). Here Prāṇas
are spoken of, as they produce Nāḍa within and without.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[216:2](tmu28.htm#fr_181) It is said to be the
subtle, gross and other microcosmic bodies. It also means sign.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[216:3](tmu28.htm#fr_182) It is said to be the
macrocosmic bodies of Virāt, etc. It means a word or letter.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[216:4](tmu28.htm#fr_183) In this
classification, tārka is introduced newly. It means; the examination of
the mind being attracted to objects and knowing that siḍḍhis are
impediments to progress.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[217:1](tmu28.htm#fr_184) The vyāhṛṭis are
Bhūḥ, [Bhuvaḥ](errata.htm#15), etc., and the head is Om, Āpo, etc.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[217:2](tmu28.htm#fr_185) Lit., car-circle
which is a mystical chakra or diagram for invoking the ḍevaṭā; but some
commentators make raṭha mean Om: and maṇdala, the circle of Śiva.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[218:1](tmu28.htm#fr_186) There are four
openings in the body; three from which the astral, the lower mental and
the higher mental bodies escape: the last being of ṭurya.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[218:2](tmu28.htm#fr_187) As measured by the
width of the middle finger: Yājñavalkya says, Prāṇa is 12 digits beyond
the body.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[219:1](tmu28.htm#fr_188) One commentator makes
it thus: Taking 21,600 for each of the five Prāṇas, we get 1,08,000: for
the five sub-prāṇas, 5 × 1036 is 5,180. Hence the total is 1,13,180.
Another commentator makes it 21,600 alone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 27. Varāha-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu29)

</div>
