<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu23)  [Next](tmu25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

### ŚĀṆDILYA-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### AṬHARVAṆAVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>. Śāṇdilya questioned Aṭharvan thus:
"Please tell me about the eight aṅgas (parts) of Yoga which is the means
of attaining to Āṭmā."

Aṭharvan replied: "The eight aṅgas of yoga are yama, niyama, āsana,
prāṇāyāma, praṭyāhāra, ḍhāraṇā, ḍhyāna, and samāḍhi. Of these, yama is
of ten kinds: and so is niyama. There are eight āsanas. Prāṇāyāma is of
three kinds; praṭyāhāra is of five kinds: so also is ḍhāraṇā. Ḍhyāna is
of two kinds, and samāḍhi is of one kind only.

"Under yama (forbearance) are ten: <span id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_120)
ahimsā, saṭya, asṭeya brahmacharya, ḍayā, ārjava, kshamā, ḍhṛṭi,
miṭāhāra, and śaucha. Of these, ahimsā is the not causing of any pain to
any living being at any time through the actions of one's mind, speech,
or body. Saṭya is the speaking of the truth that conduces to the
well-being of creatures, through the actions of one's mind, speech, or
body. Asṭeya is not coveting of another's property through the actions
of one's mind, speech, or body. Brahmacharya is the refraining from
sexual intercourse in all places and in all states in mind, speech or
body. Ḍayā is kindliness towards all creatures in all places. Ārjava is
the preserving of equanimity of mind, speech, or body in the performance
or non-performance of the actions ordained or forbidden to be done.
Kshamā is the bearing patiently of all pleasant or unpleasant things,
such as praise or blow. Dhṛṭi is

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

the preserving of firmness of mind during the period of gain or loss of
wealth or relatives. Miṭāhāra is the taking of oily and sweet food,
leaving one-fourth of the stomach empty. Śaucha is of two kinds,
external and internal. Of these, the external is the cleansing of the
body by earth and water; the internal is the cleansing of the mind. This
(the latter) is to be obtained by means of the aḍhyāṭma-viḍyā (science
of Self).

"Under niyama (religious observances), are ten, *viz*., ṭapas, sanṭosha,
āsṭikya, ḍāna, Īśvarapūjana, siḍḍhānṭa-śravaṇa, hrīḥ, maṭi, japa, and
vraṭa. Of these ṭapas, is the emancipation of the body through the
observances of such penances as kṛchchhra, chānḍrāyaṇa, etc., according
to rules. Sanṭosha is being satisfied with whatever comes to us of its
own accord. Āsṭikya is the belief in the merits or demerits of actions
as stated in the Veḍas. Ḍāna is the giving with faith to deserving
persons, money, grains, etc., earned lawfully. Īśvarapūjana is the
worshipping of Vishṇu, Ruḍra, etc., with pure mind according to one's
power. Siḍḍhānṭa-śravaṇa is the inquiry into the significance of
Veḍānṭa. Hrīḥ is the shame felt in the performance of things contrary to
the rules of the Veḍas and of society. Maṭi is the faith in the paths
laid down by the Veḍas. Japa is the practising of the manṭras into which
one is duly initiated by his spiritual instructor, and which is not
against (the rules of) the Veḍas. It is of two kinds—the spoken and the
mental. The mental is associated with contemplation by the mind. The
spoken is of two kinds—the loud and the low. The loud pronunciation
gives the reward as stated (in the Veḍas): (while) the low one (gives) a
reward thousand times (that). The mental (gives) a reward a crore (of
times that). Vraṭa is the regular observance of or the refraining from
the actions enjoined or prohibited by the Veḍas.

"Āsanas (the postures) are (chiefly) eight, *viz*., svasṭika, gomukha,
paḍma, vīra, simha, bhaḍra, mukṭa, and mayūra.

"Svasṭika is the sitting at ease with the body erect, placing each foot
between the thighs and knees of the other. Gomukha is (the sitting at
ease with the body erect,) placing the hollow

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

of the left foot under the side of the right posteriors and the hollow
of the right foot under the side of the left posteriors, resembling
Gomukha (cow's face). Paḍma is (the sitting at ease with the body erect)
placing the back of each foot in the thigh of the other, the right hand
grasping the right toe and the left hand the left toe. This, O Śāṇdilya,
is praised by all. Vīra is the sitting at ease (with the body erect),
placing one foot (on the thigh of the other and the other foot
underneath the corresponding (opposite thigh.) Simha is (the sitting at
ease with the body erect,) pressing the right side (of the thigh) with
the hollow of left heel and *vice versa*. Rest your hands on the knees,
spread out the fingers, open your mouth and carefully fix your gaze on
the tip of your nose. This is always praised by the yogins. Siḍḍha <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_121) is (the sitting at ease with the body
erect), pressing the perineum with the left heel and placing the heel of
the right foot above the genital organ, concentrating the mind between
the two eyebrows. Bhaḍra is (the sitting at ease with the body
erect,)pressing the two ankles of the two feet firmly together against
the Sīvinī (*viz*., lower part of the seed) and binding the knees firmly
with the hands. This is the bhaḍra which destroys all diseases and
poisons. Mukṭa is (the sitting at ease with the body erect,) pressing
with the left heel the right side of the tender part of the Sīvinī, and
with the right heel the left side of the tender part of the Sīvinī.
Mayūra—(lit., peacock). Rest your body upon the ground with both palms
and place your elbows on the sides of the navel, lift up the head and
feet and remain like a stick in the air, (like the plant balance in
gymnastics). This is the mayūra posture which destroys all sins. By
these, all the diseases within the body are destroyed; all the poisons
are digested. Let the person who is unable to practise all these
postures betake himself to any one (of these) which he may find easy and
pleasant. He who conquers (or gets mastery over) the postures—he
conquers the three worlds. A person who has the practice of yama and
niyama should practise prāṇāyāma; by that the nādis become purified."

Then Śāṇdilya questioned Aṭharvan thus: "By what means are the nādis
purified? How many are they in number?

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How do they arise?
What vāyus (vital airs) are located in them? What are their seats? What
are their functions? Whatever is worthy of being known in the body,
please tell me." To that Aṭharvan replied (thus): "This body is
ninety-six digits in length. Prāṇa extends twelve digits beyond the
body. He who through the practice of yoga reduces his prāṇa within his
body to make it equal to or not less than the fire in it becomes the
greatest of the yogins. In men, the region of fire which is triangular
in form and brilliant as the molten gold is situated in the middle of
the body. In four-footed animals, it (fire) is quadrangular. In birds,
it is round. In its (the region of fire's) centre, the purifying,
beneficial, and subtle flame is situate. Two digits above the anus and
two digits below the sexual organ is the centre of the body for men. For
four-footed animals, it is the middle of the heart. For birds, it is the
middle of the body. Nine digits from (or above) the centre of the body
and four digits in length and breadth is situated an oval form. In its
midst is the navel. In it, is situated the chakra (*viz*., wheel) with
twelve spokes. In the middle of the chakra, the jīva (Āṭmā) wanders,
driven by its good and bad deeds. As a spider flies to and fro within a
web of fine threads, so prāṇa moves about here. In this body, the jīva
rides upon prāṇa. Lying in the middle of the navel and above it, is the
seat of kunḍalinī. The kunḍalinī śakṭi is of the form of eight prakṛṭis
(matter) and coils itself eight ways or (times). The movement of vāyus
(vital airs) checks duly the food and drink all round by the side of
skanḍha. <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_122) It closes by its head
(the opening of) the brahmaranḍhra, and during the time of (the practice
of) yoga is awakened by the fire (in the apāna); then it shines with
great brilliancy in the ākāś of the heart in the shape of wisdom.
Depending upon kunḍalinī which is situated in the centre, there are
fourteen principal nādis (*viz*.,) Idā, Piṅgalā, Sushumnā, Sarasvaṭī,
Vāruṇī, Pūshā, Hasṭijihvā, Yaśasvinī, Viśvoḍharī, Kuhūḥ, Śāṅkhinī,
Payasvinī, Alambusā, and Gānḍhārī. Of them, Sushumnā is said to be the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

sustainer of the universe and the path of salvation. Situated at the
back of the anus, it is attached to the spinal column and extends to the
brahmaranḍhra of the head and is invisible and subtle and is vaishṇavī
(or has the śakṭi force of Vishṇu). On the left of Sushumnā is situated
Idā, and on the right is Piṅgalā. The moon moves in Idā and the sun in
Piṅgalā. The moon is of the nature of ṭamas and the sun of rajas. The
poison share is of the sun and the nectar of the moon. They both direct
(or indicate) time and Sushumnā is the enjoyer (or consumer) of time. To
the back and on the side of Sushumnā are situate Sarasvaṭī and Kuhūḥ
respectively. Between Yaśasvinī and Kuhūḥ stands Vāruṇī. Between Pasha
and Sarasvaṭī lies Payasvinī. <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_123)
Between Gānḍhārī and Sarasvaṭī is situated Yaśasvinī. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[2](#fn_124) In the centre of the navel is Alambusā.
In front of Sushumnā there is Kuhūḥ, which proceeds as far as the
genital organ. Above and below kunḍalinī is situated Vāruṇī, which
proceeds everywhere. Yaśasvinī which is beautiful (or belonging to the
moon), proceeds to the great toes. Piṅgalā goes upwards to the right
nostril. Payasvinī goes to right ear. Sarasvaṭī goes to the upper part
or the tongue and Śāṅkhinī to the left ear, (while) Gānḍhārī goes from
the back of Idā to the left eye. Alambusā goes upwards and downwards
from the root of the anus. From these fourteen nādis, other (minor)
nādis spring; from them springing others, and from them springing
others; so it should be known. As the leaf of the aśvaṭṭha tree (*ficus
religiosa*) etc., is covered with minute fibres so also is this body
permeated with nādis.

"Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna, Uḍāna, Vyāna, Naga, Karma, Kṛkara, Devaḍaṭṭa, and
Ḍhanañjaya—these ten vāyus (vital airs) move in all the nādis. Prāṇa
moves in the nostrils, the throat, the navel, the two great toes and the
lower and the upper parts of kunḍalinī. Vyāna moves in the ear, the eye,
the loins, the ankles, the nose, the throat and the buttocks. Apāna
moves in the anus, the genitals, the thighs, the knees. the stomach, the
seeds, the loins, the calves, the navel, and the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

seat of the anus of fire. Uḍāna lives in all the joints and also in the
hands and legs. Samāna lives, permeating in all parts of the body. Along
with the fire in the body, it causes the food and drink taken in, to
spread in the body. It moves in the seventy-two thousand nādis and
pervades all over the body along with the fire. The five vāyus beginning
with Naga go towards the skin, the bones, etc. The Prāṇa which is in the
navel separates the food and drink which is there and brings about the
rasas (juices) and others. <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_125) Placing
the water above the fire and the food above (or in) the water, it goes
to the Apāna and along with it, fans up the fire in the centre of the
body. The fire thus fanned up by the Apāna gradually increases in
brightness in the middle of the body. Then it causes through its flames
the water which is brought in the bowels by the Prāṇa to grow hot. The
fire with the water causes the food and condiments, which are placed
above, to be boiled to a proper degree. Then Prāṇa separates these into
sweat, urine, water, blood, semen, the fæces and the like. And along
with the Samaria, it takes the juice (or essence) to all the nādis and
moves in the body in the shape of breath. The vāyus excrete the urine,
the fæces, etc., through the nine openings in the body which are
connected with the outside air. The functions of Prāṇa are inspiration,
expiration, and cough. Those of Apāna are the excretion of the fæces and
the urine. Those of Vyāna are (such actions as) giving and taking. Those
of Uḍāna are keeping the body straight, etc. Those of Samāna are
nourishing the body. Those of Nāga are vomiting, etc.; of Kūrma, the
movement of the eyelids; of Kṛkara, the causing of hunger, etc., of
Ḍevaḍaṭṭa, idleness, etc., and Ḍhanañjaya, phlegm.

"Having thus acquired a thorough knowledge of the seat of the nādis and
of the vāyus with their functions, one should begin with the
purification of the nādis. A person possessed of yama and niyama,
avoiding all company, having finished his course of study, delighting in
truth and virtue, having conquered (his) anger, being engaged in the
service of his spiritual instructor and having been obedient to his
parents

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

and well instructed in all the religious practices and the knowledge of
his order of life, should go to a sacred grove abounding in fruits,
roots, and water. There he should select a pleasant spot always
resounding with the chanting of the Veḍas, frequented by the knowers of
Brahman that persevere in the duties of their orders of life and filled
with fruits, roots, flowers, and water. (Else) either in a temple or on
the banks of a river or in a village or in a town, he should build a
beautiful monastery. It should be neither too long nor too high, should
have a small door, should be besmeared well with cow-dung and should
have every sort of protection. <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_126)
There listening to the exposition of veḍānṭa, he should begin to
practise yoga, In the beginning having worshipped Vināyaka <span
id="fr_128"></span>[2](#fn_127) (Gaṇeśa), he should salute his
Ishta-Ḍevaṭā (tutelary deity) and sitting in any of the above-mentioned
postures on a soft seat, facing either the east or the north and having
conquered them, the learned man keeping his head and neck erect and
fixing his gaze on the tip of his nose, should see the sphere of the
moon between his eyebrows and drink the nectar (flowing therefrom
through his eyes. Inhaling the air through Idā <span
id="fr_129"></span>[3](#fn_128) for the space of twelve māṭrās, <span
id="fr_130"></span>[4](#fn_129) he should contemplate on the sphere of
fire <span id="fr_131"></span>[5](#fn_130) situated in the belly as
surrounded with flames and having as its seed र (ra); then he should
exhale it through Piṅgalā. Again inhaling it through Piṅgalā <span
id="fr_132"></span>[3](#fn_128) and retaining it (within), he should
exhale it through Idā. For the period of twenty-eight months, <span
id="fr_133"></span>[6](#fn_131) he should practise six times at every
sitting through the three sanḍhyās (morning, noon, and evening)

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

and during the intervals. By this, the nādis become purified. Then the
body becomes light and bright, the (gastric) fire is increased (within)
and there is the manifestation of nāḍa (internal sound).

"Prāṇāyāma is said to be the union of Prāṇa and Apāna. It is of three
kinds—expiration, inspiration, and cessation. They are associated with
the letters of the (Samskṛṭ) alphabet <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_132) (for the right performance of
prāṇāyāma). Therefore Praṇava (<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>) only
is said to be Prāṇāyāma. Sitting in the paḍma posture, the person should
meditate that there is at the tip of his nose Gāyaṭrī, <span
id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_133) a girl of red complexion surrounded by
the numberless rays of the image of the moon and mounted on a hamsa
(swan) and having a mace in her hand. She is the visible symbol of the
letter A. The letter U has as its visible symbol Sāviṭrī, <span
id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_133) a young woman of white colour having a
disk in her hand and riding on a garuda (eagle). The letter M has as its
visible symbol Sarasvaṭī, <span id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_133) an aged
woman of black colour riding on a bull, having a trident in her hand. He
should meditate that the single letter—the supreme light—the praṇava
(<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>)—is the origin or source of these
three letters A, U, and M. Drawing up the air through Idā for the space
of sixteen māṭrās, he should meditate on the letter A during that time;
retaining the inspired air for the space of sixty-four māṭrās, he should
meditate on the letter U during the time; he should then exhale the
inspired air for the space of thirty-two māṭrās, meditating on the
letter M during that time. He should practise this in the above order
over and over again.

"Then having become firm in the posture and preserved perfect
self-control, the yogin should, in order to clear away the impurities of
the Sushumnā, sit in the paḍmāsana (paḍma posture), and having inhaled
the air through the left nostril, should retain it as long as he can and
should exhale it through the right. Then drawing it again through the
right and having retained it, he should exhale it through the left in
the order

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

that he should draw it through the same nostril by which he exhaled it
before and retained it. In this context, occur (to memory) the following
verses: "In the beginning having inhaled the breath (Prāṇa) through the
left nostril, according to the rule, he should exhale it through the
other; then having inhaled the air through the right nostril, should
retain it and exhale it through the other." To those who practise
according to these rules through the right and left nostrils, the nādis
become purified within three months. He should practise cessation of
breath at sunrise, in the midday, at sunset and at midnight slowly till
eighty (times a day) for four weeks. In the early stages, perspiration
is produced; in the middle stage the tremor of the body, and in the last
stage levitation in the air. These (results) ensue out of the repression
of the breath, while sitting in the paḍma posture. When perspiration
arises with effort, he should rub his body well. By this, the body
becomes firm and light. In the early course of his practice, food with
milk and ghee is excellent. One sticking to this rule becomes firm in
his practice and gets no ṭāpa (or burning sensation in the body). As
lions, elephants and tigers are gradually tamed, so also the breath,
when rightly managed (comes under control); else it kills the
practitioner. <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_134)

"He should (as far as is consistent with his health and safety) properly
exhale it, properly inhale it or retain it properly. Thus (only) will he
attain success. By thus retaining the breath in an approved manner and
by the purification of the nādis, the brightening of the (gastric) fire,
the hearing distinctly of (spiritual) sounds and (good) health result.
When the nervous centres have become purified through the regular
practice of Prāṇāyāma, the air easily forces its way up through the
mouth of the Sushumnā which is in the middle. By the contraction of the
muscles of the neck and by the contraction of the one below (*viz*.,)
Apāna, the Prāṇa (breath) goes into the Sushumnā which is in the middle
from the west nādi. <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_135) Drawing

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

up the Apāna and forcing down the Prāṇa from the throat, the yogin free
from old age becomes a youth of sixteen.

"Seated in a pleasant posture and drawing up the air through the right
nostril and retaining it inside from the top of the hair to the toe
nails, he should exhale it through the same nostril. Through it, the
brain becomes purified and the diseases in the air nādis are destroyed.
Drawing up the air through the nostrils with noise (so as to fill the
space) from the heart to the neck, and having retained it (within) as
long as possible, he should exhale it through the nose. Through this,
hunger, thirst, idleness and sleep do not arise.

"Taking in the air through the mouth (wide open) and having retained it
as long as possible, he should expel it through the nose. Through this,
(such diseases as) gulma, pleeha (both being splenetic diseases), bile
and fever as also hunger, etc., are destroyed.

"Now we shall proceed to kumbhaka (restraint of breath). It is of two
kinds—sahiṭa and kevala. That which is coupled with expiration and
inspiration is called sahiṭa. That which is devoid of these is called
kevala (alone). Until you become perfect in kevala, practise sahiṭa. To
one who has mastered kevala, there is nothing unattainable in the three
worlds. By kevala-restraint of breath, the knowledge of kunḍalinī
arises. Then he becomes lean in body, serene in face and clear-eyed,
hears the (spiritual) sounds distinctly, becomes free from all diseases
and conquers his (binḍu) seminal fluid, <span
id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_136) his gastric fire being increased. <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_137)

"Centring one's mind on an inward object whilst his eyes are looking
outside without the shutting and opening of his eyelids, has been called
Vaishṇavīmuḍrā. This is kept hidden in all the

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ṭānṭric works.
With his mind and breath absorbed in an internal object, the yogin,
though he does not really see the objects outside and under him, still
(appears to) see them with eyes in which the pupils are motionless. This
is called Khecharīmuḍrā. It has as its sphere of extension one object
and is very beneficial. (Then) the real seat of Vishṇu, which is void
and non-void, dawns on him. With eyes half closed and with a firm mind,
fixing his eyes on the tip of his nose and becoming absorbed in the sun
and moon, he after remaining thus unshaken (becomes conscious of) the
thing which is of the form of light, which is free from all externals,
which is resplendent, which is the supreme truth and which is beyond. O
Śāṇdilya, know this to be Ṭaṭ (That). Merging the sound in the light and
elevating the brows a little, this is of the way of (or is a part of)
the former practice. This brings about the state of Unmani which causes
the destruction of the mind. Therefore he should practise the
Khecharīmuḍrā. Then he attains to the state of Unmanī and falls into the
yoga sleep (trance). To one who obtains this yoga sleep, time does not
exist. Placing the mind in the midst of śakṭi and śakṭi <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_138) in the midst of the mind and looking on
the mind with the mind, O Śāndilya be happy. Place the Āṭma in the midst
of ākāś and ākāś in the midst of Āṭmā, and having reduced everything to
ākāś, do not think of anything else. You should not (then) entertain
thoughts, either external or internal. Abandoning all thoughts, become
abstract thought itself. As camphor in fire and salt in water become
absorbed, so also the mind becomes absorbed in the Ṭaṭṭva (Truth). What
is termed manas (mind) is the knowledge of everything that is known and
its clear apprehension. When the knowledge and the object cognised are
lost alike, there is no second path (or that is the only path). By its
giving up all cognition of objects, it (the mind) is absorbed and when
the mind is absorbed, kaivalya (isolation) alone remains.

"For the destruction of the chiṭṭa, there are two ways—yoga and jñāna. O
prince of sages! yoga is the (forcible)

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

repression of the modifications of the mind, and jñāna is the thorough
inquiry into them. When the modifications of the mind are repressed, it
(the mind) verily obtains peace. Just as the actions of the people cease
with the stopping of the fluctuations of the sun (*viz*., with sunset),
so when the fluctuations of the mind cease, this cycle of births and
deaths comes to an end. (Then) the fluctuations of prāṇa are prevented,
when one has no longing for this mundane existence or when he has
gratified his desires therein—through the study of religious books, the
company of good men, indifference (to enjoyments), practice and yoga or
long contemplation with intentness on any desired (higher) object or
through practising one truth firmly.

"By the repression of the breath through inhalation, etc., by continual
practice therein which does not cause fatigue, and by meditating in a
secluded place, the fluctuations of the mind are arrested. Through the
right realisation of the true nature of the sound which is at the
extreme end of the pronunciation of the syllable <span
class="smallcaps">Om</span> (*viz*., Arḍhamāṭrā), and when sushupṭi
(dreamless sleeping state) is rightly cognised through consciousness,
the fluctuations of prāṇa are repressed. When the passage at the root of
the palate which is like the bell, *viz*., uvula, is closed by the
tongue with effort and when the breath goes up through (the upper hole),
then the fluctuations of prāṇa are stopped. When the consciousness
(samviṭ) is merged in prāṇa, and when through practice the prāṇa goes
through the upper hole into the ḍvāḍasānṭa <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_139) (the twelfth centre) above the palate,
then the fluctuations of prāṇa are stopped. When the eye of
consciousness (*viz*., the spiritual or third eye) becomes calm and
clear so as to be able to distinctly see in the transparent ākāś at a
distance of twelve digits from the tip of his nose, then the
fluctuations of prāṇa are stopped. When the thoughts arising in the mind
are bound up in the calm contemplation of the world of ṭāraka (star or
eye) between one's eyebrows and are (thus) destroyed, then the
fluctuations cease. When the [knowledge](errata.htm#12) which is of the
form of the knowable,

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

which is beneficent and which is untouched by any modifications arises
in one and is known as OM only and no other, then the fluctuations of
prāṇa cease. By the contemplation for a long time of the ākāś which is
in the heart, and by the contemplation of the mind free from vāsānās,
then the fluctuations of prāṇa cease. By these methods and various
others suggested by (one's) thought and by means of the contact of the
many (spiritual) guides, the fluctuations cease.

"Having by contraction opened the door of kunḍalinī, one should force
open the door of moksha. Closing with her mouth the door through which
one ought to go, the kuṇdalinī sleeps spiral in form and coiled up like
a serpent. He who causes this kunḍalinī to move—he is an emancipated
person. If this kunḍalinī were to sleep in the upper part of the neck of
any yogin, it goes towards his emancipation. (If it were to sleep) in
the lower part (of the body), it is for the bondage of the ignorant.
Leaving the two nādis, Idā and the other (Piṅgalā), it (prāṇa) should
move in the Sushumnā. That is the supreme seat of Vishṇu. One should
practise control of breath with the concentration of the mind. The mind
should not be allowed by a clever man to rest on any other thing. One
should not worship Vishṇu during the day alone. One should not worship
Vishṇu during the night alone; but should always worship Him, and should
not worship Him merely during day and night. The wisdom-producing
opening (near uvula) has five passages. O Śāṇdilya this is the
khecharīmuḍrā; practise it. With one who sits in the khecharīmuḍrā, the
vāyu which was flowing before through the left and right nādis now flows
through the middle one (Sushumnā). There is no doubt about it. You
should swallow the air through the void (Sushumnā) between Idā and
Piṅgalā. In that place is khecharīmuḍrā situated, and that is the seat
of Truth. Again that is khecharīmuḍrā which is situated in the
ākāśa-chakra (in the head) in the nirālamba (supportless) seat between
the sun and moon (*viz*., Idā and Piṅgalā). When the tongue has been
lengthened to the length of a kalā (digit) by the incision (of the
frænum lingum) and by rubbing and milking it (*viz*., the tongue), fix
the gaze between the two eyebrows and close the hole in the skull with

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

the tongue reversed. This is khecharīmuḍrā. When the tongue and the
chiṭṭa (mind) both move in the ākāś (khecharī), then the person with his
tongue raised up becomes immortal. Firmly pressing the yoni (perineum)
by the left heel, stretching out the right leg, grasping the feet with
both hands and inhaling the air through the nostrils, practise
kaṇtha-banḍha, <span id="fr_144"></span>[1](#fn_140) retaining the air
upwards. By that, all afflictions are destroyed; then poison is digested
as if it were nectar. Asthma, splenetic disease, the turning up of the
anus and the numbness of the skin are removed. This is the means of
conquering prāṇa and destroying death. Pressing the yoni by the left
heel, place the other foot over the left thigh: inhale the air, rest the
chin on the chest, contract the yoni and contemplate, (as far as
possible), your Āṭmā as situated within your mind. Thus is the direct
perception (of truth) attained.

"Inhaling the prāṇa from outside and filling the stomach with it, centre
the prāṇa with the mind in the middle of the navel, at the tip of the
nose and at the toes during the sanḍhyās (sunset and sunrise) or at all
times. (Thus) the yogin is freed from all diseases and fatigue. By
centring his prāṇa at the tip of his nose, he obtains mastery over the
element of air; by centring it at the middle of his navel, all diseases
are destroyed; by centring it at the toes, his body becomes light. He
who drinks the air (drawn) through the tongue destroys fatigue, thirst
and diseases. He who drinks the air with his mouth during the two
sanḍhyās and the last two hours of the night, within three months the
auspicious Sarasvaṭī (goddess of speech) is present in his vāk (speech)
*viz*., (he becomes eloquent and learned in his speech). In six months,
he is free from all diseases. Drawing the air by the tongue, retain the
air at the root of the tongue. The wise man thus drinking nectar enjoys
all prosperity. Fixing the Āṭmā in the Āṭmā itself in the middle of the
eyebrows, (having inhaled) through Idā and breaking through that
(centre) thirty times, even a sick man is freed from disease. He who
draws the air through the nādis and retains it for twenty-four minutes
in the navel and in

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

the sides of the stomach becomes freed from disease. He who for the
space of a month during the three sanḍhyās (sunset, sunrise, and
midnight or noon) draws the air through the tongue, pierces thirty times
and retains his breath in the middle of his navel, becomes freed from
all fevers and poisons. He who retains the prāṇa together with the mind
at the tip of his nose even for the space of a muhūrṭa (forty-eight
minutes), destroys all sins that were committed by him during one
hundred births.

"Through the samyama of ṭāra (<span class="smallcaps">Om</span>), he
knows all things. By retaining the mind at the tip of his nose, he
acquires a knowledge of Inḍra-world; <span
id="fr_145"></span>[1](#fn_141) below that, he acquires a knowledge of
Agni-(fire) world. <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_141) Through the
samyama of chiṭṭa in the eye, he gets a knowledge of all worlds: in the
ear, a knowledge of Yama-(the god of death) world: <span
id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_141) in the sides of the ear, a knowledge of
Nṛṛṭi-world: <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_141) in the back of it
(the ear), a knowledge of Varuṇa-world: <span
id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_141) in the left ear, a knowledge of
Vāyu-world: <span id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_141) in the throat, a
knowledge of Soma-(moon) world: <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_141) in
the left eye, a knowledge of Śiva-world: <span
id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_141) in the head, a knowledge of
Brahmā-world: <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_141) in the soles of the
feet, a knowledge of Aṭala world: <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_142)
in the feet, a knowledge of Viṭala world: in the ankles, a knowledge of
Niṭala (rather Suṭala) world: in the calves, a knowledge of Suṭala
(rather Ṭalāṭāla world): in the knees, a knowledge of Mahāṭala world: in
the thighs, a knowledge of Rasāṭala world: in the loins, a knowledge of
Ṭalāṭala (rather Pāṭāla) world: in the navel, a knowledge of Bhūrloka
(earth-world): in the stomach, a knowledge of Bhuvar (world): in the
heart, a knowledge of Suvar (world): in the place above the heart, a
knowledge of Mahar world: in the throat, a knowledge of Jana world: in
the middle of the brows, a knowledge of Ṭapa world: in the head, a
knowledge of Saṭya world.

"By conquering ḍharma and aḍharma, one knows the past and the future. By
centring it on the sound of every creature, a knowledge of the cry (or
language) of the

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

animal is produced. By centring it on the sañchiṭa-karma (past karma yet
to be enjoyed), a knowledge of one's previous births arises in him. By
centring it on the mind of another, a knowledge of the mind (or
thoughts) of others is induced. By centring it on the kāya-rūpa (or form
of the body), other forms are seen. By fixing it on the bala (strength),
the strength of persons like Hanūmān is obtained. By fixing it on the
sun, a knowledge of the worlds arises. By fixing it on the moon, a
knowledge of the constellation is produced. By fixing it on the Ḍhruva
(Polar star) a perception of its motion is induced. By fixing it on his
own (Self), one acquires the knowledge of Purusha; on the navel, he
attains a knowledge of the kāya-vyūha (mystical arrangement of all the
particles of the body so as to enable a person to wear out his whole
karma in one life): on the well of the throat, freedom from hunger and
thirst arises: on the Kūrma nādi (which is situated in the well of the
throat), a firmness (of concentration) takes place. By fixing it on the
tārā (pupil of the eye), he obtains the sight of the siḍḍhas (spiritual
personages). By conquering the ākāś in the body, he is able to soar in
the ākāś: (in short) by centring the mind in any place, he conquers the
siḍḍhis appertaining to that place.

"Then comes praṭyāhāra, which is of five kinds. It is the drawing away
of the organs from attaching themselves to the objects of senses.
Contemplating upon everything that one sees as Āṭmā is praṭyāhāra.
Renouncing the fruits of one's daily actions is praṭyāhāra. Turning away
from all objects of sense is praṭyāhāra. Ḍhāraṇā in the eighteen
important places (mentioned below) is praṭyāhāra, (*viz*.,) the feet,
the toes, the ankles, the calves, the knees, the thighs, the anus, the
penis, the navel, the heart, the well of the throat, the palate, the
nose, the eyes, the middle of the brows, the forehead, and the head in
ascending and descending orders.

"Then (comes) ḍhāraṇā. It is of three kinds, (*viz*.,) fixing the mind
in the Āṭmā, bringing the external ākāś into the ākaś of the heart and
contemplating the five mūrṭis (forms of ḍevaṭās) in the five
elements—earth, āpas, fire, vāyu, and ākaś.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

"Then comes ḍhyāna. It is of two kinds, saguṇa (with guṇas or quality)
and nirguṇa (without quality). Saguṇa is the meditation of a mūrṭi.
Nirguṇa is on the reality of Self.

"Samāḍhi is the union of the Jīvāṭmā (individual self) and the Paramāṭmā
(higher self) without the threefold state, (*viz*., the knower, the
known, and the knowledge). It is of the nature of extreme bliss and pure
consciousness.

"Thus ends the first chapter of Śāṇdilya Upanishaḍ."

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> II

Then the Bṛahmarshi Śāṇdilya not obtaining the knowledge of Brahman in
the four Veḍas, approached the Lord Aṭharvan and asked him: "What is it?
Teach me the science of Brahman by which I shall obtain that which is
most excellent."

Aṭharvan replied: "O Śāṇdilya, Brahman is saṭya, vijñāna and ananṭa in
which all this (world) is interwoven, warp-wise and woof-wise, from
which all originated and into which all are absorbed, and which being
known makes everything else known. It is without hands and feet, without
eyes and ears, without tongue or without body, and is unreachable and
undefinable. From which, vāk (speech) and mind return, being unable to
obtain (or reach) It. It is to be cognised by jñāna and yoga. <span
id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_143) From which, prajñā of old sprang. That
which is one and non-dual, that which pervades everything like ākāś,
which is extremely subtle, without a blemish, actionless, saṭ (be-ness)
only, the essence of the bliss of consciousness, beneficent, calm and
immortal and which is beyond. That is Brahman. Thou art That. Know That
by wisdom. He who is the one, the shining, the giver of the power of
Āṭmā, the omniscient, the lord of all, and the inner soul of all beings,
who lives in all beings, who is hidden in all beings and the source of
all beings, who is reachable only through yoga and who creates, supports
and destroys everything—He is Āṭmā. Know the several worlds in the Āṭma.
Do not grieve, O knower of Āṭmā, thou shalt reach the end of pains."

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> III

Then Śāṇdilya questioned Aṭharvan thus: "From the Brahman that is <span
class="smallcaps">Om</span>, imperishable, actionless, beneficial, saṭ
(be-ness) only and supreme, how did this universe arise? How does it
exist in It? And how is it absorbed in It? Please solve me this doubt."

Aṭharvan replied: The Supreme Brahman, the Truth, is the imperishable
and the actionless. Then from the formless Brahman, three forms (or
aspects) arose, (*viz*.,) nishkalā (partless,) sakalā (with parts), and
sakalā-nishkalā (with and without parts). That which is saṭya, vijñāna
and ānanḍa, That which is actionless, without any impurity, omnipresent,
extremely subtle, having faces in every direction, undefinable and
immortal—that is His nishkalā aspect. Maheśvara (the great Lord) who is
black and yellow rules, with aviḍyā, mūlaprakṛṭi or māyā that is red,
white, and black, and that is co-existent with Him. This is his
sakalā-nishkalā aspect. Then the Lord desired (or willed) by his
spiritual wisdom (thus): May I become many?; may I bring forth? Then
from this Person who was contemplating and whose desires are fulfilled,
three letters sprang up. Three vyāhṛṭis, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_144) the three-footed Gāyaṭrī, <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_144) the three Veḍas, the three ḍevas, the
three varṇas (colours or castes) and the three fires sprang. That
Supreme Lord who is endowed with all kinds of wealth, who is all
pervading, who is situated in the hearts of all beings, who is the Lord
of māyā and whose form is māyā—He is Brahma. He is Vishṇu: He is Ruḍra:
He is Inḍra: He is all the ḍevas: He is all the bhūṭas (elements or
beings): He only is before: He only is behind: He only is on our left:
He only is on our right: He only is below: He only is above: He only is
the all. That form of him as Ḍaṭṭāṭreya, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_145) who sports with his Śakṭi, who is kind
to his devotees, who is brilliant as fire, resembling the petals or a
red lotus and is of four hands, who is mild and shines sinlessly—this is
His sakalā form."

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

Then Śāṇdilya questioned Aṭharvan, "O Lord, that which is Saṭ only and
the essence of the bliss of consciousness—why is He called Parabrahman?"

Aṭharvan replied: "Because He increases *bṛhaṭi* and causes to increase
everything (*bṛhanṭi*); so he is called Parabrahman. Why is He called
Āṭmā? Since He obtains (*āpnoṭi*) everything, since He takes back
everything and since He is everything, so he is called Āṭmā. Why is He
called Maheśvara (the great Lord)? Since by the sound of the words
Mahaṭ-Īśa (the great Lord) and by His own power, the great Lord governs
everything. Why is He called Ḍaṭṭāṭreya? Because the Lord being
extremely pleased with Aṭri (Ṛshi) who was performing a most difficult
penance and who had expressed his desire to see Him who is light itself,
offered Himself (ḍaṭṭa) as their son, and because the woman Anasūyā was
his mother and Aṭri was his father. Therefore he who knows the (secret)
meaning knows everything. He who always contemplates on the supreme that
It is himself becomes a knower of Brahman. Here these ślokas (stanzas)
occur (to memory). 'He who contemplates always the Lord of Lords and the
ancient thus—as Ḍaṭṭāṭreya, the beneficent, the calm, of the colour of
sapphire, one who delights in his own māyā and the Lord who has shaken
off everything, as naked and as one whose whole body is besmeared with
the holy ashes, who has matted hair, who is the Lord of all, who has
four arms, who is bliss in appearance, whose eyes are like full-blown
lotus, who is the store of jñāna and yoga, who is the spiritual
instructor of all the worlds and who is dear to all the yogins, and one
who is merciful towards His devotees, who is the witness of all and who
is worshipped by all the siḍḍhas is freed from all sins and will attain
(the Spirit).'

"<span class="smallcaps">Om</span> Saṭyam (truth). Thus ends the
Upanishaḍ."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[173:1](tmu24.htm#fr_121) Under yama and niyama
Paṭañjali has five kinds only.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[175:1](tmu24.htm#fr_122) In the explanation
one more posture is introduced.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[176:1](tmu24.htm#fr_123) In Varāha Upanishaḍ
and later on, this is named "Kanḍha". Herein is described the web of
life.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[177:1](tmu24.htm#fr_124) This should be
perhaps—between Piṅgalā and Payasvinī is Pūshā.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[177:2](tmu24.htm#fr_125) Yaśasvinī should be
"Śāṅkhinī."

<span id="fn_125"></span>[178:1](tmu24.htm#fr_126) Here the process of
digestion of food is described.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[179:1](tmu24.htm#fr_127) Both by physical
protection and that of manṭras to scare away evil spirits.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[179:2](tmu24.htm#fr_128) He is the son of
Śiva, having an elephant's face symbolical of wisdom. He is considered
as the remover of all obstacles, and as such is he invoked and
worshipped in the beginning of every religious rite.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[179:3](tmu24.htm#fr_132) Idā and Piṅgalā are
the two nādis upon which our breaths alternate from the left nostril to
the right and *vice versa* and between which is Sushumnā. Hence these
two terms are applied to and mean the left and right nostrils.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[179:4](tmu24.htm#fr_130) According to
Yogaṭaṭṭva-Upanishaḍ, a māṭrā is the time occupied in circling the knee
once with the palm of the hand and filliping the fingers.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[179:5](tmu24.htm#fr_131) According to
Varāha-Upanishaḍ the seat of fire is the mūlāḍhāra (sacral plexus).

<span id="fn_131"></span>[179:6](tmu24.htm#fr_133) The original is not
clear. It says, "For the space of 3, 4, 3, 4, 7, 3 and 4 months" which
when added becomes 28.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[180:1](tmu24.htm#fr_134) According to the
Manṭra Sāsṭra, Prāṇāyāma is performed through the letters of Samskṛṭ
alphabet, the vowels corresponding to inspiration, etc.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[180:2](tmu24.htm#fr_137) These are the
Goddesses representing Śakṭi and being the wives of Brahmā, Vishṇu, and
Ruḍra.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[181:1](tmu24.htm#fr_138) This passage clearly
indicates the dreadful consequences of the performance of Prāṇāyāma
rashly and without a guru.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[181:2](tmu24.htm#fr_139) As already pointed
out, the Sushumnā nādi is between Idā and Piṅgalā. If Prāṇa which
alternates ordinarily between Idā and Piṅgalā is restrained by long
<span id="page_182">p. 182</span> kumbhaka, then it along with the soul,
its attendant will enter the Sushumnā (central nādi) at one of the three
places where it yields space for entrance through such restraint of
breath and in the navel, from the Sarasvaṭī nādi on the west. After such
entry it is that the yogin becomes dead to the world, being in the state
called trance.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[182:1](tmu24.htm#fr_140) Through such and
other methods of Prāṇāyāma prescribed in this passage and the subsequent
ones, chronic diseases that defy European doctors will be rooted out.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[182:2](tmu24.htm#fr_141) He becomes an
Ūrḍhva-rēṭas—his vital energy goes up.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[183:1](tmu24.htm#fr_142) There are six centres
of energy in the body (mūlāḍhāra, sacral plexus, etc.), which are
presided over by six sakṭis (goddesses of energy).

<span id="fn_139"></span>[184:1](tmu24.htm#fr_143) This twelfth centre
is identified by some with the pituitary body in the head, there being
six centres in the brain besides the six below the brain.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[186:1](tmu24.htm#fr_144) Lit., binding the air
up the throat.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[187:1](tmu24.htm#fr_153) These correspond
severally to the several directions and the ḍevaṭās presiding over them,
corresponding respectively to east, south-east, south, southwest, west,
north-west, north, and north-east.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[187:2](tmu24.htm#fr_154) The fourteen worlds,
lokas and ṭalas are referred to; the order in ṭalas seems to be wrong,
Ṭalaṭala should be in the middle.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[189:1](tmu24.htm#fr_155) Some texts leave the
words "and yoga".

<span id="fn_144"></span>[190:1](tmu24.htm#fr_157) These relate to the
Gāyaṭrī manṭras depending upon sound.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[190:2](tmu24.htm#fr_158) According to
Bhāgavaṭa, he is one of the minor incarnations of Vishṇu.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 23. Yogaṭaṭṭva-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu25)

</div>
