<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu26)  [Next](tmu28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

### HAMSA <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_154)-UPANISHAḌ

### of

### ŚUKLA-YAJURVEḌA

<span class="smallcaps">Gauṭama</span> addressed Sanaṭkumāra thus: "O
Lord, thou art the knower of all ḍharmas and art well versed in all
Śāsṭras, pray tell me the means by which I may obtain a knowledge of
Brahmaviḍyā. Sanaṭkumāra replied thus:

"Hear, O Gauṭama, that Ṭaṭṭva as expounded by Pārvaṭī after inquiring
into all ḍharmas and ascertaining Śiva's opinion. This treatise on the
nature of Hamsa which gives the fruit of bliss and salvation and which
is like a treasure to the yogin, is (a) very mystic (science) and should
not be revealed (to the public).

"Now we shall explain the true nature of Hamsa and Paramahamsa for the
benefit of a brahmachārin (a seeker after Brahman or celibate), who has
his desires under control, is devoted to his guru and always
contemplates (as) Hamsa, and realises thus: It (Hamsa) is permeating all
bodies like fire (or heat) in all kinds of wood or oil in all kinds of
gingelly seeds. Having known (It) thus, one does not meet with death.

"Having contracted the anus (with the heels pressed against it), having
raised the vāyu (breath) from (Mūla) <span
id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_155) Ādhāra

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (chakra), having
made circuit thrice round Svāḍhishthāna, having gone to Maṇipūraka,
having crossed Anāhata, having controlled Prāṇa in Viśuḍḍhi and then
having reached Ājñā, one contemplates in Brahmaranḍhra (in the head),
and having meditated there always 'I am of three māṭrās,' cognises (his
Self) and becomes formless. The Śisna <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_156) (penis) has two sides (left and right
from head to foot). This is that Paramahamsa (Supreme Hamsa or Higher
Self) having the resplendence of crores of suns and by whom all this
world is pervaded.

"It (this Hamsa which has buḍḍhi as vehicle) <span
id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_157) has eightfold vṛṭṭi. (When it is) in the
eastern <span id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_158) petal, there is the
inclination (in a person) to virtuous actions; in the south-eastern
petal, there arise sleep, laziness, etc.; in the southern, there is the
inclination to cruelty; in the south-western, there is the inclination
to sins; in the western, there is the inclination to sensual sport; in
the north-western, there arise the desire of walking, and others; in the
northern, there arises the desire of lust; in the north-eastern, there
arises the desire of amassing money; in the middle (or the interspaces
between the petals), there is the indifference to material pleasures. In
the filament (of the lotus), there arises the waking state; in the
pericarp, there arises the svapna (dreaming state); in the bīja (seed of
pericarp), there arises the sushupṭi (dreamless sleeping state); when
leaving the lotus, there is the ṭurya (fourth state). When Hamsa is
absorbed in Nāḍa (spiritual sound), the state beyond the fourth is
reached. Nāḍa (which is at the end of sound and beyond speech and mind)
is like a pure crystal extending from (Mūla) Ādhāra to Brahmaranḍhra. It
is that which is spoken of as Brahma and Paramāṭmā.

"(Here the performance of Ajapā Gāyaṭrī is given).

"Now Hamsa is the ṛshi; the metre is Avyakṭā Gāyaṭrī; Paramahamsa is the
ḍevaṭā (or presiding deity) 'Ham' is the bīja; 'Sa' is the śakṭī; So’ham
is the kīlaka. <span id="fr_173"></span>[4](#fn_159) Thus there are

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

six. There are 21, 600 Hamsas (or breaths) <span
id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_160) in a day and night. (Salutation <span
id="fr_175"></span>[2](#fn_161) to) Surya, Soma, Nirañjana (the
stainless) and Nirābhāsa (the universeless). Ajapā manṭra. (May) the
bodiless and subtle one guide <span id="fr_176"></span>[3](#fn_162) (or
illuminate my understanding). Vaushat to Agni-Soma. Then Aṅganyāsas and
Karanyāsas occur (or should be performed after the manṭras as they are
performed before the manṭras) in the heart and other (seats). Having
done so, one should contemplate upon Hamsa as the Āṭmā in his heart.
Agni and Soma are its wings (right and left sides); Omkāra is its head;
Ukāra and binḍu are the three eyes <span id="fr_177"></span>[4](#fn_163)
and face respectively; Ruḍra and Ruḍrāṇī (or Ruḍra's wife) are the feet
kanthaṭa (or the realisation of the oneness of jīvāṭmā or Hamsa, the
lower self with Paramāṭmā or Paramahamsa, the Higher Self) is done in
two ways, (samprajñāṭa <span id="fr_178"></span>[5](#fn_164) and
asamprajñāṭa).

"After that, Unmanī <span id="fr_179"></span>[6](#fn_165) is the end of
the Ajapā (manṭra). Having thus reflected upon manas by means of this
(Hamsa), one hears Nāḍa after the uttering of this japa (manṭra) a crore
of times. It (Nāḍa) is (begun to be heard as) of ten kinds. The first is
chini (like the sound of that word); the second is chini-chini; the
third is the sound of bell; the fourth is that of conch; the fifth is
that of ṭanṭri (lute); the sixth is that sound of ṭāla (cymbals); the
seventh is that of flute; the eighth is that of bheri (drum); the ninth
is that of mṛḍaṅga (double drum); and the tenth is that of clouds
(*viz*., thunder). He may experience the tenth without the first nine
sounds (through the initiation of

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

a guru). In the first stage, his body becomes chini-chini; in the
second, there is the (bhañjana) breaking (or affecting) in the body; in
the third, there is the (bheḍana) piercing; in the fourth, the head
shakes; in the fifth, the palate produces saliva; in the sixth, nectar
is attained; in the seventh, the knowledge of the hidden (things in the
world) arises; in the eighth, Parāvāk is heard; in the ninth, the body
becomes invisible and the pure divine eye is developed; in the tenth, he
attains Parabrahman in the presence of (or with) Āṭmā which is Brahman.
After that, when manas is destroyed, when it which is the source of
saṅkalpa and vikalpa disappears, owing to the destruction of these two,
and when virtues and sins are burnt away, then he shines as Saḍāśiva of
the nature of Śakṭi pervading everywhere, being effulgence in its very
essence, the immaculate, the eternal, the stainless and the most
quiescent Om. Thus is the teaching of the Veḍas; and thus is the
Upanishaḍ."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[212:1](tmu27.htm#fr_168) This word "Hamsa" is
very mysterious and has manifold meanings according to different
standpoints. It is composed of Ham (or Aham) and Sa (ha), which mean "I"
(am) "that". In its highest sense, it is Kālahamsa (or Parabrahman). It
is also Brahmā when he has Hamsa (or swan) as the vehicle or
Hamsa-vāhana. When Hamsa which is the manifestation of Prāṇa is applied
to the human breath, we are said to exhale with Ha and to inhale with
Sa. It is also called Ajapā-Gāyaṭrī.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[212:2](tmu27.htm#fr_169) The different chakras
of those that are above the anus, in the genitals, navel, heart, and
throat, between the eyebrows and in the head.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[213:1](tmu27.htm#fr_170) This is omitted in
the Calcutta edition and seemingly makes no sense here.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[213:2](tmu27.htm#fr_171) This is how a
commentator explains.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[213:3](tmu27.htm#fr_172) This refers to the
different petals in the heart. *Vide* the same in Nāraḍa-Parivrājaka and
Ḍhyānabinḍu Upanishaḍs.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[213:4](tmu27.htm#fr_173) Kīlaka means wedge.
In the Ajapā manṭra 'Hamsa-so’ham', So’ham is the wedge to which the
whole manṭra is fastened.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[214:1](tmu27.htm#fr_174) One commentator gives
the table for 21,600 thus: 60 breaths make one Prāṇa; 6 Prāṇas, one
nādi; and 60 nādis, one day and night.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[214:2](tmu27.htm#fr_175) The words are:
Sūryāya, Somāya, Nirañjanāya, Nirabhāsāya. It is with the pronunciation
of these words that the different places in the body are touched,
*viz*., Aṅganyāsas and Karanyāsas are performed. The first word is
pointed to the heart with the thumb; the second, to the head, and the
third, to the hair of the head. With the last, a kavacha (armour) is
made by circling the fingers round the head and then circling one hand
over another. This process is carried on again after the pronunciation
of Ajapā manṭra which follows. Here Soma (moon) is that which is united
with Thai or the emblem of the union of the lower and higher Selves.
Sūrya or Sun is the causer of the state of one-ness.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[214:3](tmu27.htm#fr_176) As it stands, it
means "the bodiless, the subtle and the guide." The original is Aṭanu
Sukshmam Prachoḍayāt.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[214:4](tmu27.htm#fr_177) The three eyes are
the two eyes commonly now in use with the Divine eye.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[214:5](tmu27.htm#fr_178) Contemplation with an
object as seed and the seedless one.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[214:6](tmu27.htm#fr_179) A state above manas
or when manas is transcended.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. Amṛṭanāḍa-Upanishaḍ of Kṛshṇa-Yajurveḍa](tmu28)

</div>
