<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmu31)  [Next](tmu33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0031574GO/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thirty Minor Upanishads*, tr. by K. Narayanasvami Aiyar, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

### YOGAKUṆDALĪ <span id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_232)-UPANISHAḌ

### OF

### KṚSHṆA-YAJURVEḌA

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> I

<span class="smallcaps">Chiṭṭa</span> <span
id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_233) has two causes, vāsanās and (prāṇa)
vāyu. If-one of them is controlled, then both are controlled. Of these
two, a person should control (prāṇa) vāyu always through moderate food,
postures, and thirdly śakṭi-chāla. <span id="fr_249"></span>[3](#fn_234)
I shall explain the nature of these. Listen to it, O Gauṭama. One should
take a sweet and nutritious food, <span id="fr_250"></span>[4](#fn_235)
leaving a fourth (of his stomach) unfilled) in order to please Śiva (the
patron of yogins). This is called moderate food. Posture herein required
is of two kinds, paḍma and vajra. Placing the two heels over the two
opposite thighs (respectively) is the paḍma (posture) which is the
destroyer of all sins. Placing one heel below the mūlakanḍa <span
id="fr_251"></span>[5](#fn_236) and the other over it and sitting with
the neck, body and head erect is the vajra posture. The śakṭi (mentioned
above) is only kunḍalinī. A wise man should take it up from its place
(*viz*., the navel, upwards) to the middle of the eyebrows. This is
called śakṭi-chāla. In practising it, two things are necessary,

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Sarasvatīchālana <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_237) and the restraint
of prāṇa (breath). Then through practice, kunḍalinī (which is spiral)
becomes straightened. Of these two, I shall explain to you first
Sarasvaṭī-chālaṇa. It is said by the wise of old that Sarasvaṭī is no
other than Arunḍhaṭī. <span id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_238) It is only
by rousing her up that kunḍalinī is roused. When prāṇa (breath) is
passing through (one's) Idā (left nostril), he should assume firmly
paḍma-posture and should lengthen (inwards) 4 digits the ākāś of 12
digits. <span id="fr_254"></span>[3](#fn_239) Then the wise man should
bind the (sarasvaṭī) nādi by means of this lengthened (breath) and
holding firmly together(both his ribs near the navel) by means of the
forefingers and thumbs of both hands, (one hand on each side) should
stir up kunḍalinī with all his might from right to left often and often;
for a period of two muhūrṭas (48 minutes), he should be stirring it up
fearlessly. Then he should draw up a little when kunḍalinī enters
sushumnā. By this means, kunḍalinī enters the mouth of sushumnā. Prāṇa
(also) having left (that place) enters of itself the sushumnā (along
with kunḍalinī). By compressing the neck, one should also expand the
navel. Then by shaking sarasvaṭī, prāṇa goes above (to) the chest.
Through the contraction of the neck, prays, goes above from the chest.
Sarasvaṭī who has sound in her womb should be shaken (or thrown into
vibration) each day. Therefore by merely shaking it, one is cured of
diseases. Gulma (a splenetic disease), jaloḍara (dropsy), plīha (a
splenetic disease) and all other diseases arising within the belly, are
undoubtedly destroyed by shaking this Śakṭi.

I shall now briefly describe to you prāṇāyāma. Prāṇa is the vāyu that
moves in the body and its restraint within is known as kumbhaka. It is
of two kinds, sahiṭa and kevala. <span id="fr_255"></span>[4](#fn_240)
One should practise sahiṭa till he gets kevala. There are four bheḍas
(lit., piercings or divisions) *viz*., sūrya, ujjāyī, śiṭalī, and
bhasṭrī.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The kumbhaka
associated with these four is called sahiṭa kumbhaka.

Being seated in the paḍma posture upon a pure and pleasant seat which
gives ease and is neither too high nor too low, and in a place which is
pure, lovely and free from pebbles, etc., and which for the length of a
bow is free from cold, fire, and water, one should shake (or throw into
vibration) Sarasvaṭī; slowly inhaling the breath from outside, as long
as he desires, through the right nostril, he should exhale it through
the left nostril. He should exhale it after purifying his skull (by
forcing the breath up). This destroys the four kinds of evils caused by
vāyu as also by intestinal worms. This should be done often and it is
this which is spoken of as sūryabheḍa.

Closing the mouth and drawing up slowly the breath as before with the
nose through both the nādis (or nostrils) and retaining it in the space
between the heart and the neck, one should exhale it through the left
nostril. This destroys the heat caused in the head as well as the phlegm
in the throat. It removes all diseases, purifies his body and increases
the (gastric) fire within. It removes also the evils arising in the
nādis, jaloḍara (water-belly or dropsy) and ḍhāṭus. This kumbhaka is
called ujjāyī and may be practised (even) when walking or standing.

Drawing up the breath as before through the tongue with (the hissing
sound of) स and retaining it as before, the wise man should slowly
exhale it through (both) the nostrils. This is called śīṭalī kumbhaka
and destroys diseases, such as gulma, plīha, consumption, bile, fever,
thirst, and poison.

Seated in the paḍma posture with belly and neck erect, the wise man
should close the mouth and exhale with care through the nostrils. Then
he should inhale a little with speed up to the heart, so that the breath
may fill the space with noise between the neck and skull. Then he should
exhale in the same way and inhale often and often. Just as the bellows
of a smith are moved (*viz*., stuffed with air within and then the air
is let out), so he should move the air within his body. If the body gets
tired, then he should inhale through the right nostril. If his belly is
full of vāyu, then he should press well his nostrils with

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

all his fingers except his forefinger, and performing kumbhaka as
before, should exhale through the left nostril. This frees one from
diseases of fire in (or inflammation of) the throat, increases the
gastric fire within, enables one to know the kunḍalinī, produces purity
removing sins, gives happiness and pleasure and destroys phlegm which is
the bolt (or obstacle) to the door at the mouth of brahmanādi (*viz*.,
sushumnā). It pierces also the three granṭhis <span
id="fr_256"></span>[1](#fn_241) (or knots) differentiated through the
three guṇas. This kumbhaka is known as bhasṭrī and should especially be
performed.

Through these four ways when kumbhaka is near (or is about to be
performed.), the sinless yogin should practise the three bandhas. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[2](#fn_242) The first is called mūlabanḍha. The
second is called uddiyāṇa, and the third is jālanḍhara. Their nature
will be thus described. Apāna (breath) which has a downward tendency is
forced up by one bending down. This process is called mūlabanḍha. When
apāna is raised up and reaches the sphere of agni (fire), then the flame
of agni grows long, being blown about by vāyu. Then agni and apāna come
to (or commingle with) prāṇa in a heated state. Through this agni which
is very fiery, there arises in the body the flaming (or the fire) which
rouses the sleeping kunḍalinī through its heat. Then this kunḍalinī
makes a hissing noise, becomes erect like a serpent beaten with stick
and enters the hole of brahmanādi (sushumnā). Therefore yogins should
daily practise mūlabanḍha often. Uddiyāṇa should be performed at the end
of kumbhaka and at the beginning of expiration. Because prāṇa uddīyaṭē
(*viz*., goes up) the sushumnā in this banḍha, therefore it called
uddiyāṇa by the yogins. Being seated in the vajra posture, and holding
firmly the two toes by the two hands, he should press at the kanḍa and
at the place near the two ankles. Then he should gradually upbear the
ṭāna <span id="fr_258"></span>[3](#fn_243) (thread or nādi) which is on
the western side first to uḍara (the upper part of the abdomen above the
navel), then to the heart and then to the neck. When prāṇa reaches the
sanḍhi (junction) of navel, slowly it removes

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

the impurities (or diseases) in the navel. Therefore this should be
frequently practised. The banḍha called jālanḍhara should be practised
at the end of kumbhaka. This jālanḍhara is of the form of the
contraction of the neck and is an impediment to the passage of vāyu
(upwards). When the neck is contracted at once by bending downwards (so
that the chin may touch the breast), prāṇa goes through brahmanādi on
the western ṭāna in the middle. Assuming the seat as mentioned before,
one should stir up sarasvaṭī and control prāṇa. On the first day
kumbhaka should be done four times; on the second day it should be done
ten times, and then five times separately; on the third day, twenty
times will do, and afterwards kumbhaka should be performed with the
three banḍhas and with an increase of five times each day.

Diseases are generated in one's body through the following causes,
*viz*., sleeping in daytime, late vigils over night, excess of sexual
intercourse, moving in crowd, the checking of the discharge of urine and
fæces, the evil of unwholesome food and laborious mental operation with
prāṇa. If a yogin is afraid of such diseases (when attacked by them), he
says, "my diseases have arisen from my practice of yoga." Then he will
discontinue this practice. This is said to be the first obstacle to yoga
The second (obstacle) is doubt; the third is carelessness; the fourth,
laziness; the fifth, sleep; the sixth, the not leaving of objects (of
sense); the seventh, erroneous perception; the eighth, sensual objects;
the ninth, want of faith; <span id="fr_259"></span>[1](#fn_244) and the
tenth, the failure to attain the truth of yoga. A wise man should
abandon these ten obstacles after great deliberation. The practice of
prāṇāyāma should be performed daily with the mind firmly fixed on Truth.
Then chiṭṭa is absorbed in sushumnā, and prāṇa (therefore) never moves.
When the impurities (of chiṭṭa) are thus removed and prāṇa is absorbed
in sushumnā, he becomes a (true) yogin. Apāna, which has a downward
tendency should be raised up with effort by the contraction (of the
anus), and this is spoken of as mūlabanḍhā. Apāna thus raised up mixes
with agni and

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

then they go up quickly to the seat of prāṇa. Then prāṇa and apāna
uniting with one another go to kunḍalinī, which is coiled up and asleep.
Kuṇdalinī being heated by agni and stirred up by vāyu, extends her body
in the mouth of sushumnā, pierces the brahmagranṭhi formed of rajas, and
flashes at once like lightning at the mouth of sushumnā. Then it goes up
at once through vishṇūgranṭhi to the heart. Then it goes up through
ruḍragranṭhi and above it to the middle of the eyebrows; having pierced
this place, it goes up to the maṇdala (sphere) of the moon. It dries up
the moisture produced by the moon in the anāhaṭachakra having sixteen
petals. <span id="fr_260"></span>[1](#fn_245) When the blood is agitated
through the speed of prāṇa, it becomes bile from its contact with the
sun, after which it goes to the sphere of the moon where it becomes of
the nature of the flow of pure phlegm. How does it (blood) which is very
cold become hot when it flows there? (Since) at the same time the
intense white form of moon is speedily heated. <span
id="fr_261"></span>[2](#fn_246) Then being agitated, it goes up. Through
taking in this, chiṭṭa which was moving amidst sensual objects
externally, is restrained there. The novice enjoying this high state
attains peace and becomes devoted to Āṭmā. Kuṇdalinī assumes the
eight <span id="fr_262"></span>[3](#fn_247) forms of prakṛṭi (matter)
and attains Śiva by encircling him and dissolves itself in Śiva. Thus
rajas-śukla <span id="fr_263"></span>[4](#fn_248) (seminal fluid) which
rises up goes to Śiva along with maruṭ (vāyu); prāṇa and apāna which are
always produced become equal. Prāṇas flow in all things, great and
small, describable or indescribable, as fire in gold. Then this body
which is āḍhibhauṭika (composed of elements) becomes āḍhiḍaivaṭa
(relating to a tutelar deity) and is thus purified. Then it attains the
stage of aṭivāhika. <span id="fr_264"></span>[5](#fn_249) Then the body
being freed from the inert state

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

becomes stainless and of the nature of Chiṭ. In it, the aṭivāhika
becomes the chief of all, being of the nature of That. Like the
conception of the snake in a rope, so the idea of the release from wife
and samsāra is the delusion of time. Whatever appears is unreal.
Whatever is absorbed is unreal. Like the illusory conception of silver
in the mother-of-pearl, so is the idea of man and woman. The microcosm
and the macrocosm are one and the same; so also the liṅga and sūṭrāṭma,
svabhāva (substance) and form and the self-resplendent light and
Chiḍāṭmā.

The Śakṭi named kunḍalinī, which is like a thread in the lotus and is
resplendent, is biting with the upper end of its hood (namely, mouth) at
the root of the lotus the mūlakanḍa. Taking hold of its tail with its
mouth, it is in contact with the hole of brahmaranḍhra (of sushumnā). If
a person seated in the pad ma posture and having accustomed himself to
the contraction of his anus makes his vāyu go upward with the mind
intent on kumbhaka, then agni comes to svāḍhishthāna flaming, owing to
the blowing of vāyu. From the blowing of vāyu and agni, the chief
(kunḍalinī) pierces open the brahmagranṭhi and then vishṇugranṭhi. Then
it pierces ruḍragranṭhi, after that, (all) the six lotuses (or
plexuses). Then Śakṭi is happy with Śiva in sahasrāra kamala (1,000
lotuses’ seat or pineal gland). This should be known as the highest
avasṭhā (state) and it alone is the giver of final beatitude. Thus ends
the first chapter.

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> II

I shall hereafter describe the science called khecharī which is such
that one who knows it is freed from old age and death in this world. One
who is subject to the pains of death, disease and old age should, O
sage, on knowing this science make his mind firm and practise khecharī.
One should regard that person as his guru on earth who knows khecharī,
the destroyer of old age and death, both from knowing the meaning of
books and practice, and should perform it with all his heart. The
science of khecharī is not easily attainable, as also its practice.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Its practice and
melana <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_250) are not accomplished
simultaneously. Those that are bent upon practice alone do not get
melana. Only some get the practice, O Brahman, after several births, but
melana is not obtained even after a hundred births. Having undergone the
practice after several births, some (solitary) yogin gets the melana in
some future birth as the result of his practice. When a yogin gets this
melana from the mouth of his guru, then he obtains the siḍḍhis mentioned
in the several books. When a man gets this melana through books and the
significance, then he attains the state of Śiva freed from all rebirth.
Even gurus may not be able to know this without books. Therefore this
science is very difficult to master. An ascetic should wander over the
earth so long as he fails to get this science, and when this science is
obtained, then he has got the siḍḍhi in his hand (*viz*., mastered the
psychical powers). Therefore one should regard as Achyuṭa (Vishṇu) the
person who imparts the melana, as also him who gives out the science. He
should regard as Śiva him who teaches the practice. Having got this
science from me, you should not reveal it to others. Therefore one who
knows this should protect it with all his efforts (*viz*., should never
give it out except to persons who deserve it). O Brahman, one should go
to the place where lives the guru, who is able to teach the divine yoga
and there learn from him the science khecharī, and being then taught
well by him, should at first practise it carefully. By means of this
science, a person will attain the siḍḍhi of khecharī. Joining with
khecharī śakṭi (*viz*., kunḍalinī śakṭi) by means of the (science) of
khecharī which contains the bīja (seed of letter) of khecharī, one
becomes the lord of khecharas (Ḍevas) and lives always amongst them.
Khecharī bīja (seed-letter) is spoken of as agni encircled with water
and as the abode of khecharas (Ḍevas). Through this yoga, siḍḍhi is
mastered. The ninth (bīja) letter of somāmśa (soma or moon part) should
also be pronounced in the reverse order. Then a letter composed of three
amśas of the form of moon has been described; and after that, the eighth
letter should be pronounced in

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

the reverse order; then consider it as the supreme and its beginning as
the fifth, and this is said to the kūta (horns) of the several bhinnas
(or parts) of the moon. <span id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_251) This which
tends to the accomplishment of all yogas, should be learnt through the
initiation of a guru. He who recites this twelve times every day, will
not get even in sleep that māyā (illusion) which is born in his body and
which is the source of all vicious deeds. He who recites this five lakhs
of times with very great care—to him the science of khecharī will reveal
itself. All obstacles vanish and the ḍevas are pleased. The destruction
of valīpaliṭa (*viz*., wrinkle and greyness of hair) will take place
without doubt. Having acquired this great science, one should practise
it afterwards. If not, O Brahman, he will suffer without getting any
siḍḍhi in the path of khecharī. If one does not get this nectarlike
science in this practice, he should get it in the beginning of melana
and recite it always; (else) one who is without it never gets siḍḍhi. As
soon as he gets this science, he should practise it; and then the sage
will soon get the siḍḍhi. Having drawn out the tongue from the root of
the palate, a knower of Āṭmā should clear the impurity (of the tongue)
for seven days according to the advice of his guru. He should take a
sharp knife which is oiled and cleaned and which resembles the leaf of
the plant snuhī ("Euphorbia antiquorum") and should cut for the space of
a hair (the frænum Lingui). Having powdered sainḍhava (rock-salt) and
paṭhya (sea-salt), he should apply it to the place. On the seventh day,
he should again cut for the space of a hair. Thus for the space of six
months, he should continue it always gradually with great care. In six
months, Śiro-banḍha (banḍha at the head), <span
id="fr_267"></span>[1](#fn_251) which is at the root of the tongue is
destroyed. Then the yogin who knows timely action should encircle with
Śiro-vasṭra (lit., the cloth of the head) the Vāk-Īśvarī (the deity
presiding over speech) and should draw (it) up. Again by daily drawing
it up for six months, it comes, O sage, as far as the middle of the
eyebrows and obliquely up to the opening of the ears; having gradually
practised, it goes to the root of the chin. Then in

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

three years, it goes up easily to the end of the hair (of the head) It
goes up obliquely to Śākha <span id="fr_268"></span>[1](#fn_252) and
downwards to the well of the throat. In another three years, it occupies
brahmaranḍhra and stops there without doubt. Crosswise it goes up to the
top of the head and downwards to the well of the throat. Gradually it
opens the great adamantine door in the head. The rare science (of
khecharī) bīja has been explained before. One should perform the six
aṅgas (parts) of this manṭra by pronouncing it in six different
intonations. One should do this in order to attain all the siḍḍhis; and
this karanyāsam <span id="fr_269"></span>[2](#fn_253) should be done
gradually and not all at a time, since the body of one who does it all
at once will soon decay. Therefore it should be practised, O best of
sages, little by little. When the tongue goes to the brahmaranḍhra
through the outer path, then one should place the tongue after moving
the bolt of Brahma which cannot be mastered by the ḍevas. On doing this
for three years with the point of the finger, he should make the tongue
enter within: then it enters brahmaḍvāra (or hole). On entering the
brahmaḍvāra, one should practise maṭhana (churning) well. Some
intelligent men attain siḍḍhi even without maṭhana. One who is versed in
khecharī manṭra accomplishes it without maṭhana. By doing the japa and
maṭhana, one reaps the fruits soon. By connecting a wire made of gold,
silver or iron with the nostrils by means of a thread soaked in milk,
one should restrain his breath in his heart and seated in a convenient
posture with his eyes concentrated between his eyebrows, he should
perform maṭhana slowly. In six months, the state of maṭhana becomes
natural like sleep in children. And it is not advisable to do maṭhana
always. It should be done (once) only in every month. A yogin should not
revolve his tongue in the path. After doing this for twelve years,
siḍḍhi is surely obtained. Then he sees the whole universe in his body
as not being different from Āṭmā. This path of the ūrḍhvakuṇdalinī
(higher kunḍalinī), O chief of kings, conquers the macrocosm. Thus ends
the second chapter.

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> III

Melanamanṭra.—(Hrīm), (bham), (sam), (sham), (pham), (sam), and (ksham).

The lotus-born (Brahma) said:

O Śaṅkara, (among) new moon (the first day of the lunar fortnight) and
full moon, which is spoken of as its (manṭra's) sign? In the first day
of lunar fortnight and during new moon and full moon (days), it should
be made firm and there is no other way (or time). A man longs for an
object through passion and is infatuated with passion for objects. One
should always leave these two and seek the Nirañjana (stainless). He
should abandon everything else which he thinks is favourable to himself.
Keeping the manas in the midst of śakṭi, and śakṭi in the midst of
manas, one should look into manas by means [of](errata.htm#21) manas.
Then he leaves even the highest stage. Manas alone is the binḍu, the
cause of creation and preservation. It is only through manas that binḍu
is produced, like the curd from milk. The organs of manas is not that
which is situated in the middle of banḍhana. Banḍhana is there where
Śakṭi is between the sun and moon. Having known sushumnā and its bheḍa
(piercing) and making the vāyu go in the middle, one should stand in the
seat of binḍu, and close the nostrils. Having known vāyu, the
above-mentioned binḍu and the saṭṭva-prakṛṭi as well as the six chakras,
one should enter the sukha-maṇdala (*viz*., the sahasrāra or pineal
gland, the sphere of happiness). There are six chakras. Mūlāḍhāra is in
the anus; svāḍhishthāna is near the genital organ; maṇipūraka is in the
navel; anāhaṭa is in the heart; viśuḍḍhi is at the root of the neck and
ājñā is in the head (between the two eyebrows). Having known these six
maṇdalas (spheres), one should enter the sukhamaṇdala (pineal gland),
drawing up the vāyu and should send it (vāyu) upwards. He who practises
thus (the control of) vāyu becomes one with brahmāṇda (the macrocosm).
He should practise (or master) vāyu, binḍu, chiṭṭa, and chakra.

Yogins attain the nectar of equality through samāḍhi alone. Just as the
fire latent in (sacrificial) wood does not

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

appear without churning, so the lamp of wisdom does not arise without
the abhyāsa yoga (or practice of yoga). The fire placed in a vessel does
not give light outside. When the vessel is broken, its light appears
without. One's body is spoken of as the vessel, and the seat of "That"
is the fire (or light) within; and when it (the body) is broken through
the words of a guru, the light of brahmajñāna becomes resplendent. With
the guru as the helmsman, one crosses the subtle body and the ocean of
samsāra through the affinities of practice. That vāk <span
id="fr_270"></span>[1](#fn_254) (power of speech) which sprouts in parā,
gives forth two leaves in paśyanṭī, buds forth in maḍhyamā and blossoms
in vaikharī—that vāk which has before been described, reaches the stage
of the absorption of sound, reversing the above order (*viz*., beginning
with vaikharī, etc). Whoever thinks that He who is the great lord of
that vāk, who is the undifferentiated and who is the illuminator of that
vāk is Self; whoever thinks over thus, is never affected by words, high
or low (or good or bad). The three (aspects <span
id="fr_271"></span>[2](#fn_255) of consciousness), viśva, ṭaijasa, and
prājña (in man), the three Virat, Hiraṇyagarbha, and Īśvara in the
universe, the egg of the universe, the egg of man <span
id="fr_272"></span>[3](#fn_256) and the seven worlds—all these in turn
are absorbed in Praṭyagāṭma through the absorption of their respective
upāḍhis (vehicles). The egg being heated by the fire of jñāna is
absorbed with its kāraṇa (cause) into Paramāṭmā (Universal Self). Then
it becomes one with Parabrahman. It is then neither steadiness nor
depth, neither light nor darkness, neither describable nor
distinguishable. Saṭ (Be-ness) alone remains. One should think of Āṭmā
as being within the body like a light in a vessel. Āṭmā is of the
dimensions of a thumb, is a light without smoke and without form, is
shining within (the body) and is undifferentiated and immutable.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

The Vijñāna Āṭmā that dwells in this body is deluded by māyā during the
states of waking, dreaming, and dreamless sleep; but after many births,
owing to the effect of good karma, it wishes to attain its own state.
Who am I? How has this stain of mundane existence accrued to me? What
becomes in the dreamless sleep of me who am engaged in business in the
waking and dreaming states? Just as a bale of cotton is burnt by fire,
so the Chiḍābhāsa <span id="fr_273"></span>[1](#fn_257) which is the
result of non-wisdom, is burnt by the (wise) thoughts like the above and
by its own supreme illumination. The outer burning (of body as done in
the world) is no burning at all. When the wordly wisdom is destroyed,
Praṭyagāṭma that is in the ḍahara (ākāś or ether of the heart) obtains
vijñāna, diffusing itself everywhere and burns in an instant jñānamaya
and manomaya (sheaths). After this, He himself shines always within,
like a light within a vessel.

That muni who contemplates thus till sleep and till death is to be known
as a jīvanmukṭa. Having done what ought to be done, he is a fortunate
person. And having given up (even) the state of a jīvanmukṭa, he attains
viḍehamu.kti (emancipation in a disembodied state), after his body wears
off. He attains the state, as if of moving in the air. Then That alone
remains which is soundless, touchless, formless, and deathless, which is
the rasa (essence), eternal, and odourless, which has neither beginning
nor end, which is greater than the great, and which is permanent,
stainless, and decayless.

Thus ends the Upanishaḍ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[260:1](tmu32.htm#fr_247) In this Upanishaḍ are
stated the ways by which the Kuṇdalinī power is roused from the navel
upwards to the middle of the eyebrows and then up to sahasrāra in the
head: this being one of the important works of an adept to master the
forces of nature.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[260:2](tmu32.htm#fr_248) Chiṭṭa is the
flitting aspect of Antaḥkaraṇa.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[260:3](tmu32.htm#fr_249) Lit., the moving of
śakṭi which is Kuṇdalinī.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[260:4](tmu32.htm#fr_250) Regarding the
quantity to be taken, one should take of solid food half of his stomach:
of liquid food, one quarter, leaving the remaining quarter empty for the
air to percolate.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[260:5](tmu32.htm#fr_251) Mūlakanḍa is the root
of kanḍa, the genital organ.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[261:1](tmu32.htm#fr_252) The moving of
sarasvaṭī nādi situated on the west of the navel among the 14 nādis
(Vide Vāraha and other Upanishaḍs).

<span id="fn_238"></span>[261:2](tmu32.htm#fr_253) Sarasvaṭī is called
also Arunḍhaṭī who is literally one that helps good actions being done
and the wife of Ṛshi Vasishtha—also the star that is shown to the bride
on marriage occasions.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[261:3](tmu32.htm#fr_254) In exhalation, prāṇa
goes out 16 digits and in inhalation, goes in only for 12, thus losing
4. But if inhaled for 16, then the power is aroused.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[261:4](tmu32.htm#fr_255) Lit., associated with
and alone. *Vide* Śāṇdilya-Upanishaḍ.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[263:1](tmu32.htm#fr_256) They are
Brahmagranṭhi, Vishṇugranṭhi, and Ruḍragranṭhi.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[263:2](tmu32.htm#fr_257) Bandhas are certain
kinds of position of the body.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[263:3](tmu32.htm#fr_258) This probably refers
to Sarasvaṭī Nādi.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[264:1](tmu32.htm#fr_259) The text is Anākhiam
which has no sense. It has been translated as Anāstha.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[265:1](tmu32.htm#fr_260) Twelve seems to be
the right number of petals in the anāhaṭa-chakra of the heart; but the
moon is probably meant having sixteen rays.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[265:2](tmu32.htm#fr_261) The passages here are
obscure.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[265:3](tmu32.htm#fr_262) They are Mūlaprakṛṭi,
Mahaṭ, Ahaṅkāra and the five elements.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[265:4](tmu32.htm#fr_263) Here it is the astral
seminal fluid which, in the case of a neophyte, not having descended to
a gross fluid through the absence of sexual desire, rises up being
conserved as a spiritual energy.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[265:5](tmu32.htm#fr_264) A stage of being able
to convey to other bodies the deity appointed by God to help in the
conveying of sūkshma (subtle) body to other bodies at the expiry of good
actions which contribute to the enjoyment of material pleasures (*vide*
Apte's Dictionary).

<span id="fn_250"></span>[267:1](tmu32.htm#fr_265) Melana is lit.,
joining. This is the key to this science which seems to be kept
profoundly secret and revealed by adepts only at initiation, as will
appear from the subsequent passages in this Upanishaḍ.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[268:1](tmu32.htm#fr_267) All these are very
mystic.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[269:1](tmu32.htm#fr_268) Probably it here
means some part below the skull.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[269:2](tmu32.htm#fr_269) Certain motions of
the fingers and hands in the pronunciation of manṭras.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[271:1](tmu32.htm#fr_270) Vāk is of four kinds
(as said here) parā, pasyanṭī, maḍhyamā, and vaikharī. Vaikharī being
the lowest and the grossest of sounds, and part being the highest. In
evolution vāk begins from the highest to the lowest and in involution it
takes a reverse order, to merge into the highest subtle sound (Parā).

<span id="fn_255"></span>[271:2](tmu32.htm#fr_271) The first three
aspects of consciousness refer to the gross, subtle, and kāraṇa bodies
of men, while the second three aspects refer to the three bodies of the
universe. This is from the standpoint of the three bodies.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[271:3](tmu32.htm#fr_272) The egg of man—this
shows that man in his formation is and appears as an egg, just as the
universe is, and appears as an egg.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[272:1](tmu32.htm#fr_273) It is the
consciousness that becomes distorted and is unable to cognise itself
through the bodies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index of Proper Names](tmu33)

</div>
