[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fsca05)  [Next](fsca07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### The Symbolism of Attitude or Position

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> must be evident to every one who has
given any thought to the subject that a definite idea is meant to be
conveyed to the mind by the attitude in which an animal is depicted; and
such figures are not mere arbitrary signs, like the letters of the
alphabet, which of themselves convey no meaning whatever. "*A lion
rampant*" is, as the term suggests, a lion in the act of fighting,
rearing on his hind legs to meet his antagonist. He is therefore
depicted with wildly tossed mane, staring eyes, and *guly* mouth; his
muscular limbs and distended claws braced up for the combat betoken the
energy and power of the noble brute. How different is the idea conveyed
by the lion *statant* in the firm majesty of his pose, calmly looking
before him; or *couchant*, fit emblem of restful vigilance and conscious
power, prepared on the instant alike to attack or defend.

Should any reasons be needed to enforce the necessity of adhering
strictly to the heraldic law in which attitude plays such an important
part, it may be needful only to refer to one or two examples, and cite
as an instance in point the noblest of all created beings, and ask
whether, of the many acts in which imperious man himself may be
heraldically portrayed, the action or position in which he is to be
depicted should not indicate distinctly the idea that

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

is to be associated with the representation? whether vauntingly, like
the old kings,—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">       "with high exacting look  
Sceptred and globed"</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —attributes of his
power,—or as a bishop or saint in the act of benediction,—kneeling in
prayer as on mediæval seals,—the three savage men *ambulant* on the
shield of Viscount Halifax,—or the dead men strewn over the field on the
seal of the city of Lichfield—in each the primary idea is *man*, but how
different the signification! It will therefore be understood that the
particular action or posture, or any of the various forms in which real
or imaginary creatures may be blazoned in heraldry, gives the keynote to
its interpretation, which, in this respect, is nothing if not symbolic.

It will be seen that to interpret the meaning implied in any particular
charge, the *tinctures*, as well as the *attitude*, must be considered.
These, taken in combination with the *qualities* or *attributes* we
associate with the creature represented, indicate in a threefold manner
the complete idea or phase of meaning intended to be conveyed by the
composition, and may be thus formulated:

\(1\) <span class="smallcaps">The Creature</span>.—The primary idea in
the symbol is in the particular being represented, whether real or
fictitious, as *a man*, *a lion*, *an eagle*, *a dragon*, &c., of the
form and accepted character for some particular quality or attribute

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

of mind or body, as *fierceness*, *valour*, *fleetness*, &c.

\(2\) <span class="smallcaps">Attitude</span>.—The various attitudes or
positions in which it may be depicted in heraldry, each denoting some
special meaning, as *rampant*, *sejant*, *dormant*, &c.

\(3\) <span class="smallcaps">Tincture</span>.—Whether blazoned *proper*
(that is, according to nature) or of some of the heraldic tinctures, as
*or* (gold), *gules* (red), *azure*, *vert*, &c., each tincture,
according to the old heralds, bearing a particular and special
signification.

Tinctures in armorial devices were, however, not always introduced on
these scientific principles or adopted from any symbolic meaning, but as
arbitrary variations of colour for distinction merely, and as being in
themselves equally honourable; colour alone in many instances serving to
distinguish the arms of many families that would otherwise be the same.
Hence the necessity for accuracy in blazoning.

Guillam lays down some general rules regarding the symbolic meaning by
which all sorts of creatures borne in arms or ensigns are to be
interpreted, and by which alone a consistent system can be regulated.
"They must," he says, be interpreted in the best sense, that is,
according to their most generous and noble qualities, and so to the
greatest honour of their bearers. . . . The *fox* is full of wit, and
withal given wholly to filching for his prey. If, then, this be the
charge of an escutcheon, we must conceive

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the quality represented to be his wit and cunning, but not his pilfering
and stealing;" and so of other beasts. Even in wild and ruthless animals
and fictitious creatures, symbolic heraldry delights in setting forth
their most commendable qualities, as fierceness and courage in
overcoming enemies, though they may also possess most detestable
qualities.

In like manner all sorts of peaceable or gentle-natured creatures must
be set forth in their most noble and kindly action, each in its
disposition and that which is most agreeable to nature, rather than of
an opposite character. Heraldic art thus stamps a peculiar note of
dignity for some particular respect in the emblematic figures it
accepts, as for some special use, quality or action in the thing
depicted; and this dignity or nobility may have a twofold relation, one
betwixt creatures of divers kinds, as *a lion* or *a stag*, *a wolf* and
*a lamb;* the other between beings of one and the same kind, according
to their various attitudes or positions in which they may be
represented, as a stag *courant* or *at speed*, and a stag *lodged* or
at *bay;* a lion *rampant* and a lion *coward*—one will keep the field,
the other seek safety in flight, just as one attitude conveys a
different signification from another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Heraldic Spirit—Effective decorative Quality essential in
Heraldry](fsca07.md)
