[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fsca29)  [Next](fsca31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

### Mediaeval Conception of the Unicorn

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> mediæval conception of the unicorn as
the water-conner of the beasts was doubtless suggested by that belief of
earlier ages which made the unicorn not merely symbolical of virtue and
purity, but the more immediate emblem of Christ as the horn of our
salvation (Psalms xcii. 10 and lxxxix. 17, 24), expressly receiving its
general fulfilment in him (St. Luke i. 69). The horn, as an antidote to
all poison, was also believed to be emblematical of the conquering or
destruction of sin by the Messiah, and as such it appears in the
catacombs at Rome. The unicorn is the companion of St. Justiana, as an
emblem betokening in the beautiful legend her pure mind, resisting all
the Geraldine-like dreams sent by magic art to haunt her, till she
converted her tormentor himself.

He is remarkable, say the old writers, for his great strength, but more
for his great and haughty mind, as he would rather die than be brought
into subjection (Job xxxix. 10–12).

It was believed the only way to capture him was to leave a beautiful
young virgin in the place where he resorted. When the animal perceived
her, he would come and lie quietly down beside her, resting his head
upon her lap, and fall asleep, when he would he surprised by the hunters
who lay in wait to destroy him.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

The unicorn is one of the most famous of all the chimerical monsters of
antiquity. The Scriptures make repeated mention of such a creature, but
of its shape we can form little conception. In Early Christian Art the
unicorn symbolised the highest and purest virtue; not only was it one of
the noblest bearings in the heraldry of the Middle Ages, but was

<span id="img_13100"></span> ![The Legend of the
Unicorn.](img/13100.jpg.md)

viewed as the immediate emblem of our Blessed Lord. Philippe de Thaun
says in his "Bestiarius":

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Monocéros est beste  
 Une corne a en la tête  
 Cette beste en verité nous signifie Dieu."</span>

</div>

Whence comes the unicorn? It is older than the days of Job. Among the
hieroglyphics of Ancient Egypt this wonderful creature is depicted.
Sometimes

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the body is that of an ass, sometimes that of a bull, sometimes that of
a horse with the long twisted frontal horn for which he is noted. Is the
myth derived from some mysterious single-horned antelope, as has been
said, or is the one-horned rhinoceros the prototype of the legendary
unicorn? As an emblem it figures on the obelisks of Nimroud and the
catacombs of Rome. We read of this strange creature in Herodotus, and in
Aristotle, who calls it the "wild ass"; Pliny calls it the "Indian ass,"
describing it as like a horse with a horn fixed in the front of his
head. Cæsar counts it among the fauna of the Hyrcinian Forest. The
earliest author who describes it is Ctesias (B.C. 400), who derives it
from India. According to an Eastern legend the unicorn is found in
Abyssinia. Lobo also describes it in his history of that country: there
the animals are undisturbed by man, and live after their own laws. "Of
the many ancient and famous men," says a modern writer, "who have
written about the unicorn, no two seem to agree except when they copy
from one another."

"Some writers" (says Guillim, p. 175) "have made doubt whether there be
any such beast as this or no. But the great esteem of his horn (in many
places to be seen) may take away that needless scruple."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Horn of the Unicorn](fsca31.md)
