[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fsca30)  [Next](fsca32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

### The Horn of the Unicorn

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The unicorn whose horn is worth a city."  
                    <span class="smallcaps">Decker</span>, "Gull's
Hornbook."</span>

</div>

*The horn* of the unicorn was supposed to be the most powerful antidote
against, as it was a sure test of, poisons. He was therefore invested by
the other beasts of the forest with the office of "water-conner," none
daring to taste of fountain or pool until he had stirred the water with
his horn, to discover whether any dragon or serpent had deposited his
venom therein, and render it innocuous. So complete was the faith in the
efficacy of the wonder-working horn as a test of poisons, that fabulous
store was set upon the possession of even a portion. In old inventories
the "Essai" of Unicorn's horn is frequently mentioned.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">1391. Un manche d’or d’un essai de licourne pour
attoucher aux viandes de monsigneur le Dauphin.—"Comptes Royaux."  
1408. Une pièce de licorne à pour faire essai, à ung bou. d’argent.—Inv.
des ducs de Bourgogne.  
1536. Une touche de licorne, garni d’or, pour faire essai.—Inv. de
Charles Quint.</span>

</div>

An Italian author who visited England in the reign of Henry VII.,
speaking of the wealth of the religious houses in this country, says:
"And I have been informed that, amongst other things, many of

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

these monasteries possess unicorns’ horns of an extraordinary size."
Hence such a horn was worthy to be placed among the royal jewels. At the
head of an inventory taken in the first year of Queen Elizabeth and
preserved in the Harleian Library (No. 5953) we read "Imprimis, a piece
of unicorn's horn," which, as probably the most important object, is
named first. This was no doubt the piece seen by the German traveller
Hentzner, at Windsor: "We were shown here, among other things, the horn
of a unicorn of about eight spans and a half in length, valued at about
£10,000." Peacham places "that horne of Windsor, of an unicorn very
likely," amongst the sights worth seeing.

"One little cup of unicorn's horn" was also in possession of Queen
Elizabeth, and was subsequently given by James I. to his Queen.

Alviano, a celebrated general of the Venetian Republic, when he took
Viterbo, and dispersed the Gatesca faction, whom he called the poison of
the city, caused to be embroidered upon his standard a unicorn at a
fountain surrounded by snakes and toads and other reptiles, and stirring
up the water with his horn before he drinks, with the motto or legend
"Venene pello" (I expel poison). Although the unicorn has not been seen
and described by any modern writer, its horn has been occasionally
found, sometimes preserved in museums, but alas! the cherished horn,
whenever it is examined, turns out to be a narwhal's tooth. To this,
Wood's "Natural History" makes

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

special reference: "In former days, an entire tusk of a narwhal was
considered to possess an inestimable value, for it was looked upon as
the weapon of the veritable unicorn reft from his forehead in despite of
his supernatural strength and intellect. Setting aside the rarity of the
thing, it derived a practical value from its presumed capability of
disarming all poisons of their terrors, and of changing the deadliest
draught into a wholesome beverage."

This antidotal potency was thought to be of vital service to the
unicorn, whose residence was in the desert among all kinds of loathsome
beasts and poisonous reptiles, whose touch was death and whose look was
contamination. The springs and pools at which such monsters quenched
their thirst were saturated with poison by their contact, and would pour
a fiery death through the veins of any animal that partook of them. But
the unicorn, by dropping the tip of his horn into the pool, neutralised
the venom and rendered the deadly waters harmless. This admirable
quality of the unicorn's horn was a great recommendation in days when
the poisoned chalice crept too frequently upon the festive board, and a
king could receive no worthier present than a goblet formed from such
valuable material.

Even a few shavings of the unicorn's horn were purchased at high prices,
and the ready sale for such antidotes led to considerable adulteration—a
fact which is piteously recorded by an old writer, who tells us that
"some wicked persons do make a

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

mingle-mangle thereof, as I saw among the Venetians, being, as I here
say, compounded with lime and sope, or peradventure with earth or some
stone (which things are apt to make bubbles arise), and afterwards sell
it for the unicorn's horn." The same writer, however, supplies an easy
test, whereby the genuine substance may be [distinguished](errata.htm#2.md)
from the imposition. "For experience of the unicorn's horn to know
whether it be right or not; put silk upon a burning coal, and upon the
silk the aforesaid horn, and if so be that it be true, the silk will not
be a whit consumed."

<span class="smallcaps">Examples</span>.—*Argent, a unicorn rampant*
(*sometimes sejant sable armed and unguled or*), is borne by *Harling*,
Suffolk.

Another of the name bears the unicorn *courant in chief* with additional
charges upon the shield.

*Azure, a unicorn couchant, argent between twelve cross crosslets,
or*.—*Doon*.

*Argent a chevron engrailed gules between three unicorns’ heads, erased
azure*.—*Horne*.

Religious emblems were in great favour with the early printers; some of
them for this reason adopted the unicorn as their sign. Thus John
Harrison lived at the Unicorn and Bible in Paternoster Row, 1603.

Again, *the reputed power of the horn* caused the animal to be taken as
a supporter for the Apothecaries’ arms, and as a constant signboard by
chemists.

The great value set upon unicorn's horn caused the Goldsmiths of London
to adopt this animal as their sign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pegasus](fsca32.md)
