[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fsca50)  [Next](fsca52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span id="img_20900"></span> ![The Crowned Salamander of Francis
I.](img/20900.jpg.md)

### The Salamander

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> salamander has been immemorially
credited with certain fabulous powers. Less than a century ago the
creature was seriously described as a "spotted lizard, which will endure
the flames of fire." Divested of its supernatural powers it is simply a
harmless little amphibian of the "newt" family, from six to eight inches
in length, with black skin and yellow spots. The skin was long thought
to be poisonous, though it is in reality perfectly harmless; but the
moist surface is so extremely cold to the touch that, from this peculiar
quality in the creature, the idea must have arisen, not only that it
could withstand any heat to which it was exposed, but it would actually
subdue and put out fire.

This was a widespread belief long before the time

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

of Pliny, whose account of the creature is thus paraphrased by Swift:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Further, we are by Pliny told  
 This serpent is extremely cold;  
 So cold that, put it in the fire,  
 ’Twill make the very flames expire."</span>

</div>

Marco Polo, the early Venetian traveller, who tells of many strange and
wonderful things seen and heard of in his journeyings, was not a
believer in the fabulous stories of the salamander, for he dismisses the
subject with the curt remark, "Everybody knows that it could be no
animal's nature to live in fire." An early heraldic writer of a somewhat
later period, with greater credulity, stoutly maintains its reality, and
in describing the creature states that he actually possessed some of the
hair or down of the salamander. "This," he goes on to say, I have
several times put in the fire and made it red-hot, and after taken out;
which, being cold, yet remaineth perfect wool, or fine downy hair."

Marco Polo further on assures his readers that the true salamander is
nothing but an incombustible substance found in the earth, "all the rest
being fabulous nonsense." He tells of a mountain in Tartary, "there or
thereabouts," in which a "vein" of salamander was found; and so we
arrive at the fact that this salamander's wool was nothing but the
"asbestos" of the ancients. It is easy to see why asbestos became known
as "salamanders’ wool." The name

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

resulted from the juxtaposition of ideas, and shows how deeply impressed
was the belief in the salamander's mysterious powers. A late writer
tells us that some of the lizard tribe are known to enjoy warmth, and
alligators are said to revel in hot water. It needed only that an
insignificant member of the genus should have been found among the dead
embers of a fire to prove at once the invulnerability of the reptile and
its ability to extinguish the flames.

The salamander of mediæval superstition was a creature in the shape of a
man, which lived in fire (Greek, salambeander, chimney-man), meaning a
man that lives in a chimney. It was described by the ancients as bred by
fire and existing in flames, an element which must inevitably prove
destructive of life. Pliny describes it as "a sort of lizard which seeks
the hottest fire to breed in, but quenches it with the extreme frigidity
of its body." He tells us he tried the experiment once, but the creature
was soon reduced to powder. <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_25.md)

Gregory of Nazianzen says that the salamander not only lived in and
delighted in flames, but extinguished fire. St. Epiphanius compares the
virtues of the hyacinth and the salamander. The hyacinth, he states, is
unaffected by fire, and will even extinguish it as the salamander does.
"The salamander and the hyacinth were symbols of enduring faith, which
triumphs over the ardour of the passions.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Submitted to fire
the hyacinth is discoloured and becomes white. "We may here perceive,"
says M. Portal, "a symbol of enduring and triumphant faith."

This imaginary creature is generally represented as a small wingless
dragon or lizard, surrounded by and breathing forth flames. Sometimes it
is represented somewhat like a dog breathing flames. A

<span id="img_21200"></span> ![Salamander crest of James, Earl of
Douglas. From garter-plate.](img/21200.jpg.md)

golden salamander is so represented on the garter-plate of James, Earl
of Douglas, K.G., the first Scottish noble elected into the Order of the
Garter, and who died 1483 A.D. Tinctured *vert;* and *in flames proper*
it is the crest of Douglas, Earl of Angus.

François I. of France adopted as his badge the salamander in the midst
of flames, with the legend, "Nutrisco et extinguo" ("I nourish and
extinguish"). The Italian motto from which this legend was borrowed was,
"Nudrisco il buono e spengo it reo" ("I nourish the good and extinguish
the bad;" "Fire purifies good metal, but consumes rubbish"). In his
castle of Chambord, the galleries of the Palace

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

of Fontainebleau, and the Hôtel St. Bourg Thoroulde at Rouen, this
favourite device of the crowned salamander, with the motto, may be
everywhere seen.

*Azure, a salamander or, in flames proper*, is the charge on the shield
of the Italian family of Cennio.

The "*lizards*" which form the crest of the Ironmongers’ Company, were
probably intended for salamanders on the old seal of the company in
1483, but are now blazoned as lizards.

The heraldic signification of the salamander was that of a brave and
generous courage that the fire of affliction cannot destroy or consume.

In the animal symbolism of the ancients the salamander may be said to
represent the element of <span class="smallcaps">Fire</span>; the eagle,
<span class="smallcaps">Air</span>; the lion, <span
class="smallcaps">Earth</span>; the dolphin, <span
class="smallcaps">Water</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[211:\*](fsca51.htm#fr_25.md) "Natural History," x.
67, xxix. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Heraldic Antelope](fsca52.md)
