[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fsca26)  [Next](fsca28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Mythical Serpent

"<span class="smallcaps">The</span> most remarkable remembrance," says
Dean, "of the power of the paradisaical serpent is displayed in the
position which he retains in Tartarus. A cuno-draconictic cerberus
guards the gates; serpents are coiled upon the chariot wheels of
Proserpine; serpents pave the abyss of torment; and even serpents
constitute the caduceus of Mercury, the talisman which he holds in his
hand when he conveys the soul to Tartarus. The image of the serpent is
stamped upon every mythological fable connected with the realms of
Pluto. is it not probable that in the universal symbol of heathen
idolatry we recognise the universal object of primitive worship, the
serpent of paradise?"

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

"Speaking of the names of the snake tribe in the great languages,"
Ruskin says, "in Greek, <span class="smallcaps">Ophis</span> meant the
seeing creature, especially one that sees all round it; and <span
class="smallcaps">Drakon</span>, one that looks well into a thing or
person. In Latin, <span class="smallcaps">Anguis</span>, was the
strangler; <span class="smallcaps">Serpens</span>, the winding creature;
<span class="smallcaps">Coluber</span>, the coiling animal. In our own
Saxon the <span class="smallcaps">Snake</span> meant the crawling
creature; and <span class="smallcaps">Adder</span> denoted the
groveller."

The true serpents comprise the genera without a sternum or breastbone,
in which there is no vestige of shoulder, but where the ribs surround a
great part of the circumference of the trunk. To the venomous kind
belong the rattlesnake, cobra de capello, spectacled or hooded snake,
viper, &c. So the non-venomous, the boa constrictor, anaconda, python,
black snake, common snake.

The minute viper, *V. Brashyura*, is celebrated for the intensity of its
poison, and is truly one of the most terrible of its genus. The asp of
Egypt, or Cleopatra's asp (*Coluber naja*, Lin.), was held in great
veneration by the Egyptians; and it is this snake which the jugglers, by
pressing on the nape of the neck with the finger, throw into a kind of
catalepsy, which renders it stiff, or, as they term it, turns it into a
rod.

All snakes, says the celebrated naturalist Waterton, take a motion from
left to right or *vice versa*—but never up and down—the whole extent of
the body being in contact with the ground, saving the head, which is
somewhat elevated. This is equally observable

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

both on land and in water. Thus, when we see a snake represented in an
up-and-down attitude, we know at once that the artist is to blame.

Another misconception exploded by Waterton is the common and accepted
notion that a snake can fascinate to their destruction and render
powerless by a dead set of its eye the creatures it makes its prey.
Snakes have no such power. The eyes, which are very beautiful, do not
move, and they have no eyelids; they have been placed by nature under a
scale similar in composition to the scales of the body, and when the
snake casts it slough, this scale comes away with it, and is replaced by
a new one on a new skin.

*Noli me tangere*—do not touch me with intent to harm me—is, continues
Waterton, a most suitable motto for a snake, which towards man never
acts on the offensive (except perhaps only the larger species which may
be in waiting for a meal, when any creature, from a bull to a mouse, may
be acceptable). But when roused into action by the fear of sudden
danger, ’tis then that, in self-defence a snake will punish the intruder
by a prick (not a laceration) from the poison-fang, fatal or not,
according to its size and virulence.

A writer in the *Daily Telegraph* of July 23, 1883, giving an account of
the new reptile house in the Zoological Gardens, Regent's Park, dwells
upon the surpassing beauty of a python that had just cast its skin, a
very miracle of reptilian loveliness. Watch it breathing; it is as
gentle as a child, and the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

beautiful lamia head rests like a crowning jewel upon the softly heaving
coils. Let danger threaten, however, and lightning is hardly quicker
than the dart of those vengeful convolutions. The gleaming length
rustles proudly into menace, and instead of the voluptuous lazy thing of
a moment ago, the python, with all its terrors complete, erects itself
defiantly, thrilling, so it seems, with eager passion in every scale,
and measuring in the air, with threatening head, the circle within which
is death. Once let those recurved fangs strike home, and there is no
poison in them, all hope is gone to the victim. Coil after coil is
rapidly thrown round the struggling object, and then with slow but
relentless pressure life is throttled out of every limb. No wonder that
the world has always held the serpent in awe, and that nations should
have worshipped, and still worship, this emblem of destruction and
death. It is fate itself, swift as disaster, deliberate as retribution,
incomprehensible as destiny." It would be tedious to recapitulate the
multitude of myths through which the "dire worm" has come to our times,
dignified and made awful by the honours and fears of the past. A volume
could hardly exhaust the snake-lore scattered up and down in the pages
of history and fable.

"The python in the Zoological Gardens, however," adds the same writer,
"though it may stand as the modern reality of the old-world fable of a
gigantic snake that challenged the strength of the gods to overcome it,
presents to us only one side of snake

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

nature. It possesses a surprising beauty and prodigious strength; but it
is not venomous. Probably the more subtle and fearful apprehensions of
men originated really from the smaller and deadlier kinds, and were then
by superstition, poetry and heraldry extended to the larger. The little
basilisk, crowned king of the vipers; the horned 'cerastes dire,' a few
inches in length; the tiny aspic, fatal as lightning and as swift; and
the fabled cockatrice, that a man might hold in his hand, first made the
serpent legend terrible; their venom was afterwards transferred, and not
[unnaturally](errata.htm#1.md), to the larger species. It was the small
minute worms, that carried in their fangs such rapid and ruthless death,
which first struck fear into the minds of the ancients, and invested the
snake with the mysterious and horrid attributes whereunto antiquity from
China to Egypt hastened to pay honours."

Cadmus and his wife Harmonia were by Zeus converted into serpents and
removed to Elysium. Æsculapius, son of Apollo, god of medicine, assumed
the form of a serpent when he appeared at Rome during a pestilence;
therefore he is always represented with his staff entwined with a
serpent, symbol of healing. Similarly represented was Hippocrates, a
famous physician of Cos; who delivered Athens from a dreadful
pestilence, in the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, and was publicly
rewarded with a golden crown, and the privileges of a citizen. Therefore
it is that the goddess of health bears in her hand a serpent.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

The caduceus of Mercury was a rod adorned with wings, having a male and
female serpent twisted about it, each kissing the other. With this in
his hands, it was said, the herald of the Gods could give sleep to
whomsoever he chose; wherefore Milton, in "Paradise Lost," styles it
"his opiate rod."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"With his caduceus Hermes led  
 From the dark regions of the imprisoned dead;  
 Or drove in silent shoals the lingering train  
 To night's dull shore and Pluto's dreary reign."  
                 <span class="smallcaps">Darwin</span>, *Loves of the
Plants*, ii. 291.</span>

</div>

Jupiter Ammon appeared to Olympias in the form of a serpent, and became
the father of Alexander the Great:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"When glides a silver serpent, treacherous guest!  
 And fair Olympia folds him to her breast."  
                 <span class="smallcaps">Darwin</span>, *Economy of
Vegetation*, i. 2.</span>

</div>

Jupiter Capitolinus in a similar form became the father of Scipio
Africanus.

In the temple of Athena at Athens, a serpent was kept in a cage and
called "The Guardian Spirit of the Temple." This serpent was supposed to
be animated by the soul of Ericthonius. It was thus employed by the
Greeks and Romans to symbolise a guardian spirit, and not unfrequently
the figure of a serpent was depicted on their altars.

Upon the shields of Greek warriors, on ancient vases, &c., the serpent
is often to be seen blazoned.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

The serpent monster Python, produced from the mud left on the earth
after the deluge of Deucalion,<span id="img_11400"></span>

|                                                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ![Greek Shield, from painted vase in the British Museum.](img/11400.jpg.md) |

lived in the caves of Mount Parnassus, but was slain by Apollo, who
founded the Pythian games in commemoration of his victory. This and many
similar solar myths are merely classic panegyrics on the conquering
power exercised by the genial warmth of spring over the dark gloom of
winter.

The serpent in Christian Art figures in Paradise as the tempter of Eve
under that form, and is generally placed under the feet of the Virgin,
in allusion to the promise made to Eve after the Fall: "The seed of the
woman shall bruise the serpent's head." The heart of the serpent being
close to the head, renders a severe "bruise" there fatal. The serpent
bruised the "heel" of man—*i.e.*, being a cause of stumbling, it hurt
the foot which tripped against it (Gen. iii. 15).

The brazen serpent erected by Moses in the wilderness, which gave
newness of life to<span id="img_11401"></span>

|                                             |
|---------------------------------------------|
| ![snake coiled on tau cross](img/11401.jpg.md) |

those plague-stricken Israelites who were bitten by the fiery dragons
and raised their eyes to this symbol (Numb. xxi. 8), as an emblem of
healing, is represented in Christian art as coiled up on a tau cross, a
symbol of which our Saviour did not disdain in some degree to

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

admit the propriety when he compared himself to the healing serpent in
the wilderness.

The serpent is placed under the feet of St. Cecilia, St. Euphemia, and
many other saints, either because they trampled on Satan, or because
they miraculously cleared some country of such reptiles. St. Patrick,
the patron saint of Ireland, is always represented habited as a bishop,
his foot upon a viper, the head transfixed with the lower extremity of
his pastoral staff, from his having banished snakes and all venomous
reptiles from the soil of Ireland. As the symbol of the evil principle,
a diminutive specimen of the dragon, guivre, or winged snake was more
frequently used, wriggling under foot.

The serpent is emblematical of <span class="smallcaps">The Fall</span>;
Satan is called the great serpent (Rev. xii. 9); of <span
class="smallcaps">Wisdom</span>: "Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and
harmless as doves" (Matt. x. 16); of <span
class="smallcaps">Subtlety</span>: "Now the serpent was more subtil than
any beast of the field" (Gen. iii. 1); of <span
class="smallcaps">Eternity</span>: a serpent in a circle with its tail
in its mouth is the well understood symbol of unending time.

The serpent figures largely in Byzantine Art as the instrument of the
Fall, and one type of the Redemption. The cross planted on the serpent
is found sculptured on Mount Athos; and the cross surrounded by the
so-called runic knot is only a Scandinavian version of the original
Byzantine image—the crushed snake curling round the stem of the avenging
cross. The cross, with two scrolls at the

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

foot of it typifying the snake, is another of its modifications, and a
very common Byzantine ornament. The ordinary northern crosses, so
conspicuous for their interlaced ornaments and grotesque monsters,
appear to be purely modifications of this idea." <span
id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7.md)

Boniface, the Anglo-Saxon missionary, in his letter to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, inveighs against the luxuries of dress, and declares against
those garments that are adorned with very broad studs and images of
worms, announcing the coming of Antichrist.

In the wonderfully intricate interlacing of snakelike and draconic forms
of celtic art which appear in the marvellously illuminated manuscripts
executed in Ireland of the sixth and seventh centuries, the great
sculptured crosses, as well as in gold and metal work, are seen
unmistakable traces of the traditional ideas relating to the early
serpent-worship.

"The serpent," says Mr. Planché, "the most terrible of all reptiles, is
of rare occurrence in English heraldry. Under its Italian name of
*Bisse* it occurs in the Roll of Edward III.'s time, 'Monsire William
Mal *bis d’argent, a une chevron de gules, a trois testes de bys rases
gules*' (*Anglicé*; argent, a chevron between three serpents’ heads
erased gules)."

The well-known historic device, the *Biscia* or serpent devouring a
child, of the dukedom of Milan

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

is of much interest. There are many stories as to the origin of this
singular bearing. Some writers assign it to Otho Visconti, who led a
body of Milanese in the train of Peter the Hermit, and at the crusades
fought and killed in single combat the Saracen giant Volux, upon whose
helmet was this device, which Otho afterwards assumed as his own. Such
is the version adopted by Tasso, who enumerates Otho among the Christian
warriors:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Otho fierce, whose valour won the shield  
 That bears a child and serpent on the field."  
             *Gerusalemme Liberata*, cant. i. st. 55.  
                                   (Hoole's translation.)</span>

</div>

From another legend we learn that when Count Boniface, Lord of Milan,
went to the crusades, his child, born during his absence, was devoured
in its cradle by a huge serpent which ravaged the country. On his
return, Count Boniface went in search of the monster, and found it with
a child in its mouth. He attacked and slew the creature, but at the cost
of his own life. Hence it is said his posterity bore the serpent and
child as their ensign. A third legend is referred to under Wyvern (which
see).

Menestrier says that the first Lords of Milan were called after their
castle in Angleria, in Latin *anguis*, and that these are only the
*armes parlantes* of their name. <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8.md) Be
this as it may, "*Lo Squamoso Biscion*"

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

(the scaly snake) was adopted by all the Visconti lords, and by their
successors of the House of Sforza.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Sforza e Viscontei colubri."  
              *Orlando Furioso*, cant. xiii. 63.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And again in the
same poem (cant. iii. 26. Hoole's translation):

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Hugo appears with him, his valiant son  
 Who plants his conquering snakes in Milan's town."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dante also refers
in "Purgatorio" to this celebrated device.

The "*three coiled snakes*," which appear in<span id="img_11800"></span>

|                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|
| ![Arms of Whitby Abbey.](img/11800.jpg.md) |

the arms of Whitby Abbey, Yorkshire, really represent fossil ammonites,
which are very plentiful in the rocky promontories of that part of the
English coast, and on that account were no doubt adopted in the arms of
the Abbey, and afterwards of the town of Whitby.

The arms are: *Azure three snakes coiled or encircled two and one, or*.

Popular legend, however, ascribes their origin to the transformation of
a multitude of snakes into stone by St. Hilda, an ancient Saxon
princess. The legend is referred to by Sir Walter Scott in "Marmion":

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"How of a thousand snakes each one  
 Was changed into a coil of stone  
 While Holy Hilda prayed."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is, however,
more than likely that the arms suggested the legend of the miracle.

The ancient myth of the *deaf adder* seems to have been a favourite
illustration of the futility of unwelcome counsel.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"What, art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?  
 Be poisonous too."  
                      2 *King Henry VI*. Act ii. sc. 2.

"Pleasure and revenge have ears more deaf than adders  
 To the voice of any true decision."  
                   *Troilus and Cressida*, Act ii. sc. 2.

"He flies me now—nor more attends my pain  
 Than the deaf adder needs the charmer's strain."  
                    *Orlando Furioso*, cant. xxxii. 19.  
                                 (Hoole's translation.)

</div>

A serpent or adder stopping his ears, by some writers termed "*an adder
obturant his ear*," from the Latin *obturo*, to shut or stop, is a very
ancient idea. It is said that the asp or adder, to prevent his hearing
unwelcome truths, puts one ear to the ground and stops the other with
his tail, a device suggested by Psalm lviii. 4, 5: "They are like the
deaf adder that stoppeth her ear; which will not hearken to the voice of
charmers, charming never so wisely."

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

Alessandro d’Alessandri (+ 1523), a lawyer of Naples, of extensive
learning, and a member of the Neapolitan Academy, took for device a
serpent stopping its ears, and the motto, "Ut prudentia vivam" ("That I
may live wisely"), implying that as the serpent by this means refuses to
hear the voice of the charmer, so the wise man imitates the prudence of
the reptile and refuses to listen to the words of malice and slander.

It is said that the *cerastes* hides in sand that it may bite the
horse's foot and get the rider thrown. In allusion to this belief, Jacob
says, "Dan shall be . . . an adder in the path, that his rider shall
fall backward" (Gen. xlix. 17).

*Asp*.—According to Sir Gardiner Wilkinson, the ancient Egyptian kings
wore the asp, the emblem of royalty, as an ornament on the forehead. It
appears on the front of the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt.

Many terms have been invented by the heralds to express the positions
serpents may assume in arms. Berry's "Encyclopædia of Heraldry"
illustrates over thirty positions, the terms of blazon of which it is
impossible to comprehend, and hardly worth the inquiry. Few of these
terms are, however, met with in English heraldry.

Two serpents erect in pale, their tails "rowed" (twisted or knotted)
together, are figured in the arms of Caius College, Cambridge. In the
words of the old grant, they are blazoned "*gold, serried with* 

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

*flowers gentil, a sengreen* (or houseleek) *in chief, over the heads of
two whole serpents in pale, their tails knit together (all in proper
colour), resting upon a square marble stone vert, between a book sable,
garnish’t gul, buckled, or*."

Fruiterers’ Company of London.—*On a mount in base vert, the tree of
Paradise environed with the serpent between Adam and Eve, all proper*.
Motto: *Arbor vitæ Christus, fructus perfidem gustamus*.

*Nowed* signifies tied or knotted, and is said of a serpent, wyvern, or
other creature whose body or tail is twisted like a knot.

*Annodated*, another term for nowed; bent in the form of the letter S,
the serpents round the caduceus of Mercury may be said to be annodated.

*Torqued*, *torgant*, or *targant* (from the Latin *torqueo*, to
wreathe), the bending and rebending, either in serpents, adders or fish,
like the letter S.

*Voluted*, *involved* or *encircled*, *gliding*, and several terms used
in blazon explain<span id="img_12100"></span>

|                                                                 |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| ![A Serpent, nowed, proper. Crest of Cavendish.](img/12100.jpg.md) |

themselves, as *erect*, *erect wavy*, &c.

In blazoning, the terms *snake*, *serpent*, *adder*, appear to be used
indiscriminately.

A *serpent nowed, proper*, is the crest of Cavendish, Duke of
Devonshire.

*Gules, three snakes nowed in triangle argent* (Ednowain Ap Bradwen,
Merionethshire).

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

*Or, three serpents erect wavy sable* (Codlen, or Cudlen).

*Remora* is an old term in heraldry for a serpent entwining.

Serpents are also borne entwined round pillars and rods, &c., and around
the necks of children, as in the arms of Vaughan or Vahan Wales: *Azure,
three boys’ heads affronté, couped at the shoulders proper, crined*<span
id="img_12200"></span>

|                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| ![Amphiptère, or flying Serpent.](img/12200.jpg.md) |

*or, each enveloped or enwrapped about the neck with a snake vert*.
Entwisted and entwined are sometimes used in the same sense.

The *amphiptére* is a winged serpent. *Azure, an amphiptére or, rising
between two mountains argent*, are the arms of Camoens, the Portuguese
poet.

As a symbol in heraldry the serpent does not usually have reference to
the mythical creature, as in Early Christian Art, its natural qualities
being more generally considered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[116:\*](fsca27.htm#fr_7.md) "Analysis of Ornament,"
by Ralph N. Wornum.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[117:\*](fsca27.htm#fr_8.md) That is, *Visconti* is
only a variation of *Biscia* equivalent to *Anguis*, Italianised to
*Angleria*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Scorpion](fsca28.md)
