[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fsca15)  [Next](fsca17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_07400"></span> ![St. George and the
Dragon.](img/07400.jpg)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"In many a church his form is seen,  
 With sword, and shield, and helmet sheen:  
 Ye know him by his steed of pride,  
 And by the dragon at his side."  
                                     <span class="smallcaps">Chr.
Schmid.</span></span>

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">St. George</span>, the patron saint of England,
in his legendary combat with the monster, is a subject which occurs
frequently in English sculpture and painting, and enters largely into
the language and literature of the nation. St. George appears to have
been selected as the patron saint of England not long after the Norman
conquest. We find the anniversary of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

his martyrdom (April 23) was ordered to be observed as a festival by the
National Synod of Oxford in 1222 A.D.

The "Golden Legend," printed by Pynson in 1 507 (fol. cxix.), thus
refers to "Saynt George": "This blyssed and holy martyr Saynt George is
patrone of this reame of Englōd: and ye crye of mē of warre; and in ye
worsyp of whome is founded ye noble order of a garter: and also ye noble
college in ye castell of Wyndsore, by Kynges of Englond. In whyche
college is ye herte of Saynt George: whyche Sygysmond ye Emperour of
Alamayn brought: and gaf it for a grete and precyous relyque to kynge
Harry the fifte. And also the said Sygysmond was broder of the sayd
garter. And also there is a piece of his head; which college is nobly
endowed to thonour and worshippe almighty God and his blyssed Martyr
Saynt George. Then late us praye vnto hym that he be specyel protectour
and defendour of this royaume."

The emblems commonly given to St. George, martyr, and patron saint of
England are: a dragon, a shield bearing a red cross on a white field,
and a spear. He is usually represented on horseback in the act of
spearing the monster which is vomiting fire; or as standing with the
slain dragon at his feet.

That St. George is a veritable character is beyond all reasonable doubt,
and there seems no reason to deny that he was born in Armorica, and was
beheaded in Diocletian's persecution by order of Datianus, April 23,
303. St. Jerome (331–420)

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

mentions him in one of his martyrologies; in the next century there were
many churches erected to his honour. St. Gregory (540–604) has in his
sacramentary a "Preface for St. George's Day"; and the Venerable Bede
(672–735) in his martyrology, says: "At last St. George truly finished
his martyrdom by decapitation, although the gests of his passion are
numbered among the apocryphal writings."

According to the old ballad given in Bishop Percy's "Reliques of Ancient
Poetry," St. George was the son of Lord Albert of Coventry. His mother
died in giving him birth, and the new-born babe was stolen away by the
weird lady of the woods, who brought him up to deeds of arms. His body
had three marks: a dragon on the breast, a garter round one of the legs,
and a blood-red cross on the arm. When he grew to manhood he first
fought against the Saracens, and then went to Sylene, a city of Libya,
where was a stagnant lake infested by a huge dragon, whose poisonous
breath "had many a city slain," and whose hide "no spear nor sword could
pierce." Every day a virgin was sacrificed to it, and at length it came
to the lot of Sabra, the king's daughter, to become its victim. Decked
out in bridal array she went out to meet the dragon; she was tied to the
stake, and left to be devoured, when St. George appeared in full panoply
and mounted on his charger. He vowed to take her cause in hand, and when
the dragon came on the scene it was encountered by the hero, who wounded
it, and binding it to the lady's girdle it was

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

led like a "meek beast" into the city. St. George there attacked it,
thrusting his lance into its mouth, killed it on the spot, and a church
dedicated to Our Lady and St. George was built to commemorate the event.
After many adventures he carried off Sabra to England, where they were
wedded, and at Coventry lived happily till their death.

In his history of the Order of the Garter Mr. Antis warmly censures
those who would doubt the traditionary history of that saint, and says
"he who would credit St. Ambrose will not detract from the honour of our
George, the soldier and martyr of Christ, concerning the dragon and the
deliverance of the beautiful royal virgin, which is related in so many
pictures," adding that "he shall not contradict those who make an
allegory of it, so that they do not deny the certainty of this history.
. . . Suppose every one George, who being clothed with the virtue of
baptism and armour of faith, keeps his earthly body in subjection by the
due exercise of religion and piety, and by the armour of the Spirit
overcomes, and by the true spiritual art crushes and confounds the
serpent's poison, the snares of the old Dragon, and his diabolical arts
and stratagems."

The dragon slain by St. George is simply a common allegory to express
the triumph of the Christian hero over evil, which St. John the
Evangelist beheld under the figure of a dragon. Similarly St. Michael,
St. Margaret, St. Sylvester and St. Martha are all depicted as slaying
dragons;

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

the Saviour and the Virgin as treading them under foot; and St. John the
Evangelist as charming a winged dragon from a poisoned chalice given him
to drink. Even John Bunyan avails himself of the same figure, when he
makes Christian encounter Apollyon and prevail against him.

A learned Frenchman, M. Clermont Ganneau, in a treatise lately
published, traces the legend of St. George and the dragon to a very
remote antiquity. In the Louvre at Paris he found an Egyptian
bas-relief, which he identified as the combat of Horus against Set, or
Typhon, in the well-known Egyptian legend. It represents a man on
horseback in Roman armour slaying a crocodile with a spear; but for the
fact that the rider has a hawk's head, the group might easily be
mistaken for the traditional combat of St. George and the dragon.
Extending his investigations, M. Ganneau has brought to light some most
startling proofs of the connection between the eastern and western
mythologies. We have therefore, he considers, evidence as clear and
convincing as evidence from deduction can be, that the Egyptian "Horus
and Typhon"; the Greek "Perseus and Andromeda"; the "Bel and Dragon" of
the Apocrypha; the Archangel Michael of Christian legend who also slays
the old dragon, are all one and the same story with that of our own St.
George. We pass over the intermediate steps by which he reconciles the
divergent names and qualities of the personages identified, and also the
ingenious arguments

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

as to the real meaning of the symbolism in the worship of <span
class="smallcaps">Dagon the Fish-god</span>.

In all the old romances dealing with feats of chivalry and
knight-errantry the dragon plays an essential if not a leading part; and
a romance without some dragon or monster was as rare as one without a
valiant knight or a beautiful lady. But of all the malignant creatures
dreaded of gods and men, the most hateful and wicked is that prime
dragon personified by Spenser under the type of the blatant beast," and
which confronts his hero, the Red Cross Knight, at every turn: "a
dreadful fiend, of gods and men ydrad," who has a thousand tongues,
speaks things most shameful, most unrighteous, most untrue, and with his
sting steeps them in poison.

As an example of the inception and development of a dragon legend from
slender materials, the following is related in Figuer's "World before
the Deluge ":

In the city of Klagenfurth, in Carinthia, is a fountain on which is
sculptured a monstrous dragon with six feet, and a head armed with a
stout horn. According to popular tradition this dragon lived in a cave,
whence it issued from time to time to ravage the country. A bold and
venturous knight at last kills the monster, paying with his life the
forfeit of his rashness. The head of the pretended dragon is preserved
in the Hotel de Ville, and this head has furnished the sculptor for a
model of the dragon on the fountain. A learned professor of Vienna on a

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

visit to the city recognised it at a glance as the cranium of the fossil
rhinoceros. Its discovery in some cave had probably originated the fable
of the knight and the dragon—and all similar legends are capable of some
such explanation when we trace them back to their sources and reason the
circumstances on which they are founded. The famous bird, the roc, which
played so important a part in the myths of the people of Asia, is also
believed to have originated in the discovery of some gigantic bones.

Chief among <span class="smallcaps">Dragon-slayers</span> of Christian
legend we find the following:

*St. Philip the Apostle* is said to have destroyed a huge dragon at
Hierapolis, in Phrygia.

*St. Michael*, *St. George*, *St. Margaret*, *Pope Sylvester*, *St.
Samson*, Archbishop of Dol; *Donatus* (fourth century), *St. Clement* of
Metz, all killed dragons—if we may trust old legends.

*St. Keyne* of Cornwall slew a dragon.

*St. Florent* killed a terrible dragon who haunted the Loire.

*St. Cado*, *St. Maudet* and *St. Paull* did similar feats in Brittany.

The town of <span class="smallcaps">Worms</span> (famous as the place at
which the Diet of Worms was held before which the reformer Luther was
summoned) owes its name to the "Lind-wurm" or dragon there conquered by
the hero Siegfried as related in the "Nibelungen Lied." (*See* [p.
100](fsca21.htm#page_100).)

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Drachenfels, on the Rhine (Dragon Rocks), is so called from the same
monster; and at Arles and Rouen legends are preserved of victories
gained by saints over the *Tarasque* and *Gargouille*, both local names
for the dragon. St. Martha conquered the fabulous Tarasque of the city
of Languedoc, which bears the name of "Tarascon." Gargouille
(waterspout) was the great dragon that lived in the Seine, ravaged
Rouen, and was slain by St. Romanus, Bishop of Rouen, in the seventh
century. The latter name has come down to us in the term "gargoyle,"
applied to the monstrous heads which often decorate the waterspouts of
old churches.

A strange relic of the ancient faith is perpetuated in the remains of
early Celtic art in the curiously wrought interlaced monsters which form
the chief ornament of ancient Irish crosses, and particularly in the
borders and initials of illuminated manuscripts, whose spirals and
interminable interlacements of the most complex character, often allied
with equally strange colouring, form a style perfectly unique in itself,
and unlike any other; the elaborate knots terminating in draconic heads,
and with wings and animal extremities in wonderfully ingenious patterns
that seem almost beyond the limits of human ingenuity. In the kindred
art of Scandinavia we find similar decoration founded on serpentine
forms.

Another survival of the dragon myth exists in the name given to some of
our fighting men on the introduction of firearms. A kind of blunderbus
gave

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

to the troops who used it the name of "dragoniers," whence is derived
the well-known term dragoons. They used to be armed with
*dragons*—*i.e.*, short muskets—which spouted fire, like the fabulous
beast so named. The head of a dragon was wrought on the muzzles of these
muskets. We have all heard of the Dragonades, a series of persecutions
by Louis XIV., which drove many thousands of Protestants out of
France—and out of the world. Their object was to root out "heresy." A
bishop, with certain ecclesiastics, was sent to see if the heretics
would recant; if not they were left to the tender mercies of the
Dragonniers, who followed these "ministers of peace and good will to
men." The same game of conversion was practised by the Reformed Church
upon the Presbyterians of Scotland, with its accompaniment of "dragons
let loose"—in which Claverhouse took a leading part.

"In mediæval alchemy the dragon seems to have been the emblem of
Mercury; hence the dragon became one of the 'properties' of the chemist
and apothecary, was painted upon his drug pots, hung up as his sign, and
some dusty stuffed [crocodile](errata.htm#0) hanging from the ceiling in
the laboratory had to do service for the monster, And inspire the vulgar
with a profound awe of the mighty man who had conquered the vicious
reptile." <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)

When apothecaries’ signs were not derived from heraldry, they were used
to typify certain chemical

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

actions. In an old German work on alchemy one of the plates represents a
dragon eating his own tail; underneath are the words which, translated,
signify "This is a great wonder and very strange; the dragon contains
the greatest medicament," and much more of similar import.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[82:\*](fsca16.htm#fr_5) "History of Signboards."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dragon in the Royal Heraldry of Britain](fsca17)
