[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Symbolism](../../sym/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fsca03)  [Next](fsca05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002D48Q8Y/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Fictitious and Symbolic Creatures in Art*, by John Vinycomb, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### INTRODUCTION

<span class="small">"*Angels and ministers of grace defend
us*."—"Hamlet."</span>

<span id="img_00100"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/00100.jpg) |

THE human mind has a passionate longing for knowledge even of things
past comprehension. Where it cannot know, it will imagine; what the mind
conceives it will attempt to define. Are facts wanting, poetry steps in,
and myth and song supply the void; cave and forest, mountain and valley,
lake and river, are theatres peopled by fancy, and

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">             "as imagination bodies forth  
 The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen  
 Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing  
 A local habitation and a name."</span>

</div>

Traditions of unreal beings inhabit the air, and will not vanish be they
ever so sternly commanded; from the misty records of antiquity and the
relics of past greatness as seen sculptured in stupendous ruins on the
banks of the Nile and the plains of Assyria, strange shapes look with
their mute stony eyes upon a world that knows them but imperfectly, and

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

vainly attempts to unriddle the unfathomable mystery of their being.
Western nations, with their growing civilisations, conjured up monsters
of benign or baneful influence, or engrafted and expanded the older
ideas in a manner suited to their genius and national characteristics.

The creatures of the imagination, "Gorgons and Hydras and Chimeras
dire," shapes lovely and shapes terrible begot of unreason in the
credulous minds of the imaginative, the timid and the superstitious,—or
dreamy poetic fancies of fairies and elves of whom poets sing so
sweetly:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Shapes from the invisible world unearthly singing  
 From out the middle air, from flowery nests  
 And from the pillowy silkiness that rests  
 Full in the speculation of the stars,—"  
                                           <span
class="smallcaps">Keats</span>.</span>

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">                   "or fairy elves,  
 Whose midnight revels, by the forest side  
 Or fountain, some belated peasant sees,  
 Or dreams he sees,—"  
                 <span class="smallcaps">Milton</span>, *Paradise Lost*,
Book i.</span>

</div>

the nameless dreads and horrors of the unknown powers of darkness, the
pestiferous inhabitants of wastes and desert places where loneliness
reigns supreme, and imaginary terrors assault the traveller on every
hand, assuming forms more various and more to be dreaded than aught of
mortal birth,—such vague and indefinable ideas, "legends fed by

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

time and chance," like rumours in the air, in the course of time assume
tangible shape, receiving definite expression by the poet and artist
until they become fixed in the popular mind as stern realities
influencing the thoughts and habits of millions of people through
successive generations. We see them in the rude fetish of the South Sea
Islander, the myriad gods and monsters of heathen mythology, as well as
in the superstitions of mediæval Europe, of which last the devil with
horned brow, cloven hoofs and forked tail is the most "unreal mockery"
of them all. The days of Diabolism and the old witch creed are, however,
passed away; but under the dominance of these ideas during centuries, in
Protestant and Catholic lands alike, hundreds of thousands of innocent
victims of all ages and both sexes were accused of the most absurd and
impossible crimes, and subjected to almost inconceivable torture and
death.

The dying Christian about to pass through the valley of the shadow of
death, in the words of the poet, expresses his faith in the nearness of
the spirit world:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"I see a form ye cannot see  
 I hear a voice ye cannot hear."</span>

</div>

To the spiritually minded other forms, with more of the beautiful and
less of the hideous and frightful, revealed themselves; the solitary
recluse, his body and mind reduced to an unnatural condition by fasting
and penance, in mental hallucination beheld his

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

celestial visitants with awe and adoration, and saw in visions angels
and archangels, cherubim and seraphim towering in a blaze of glory to
illimitable height and extremest space. The rapt seraph and the whole
angelic host of heaven to his ecstatic gaze was a revelation and a
reality as tangible as were the powers of darkness seen and felt by more
sordid natures, incapable of the higher conceptions, and whose minds
were accessible chiefly through their terrors.

To classic fable we are indebted for very many of the fictitious animals
which heralds have introduced into coats armorial. In all ages man has
sought to explain by myths certain phenomena of nature which he has been
unable to account for in a more rational manner. *Earthquakes* were the
awakening of the earth tortoise which carried the earth on its back;
*the tides* were the pulses of the ocean; *lightning* was the breath of
demons, the thunderbolt of Jupiter, the hammer of Thor; *volcanoes* were
the forges of the infernal deities. In the old Norse legends we read of
*waterspouts* being looked upon as sea serpents, and wonderful stories
are related of their power and influence. The Chinese imagine *eclipses*
to be caused by great dragons which seek to devour the sun. Innumerable
beliefs cluster round the *sun*, *moon*, and *stars*. We may trace from
our own language the extent of power which these peculiar beliefs have
had over the human mind. We still speak of mad people as lunatics,
gloomy people as saturnine, sprightly people we term mercurial; we say,
"Ill-star’d event,"

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> &c. &c. The ships
of the early navigators, with masts and sails and other requisites for
directing their motion or influencing their speed, would be objects of
astonishment to the inhabitants of the countries they visited, causing
them to be received with the utmost respect and veneration. The ship was
taken for a living animal, and hence originated, some say, the fables of
winged dragons, griffons, flying citadels, and men transformed into
birds and fishes. The winged Pegasus was nothing but a ship with sails
and hence was said to be the offspring of Neptune.

"In reality," says Southey, in his preface to the "Morte d’Arthur," vol.
ii. 1817, "mythological and romantic tales are current among all savages
of whom we have any full account; for man has his intellectual as well
as his bodily appetite, and these things are the food of his imagination
and faith. They are found wherever there is language and discourse of
reason; in other words, wherever there is man. And in similar states of
society the fictions of different people will bear a corresponding
resemblance, notwithstanding the differences of time and scene." And Sir
Walter Scott, in his "Essay on Romance and Chivalry," following up the
same idea, adds, "that the usual appearances and productions of nature
offer to the fancy, in every part of the world, the same means of
diversifying fictitious narrative by the introduction of prodigies. If
in any romance we encounter the description of an elephant, we may
reasonably conclude that a phenomenon unknown in Europe must

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

have been borrowed from the East; but whoever has seen a serpent and a
bird may easily aggravate the terrors of the former by conferring on a
fictitious monster the wings of the latter; and whoever has seen or
heard of a wolf, or lion and an eagle, may, by a similar exercise of
invention, imagine a griffon or a hippogriff."

Beyond the common experiences of every-day life the popular mind
everywhere cares very little about simple commonplace practical truths.
Human nature seems to crave mystery, to be fond of riddles and the
marvellous, and doubtless it was ever so and provided for in all the old
faiths of the world.

"The multitude of dragons, diverse as they are, reflecting the fears and
fancies of the most different races, it is more than probable is a relic
of the early serpent-worship which, according to Mr. Fergusson, is of
such remote antiquity that the religion of the Jews was modern in
comparison, the curse laid on the serpent being, in fact, levelled at
the ancient superstition which it was intended to supersede.
Notwithstanding the various forms under which we find the old dragon he
ever retains something of the serpent about him, if no more than the
scales. In the mediæval devil, too, the tail reveals his descent."
(Louis F. Day.)

The fictitious beings used as symbols in heraldry may be divided into
two classes: (1) Celestial beings mentioned in Holy Writ, and those
creatures of the imagination which, from the earliest ages, have held

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

possession of men's minds, profound symbols unlike anything in the
heavens or in the earth beneath or in the waters under the earth. They
may be abstract ideas embodied in tangible shape, such as the terrible
creature, the type of some divine quality, that stands calm, immovable,
and imperishable within the walls of our National Museum; such forms as
the dragon, of the purely imaginative class, and those creatures
compounded of parts of different real animals, yet unlike any one of
them, each possessing special symbolic attributes, according to the
traditional ideas held concerning them. (2) Animals purely heraldic,
such as the heraldic tiger, panther incensed, heraldic antelope, &c.,
owe their origin and significance to other ideas, and must be accounted
for on other grounds, namely, the mistaken ideas resulting from
imperfect knowledge of these objects in natural history by early writers
and herald painters, to whom they were no doubt real animals with
natural qualities, and, as such, according to their knowledge, they
depicted them; and although more light has been thrown upon the study of
natural history since their time, and many of their conceptions have
been proved to be erroneous, the well-known heraldic shapes of many of
these *lusus naturæ* are still retained in modern armory. These animals
were such as they could have little chance of seeing, and they probably
accepted their descriptions from "travellers’ tales," always full of the
marvellous—and the misleading histories of still earlier writers.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pliny and many of
the writers of his day describe certain animals in a way that appears
the absurdest fable; even the lion described by him is in some points
most unnatural. Xenophon, for instance, describing a boar hunt, gravely
tells us: "So hot are the boar's tusks when he is just dead that if a
person lays hairs upon them the hairs will shrivel up; and when the boar
is alive they—that is, the tusks—are actually red hot when he is
irritated, for otherwise he would not singe the tips of the dogs’ hair
when he misses a blow at their bodies." The salamander in flames, of
frequent occurrence in heraldry, is of this class. Like the toad, "ugly
and venomous," the salamander was regarded by the ancients with the
utmost horror and aversion. It was accredited with wondrous qualities,
and the very sight of it "abominable and fearful to behold." Elian,
Nicander, Dioscorides and Pliny all agree in that it possessed the power
of immediately extinguishing any fire into which it was put, and that it
would even rush at or charge the flame, which it well knew how to
extinguish. It was believed that its bite was certainly mortal, that
anything touched by its saliva became poisonous, nay, that if it crept
over a tree all the fruit became deleterious. Even Bacon believed in it.
Quoth he: "The salamander liveth in the fire and hath the power to
extinguish it." There is, too, a lingering popular belief that if a fire
has been burning for seven years there will be a salamander produced
from it. Such is the monstrous character given to

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

one of the most harmless of little creatures: the only basis of truth
for all this superstructure of fable is the fact that it exudes an acrid
watery humour from its skin when alarmed or in pain.

Spenser, in the "Fairy Queen," Book 1, cant. v. 18, according to the
mistaken notions of his time, compares the dangerous dissimulation and
treacherous tears of Duessa (or Falsehood) to the crocodile:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"As when a weary traveller that strays  
 By muddy shore of broad seven-mouthed Nile,  
 Unweeting of the perilous wand’ring ways,  
 Doth meet a cruel, crafty crocodile,  
 Which in false guise hiding his harmful guile,  
 Doth weep full sore, and shedding tender tears;  
 The foolish man, that pities all the while  
 His mournful plight, is swallowed unawares  
 Forgetful of his own that minds another's cares."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Shakespeare,
*2 Henry VI*. iii. 1:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">             "as the mournful crocodile  
 With sorrow snares relenting passengers."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Quarles, too, in
his "Emblems":

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O what a crocodilian world is this,  
 Compos’d of treach’ries and insnaring wiles!"</span>

</div>

Bossewell, an heraldic writer of the sixteenth century, after the model
of his forerunner, Gerard Leigh, edified his readers with comments on
natural history in such a delightful manner (according to his friend
Roscarrocke) as to provoke the envy of Pliny in

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Elysium, though
now these descriptions in many instances only serve to call up a smile
from their very absurdity. With "veracious" histories of this
description, is it to be wondered at that such beings as those referred
to were made use of in heraldry and accepted as types or emblems of some
particular quality in man? As an instance of how an error in the form of
an animal may be perpetuated unperceived, it may be mentioned that even
in the best books on heraldry, natural history, and in other illustrated
publications, the elephant is rarely to be seen correctly delineated. A
peculiarity in his formation is that the hind legs bend in the same
manner as the fore legs, so that, unlike other quadrupeds, it can kneel
and rest on its four knees, whereas it is usually depicted with the hind
legs to bend in the same way as those of the horse or the cow. When
artists and herald-painters continue to commit this blunder unobserved,
some palliation may be afforded to the old heralds for their offences
against zoology in the errors and delusions arising from lack of
information. They could have little opportunity of acquiring a correct
knowledge of the rarer kinds of animals; they had not the advantage of
seeing menageries of wild beasts, or of consulting books on natural
history with excellent illustrations, as the modern herald may do. Only
when their scanty information fell short did they venture to draw on
their imaginations for their beasts, after the manner of an ancient
worthy, who "where

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

the lion's skin fell short, eked it out with the fox's."

Some writers, however, maintain that these monstrosities are not so much
the result of ignorance of the real forms of the beasts as that they
were intended to typify certain extraordinary qualities, and therefore
exaggeration of the natural shapes and functions was needful to express
such qualities. This may be true in some instances. Under this idea the
noble form of the lion may have been distorted to resemble the wild cat
in the fury of its contortions. *The Panther incensed*, breathing fire
and smoke out of its mouth, nose and ears, seems as if taken from some
misleading history—like that of the boar, by Xenophon, already referred
to—or the result of the erroneous description of some terrified
traveller. This is a natural and probable mode of accounting for its
unnatural appearance. It may, however, fairly be said that the natural
ferocity of the brute, and also its destructive qualities, are most
fitly typified by the devouring flame issuing from the head of this
bloodthirsty and treacherous beast of prey.

*The Heraldic Pelican*, again, is evidently a mistake of the early
artists, similar to the heraldic tiger, heraldic antelope, &c., and the
persistent following of the traditional "pattern" by the heralds when
once established. Early Christian painters always represented this
emblem of devoted self-sacrifice, *A Pelican in her piety*—that is,
feeding her young with her own blood—as having the head and beak of an
eagle

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

or bird of prey such as they must have believed it to possess, and with
which it would be possible that it could lacerate its own breast; and
not with the clumsy and ungainly "bill" peculiar to this species of
bird, which we know is more suited to gobble up small reptiles than to
"*vulning*" itself.

Some symbols, again, are neither real nor do they pretend to be
fabulous, such as the *two-headed eagle*, but are pure heraldic
inventions that have each their special signification. *The tricorporate
lion* lays no claim to be other than the symbol of a powerful triune
body under one guiding head; the *three legs conjoined*—the arms of the
Isle of Man—is an old Greek sign for expedition. Many other instances
will, no doubt, occur to the reader of similar emblems of this class.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](fsca05)
