[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ar10)  [Next](ar12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Apocalypse Revealed*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1766\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocalypse Revealed

<span class="margnote"><span id="501.">501.</span></span>

Verse 8. And their bodies shall be upon the street of the great city,
signifies that the two essentials of the New Church are totally rejected
by those who are interiorly in the falsities of doctrine concerning
justification by faith alone. By "the bodies of the two witnesses" are
signified the two essentials of the New Church, which are the
acknowledgment of the Lord as the only God of heaven and earth, and that
conjunction with Him is by a life according to the precepts of the
Decalogue (n. 490, etc.). By "the street of the great city," is
signified the falsity of the doctrine concerning justification by faith
alone; by "a street" is signified falsity, as will be seen presently;
and by "a city" is signified doctrine (n. 194). It is called "a great
city," because it is the doctrine which reigns in the whole Reformed
Christian world among the clergy, though not in like manner among the
laity. "By streets," in the Word, almost the same is signified as by
"ways," because streets are ways in a city; but still by "streets" are
signified the truths or falsities of doctrine, because "a city"
signifies doctrine (n. 194); and by "ways" are signified the truths or
falsities of the church, because "the earth" signifies the church (n.
285). That "streets" signify truths or falsities of doctrine, may be
seen from the following passages: And judgment is rejected, and justice
hath stood afar off: for truth is stricken in the street, and rectitude
cannot come (Isa. 59:14). The chariots shall rage in the streets, they
shall run to and fro in the broad ways (Nah. 2:4). In the days of Jael
the ways ceased, the broad ways ceased in Israel (Judg. 5:6-7). How is
the city of glory left? therefore her young men shall fall in the
streets (Jer. 49:25-26; 50:30). They that did feed delicately are
devastated in the streets. The form of the Nazarites is darker than
blackness; they are not known in the streets. They wandered blind in the
streets. They hunted our steps, that we cannot go in the streets (Lam.
4:5, 8, 14, 18). I will cut off the nations, their corners shall be laid
waste, I will desolate their streets (Zeph. 3:6). Afterwards in
sixty-two weeks the streets of Jerusalem shall be built again, but in
troublous times (Dan. 9:25). The street of the city New Jerusalem was
pure gold, as clear glass (Rev. 21:21). In the midst of the street of
it, on this side and that, the tree bearing twelve fruits (Rev. 22:2;
besides other places; as in Isa. 15:3; 24:10-11; 51:20; Jer. 5:1; 6:16;
7:17; 9:21; 11:13; Ezek. 16:24-25, 31; Jer. 44:9, 17; Lam. 2:11, 19;
Ezek. 11:6; 26:11-12; Amos 5:16; Zech. 8:3-5; Ps. 144:13; Job 18:17).
Since "streets" signify the truths of doctrine of the church, therefore:
They taught in the streets (2 Sam. 1:20). And it was said: We have eaten
before Thee and drunk before Thee, and Thou hast taught in our streets
(Luke 13:26). And therefore: Hypocrites prayed in the corners of the
streets (Matt. 6:2-5). And therefore: The householder commanded the
servants to go into the streets and broad ways, and bring them in (Luke
14:21). For the same reason, also, what is false and falsified is
called: Mire, dirt, and dung of the streets (Isa. 5:25; 10:6; Micah
7:10; Ps. 18:42). The prophets who prophesied what was false, should be
cast out into the streets of Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them
(Jer. 14:16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="502.">502.</span></span>

Which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt signifies the two infernal
loves, which are the love of dominating from self-love, and the love of
ruling from the pride of one's own intelligence, which are in the church
where one God is not acknowledged, and the Lord is not worshiped, and
where they do not live according to the precepts of the Decalogue. By
"Sodom," in the spiritual sense, is signified the love of dominating
from self-love, as will be seen presently; and by "Egypt," in the
spiritual sense, is signified the love of ruling from the pride of one's
own intelligence, which also will be spoken of presently; and because
these two loves are signified, therefore it is spiritually called "Sodom
and Egypt." The reason why these loves prevail in the church where one
God is not acknowledged, and the Lord is not worshiped, and where they
do not live according to the precepts of the Decalogue, is, because man
is born into those two loves, and comes into them as he grows up, and
those loves cannot be removed but by God the Savior, and by a life
according to His precepts; and they cannot be removed by God the Savior,
unless He is approached; nor can a life according to His precepts be
given, unless man is led by Him. It can indeed be given, but not a life
in which there is anything of heaven and thence of the church. That life
is given only by Him who is life. That the Lord is that life, may be
seen (John 1:1, 4; 5:26; 6:33-35, and following verses; 11:25, 26; 14:6,
19; and in many other places). \[2\] That the love of dominating from
self-love, and the love of ruling from the pride of one's own
intelligence, are the heads of all the loves of hell, and thus the heads
of all the evils and thence of the falsities in the church, is unknown
at this day; the delights of those loves, which exceed the delights of
all the pleasures of the mind, are the causes of its not being known,
when yet, "spiritually, they are Sodom and Egypt." That "Sodom" is the
love of dominating from self-love, may appear from the description of
Sodom in Moses, that they wished to do violence to the angels who came
into Lot's house; and that fire and brimstone rained upon them out of
heaven (Genesis 19:1, and following verses). By "fire and brimstone,"
that love with its lusts is signified. I saw similar things happen when
the cities and societies of such were overthrown in the day of the Last
Judgment, and they were cast into hell. These loves and their evils are
signified by "Sodom and Gomorrah" (in these places: Isaiah 1:10; 3:8-9;
13:19; Jeremiah 23:14; 49:18; 50:37, 40; Lamentations 4:6; Ezekiel
16:46-50; Amos 4:11; Zephaniah 2:9-10; Deuteronomy 29:23; 32:32; Matthew
10:14-15; 11:23; Mark 6:11; Luke 10:10-12; 17:28-29). \[3\] That this
love is signified by "Sodom," is not known in the world; but keep this
in mind and remember it when you come into the world of spirits, as is
done after death, and you will be fully convinced. But it is to be
known, that there is a love of dominating from self-love, and a love of
dominion from the love of uses; the latter love is celestial, but the
former infernal. Therefore when one makes the head, the other makes the
feet, that is, when the love of dominating from self-love makes the
head, then the love of dominion from the love of uses, which is also the
love of serving the neighbor from the Lord, at first makes the feet,
afterwards the soles of the feet, and, lastly is trodden under foot. But
when the love of dominion from the love of uses, which, as was said, is
celestial love, makes the head, then the love of dominating from
self-love, which, as was observed, is an infernal love, at first makes
the feet, afterwards the soles of the feet, and, finally, is trodden
under foot. These two loves, however, are with difficulty distinguished
by man in the world, because their external forms are similar; yet they
may be distinguished by this, that the celestial love is with those who
approach the Lord, and live according to the precepts of the Decalogue;
and that the infernal love is with those who do not approach the Lord,
and who do not live according to the precepts of the Decalogue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="503.">503.</span></span>

It shall now be said what is signified by "Egypt" in the Word. "Egypt"
signifies the natural man in conjunction with the spiritual, and thus
the affection of truth and thence science and intelligence; but, in the
opposite sense, it signifies the natural man separated from the
spiritual, and then the pride of one's own intelligence, and thence
insanity in spiritual things. "Egypt" signifies the natural man in
conjunction with the spiritual, and then the affection of truth, and
thence science and intelligence, in the following passages: In that day
shall five cities in the land of Egypt swear to Jehovah of Hosts. In
that day shall there be an altar to Jehovah in the midst of the land of
Egypt; then shall Jehovah be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall
know Jehovah in that day (Isa. 19:18-21). In that day shall there be a
highway out of Egypt into Assyria, that Assyria may come into Egypt, and
Egypt into Assyria, and the Egyptians may serve with Assyria. In that
day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and Assyria, a blessing in the
midst of the land; whom Jehovah of Hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be
Egypt My people, and Assyria the work of My hands, and Israel Mine
inheritance (Isa. 19:23-25). Egypt there is the natural, Assyria is the
rational, and Israel is the spiritual; these three make the man of the
church. Hence the king of Egypt was called "the son of the wise," "the
son of the kings of antiquity"; and Egypt was called "the cornerstone of
the tribes" (Isaiah 19:11, 13); and it is said of Solomon that: His
wisdom excelled the wisdom of the Egyptians (1 Kings 4:30). And that he
took pharaoh's daughter to wife, and brought her into the city of David
(1 Kings 3:1). And that he built Pharaoh's daughter a house near the
porch (1 Kings 7:8). \[2\] For the same reason also: Joseph was carried
into Egypt, and was there made the ruler over all the land (Gen.
41:37-57). Since "Egypt" signified the natural man as to the affection
of truth and thence science and intelligence, therefore: Joseph, the
husband of Mary, being warned of an angel, departed into Egypt with the
infant Lord (Matt. 2:14, 15). According to the prediction: When Israel
was a boy then I loved him, and called My son out of Egypt (Hos. 11:1).
Thou hast caused a vine to come out of Egypt, Thou hast planted it, and
didst cause it to take deep root (Ps. 80:8, 9). For man is born natural,
becomes rational, and afterwards spiritual, thus the vine out of Egypt
is planted and takes root. For the sake of this representation also:
Abraham journeyed into Egypt (Gen. 12:10, and following verses). And
Jacob was commanded to go with his sons into Egypt, and also abode there
(Gen. 46 and following chapters). Thence, also, the land of Canaan, by
which the church is signified, is described as to its extent: As far as
the river of Egypt (Gen. 15:18; 1 Kings 4:21; Micah 7:12). And Egypt is
compared: To the garden of Eden, the garden of God (Ezek. 31:2, 8; Gen.
13:10). And the sciences of the natural man are called: The desirable
things of Egypt (Dan. 11:43). And fine linen in needlework from Egypt
(Ezek. 27:7; besides other passages, where Egypt is favorably spoken of;
as in Isa. 27:12-13; Ezek. 29:13-16; 31:1-18; Hos. 11:11; Zech.
10:10-11; 14:16-18; Ps. 68:31-32; Isa. 19:23-24). \[3\] But "Egypt" in
the opposite sense signifies the natural man separated from the
spiritual, and then the pride of his own intelligence, and thence
insanity in spiritual things, in these passages: Because the heart of
Pharaoh is lifted up in his height, and he hath put his top among the
thick boughs, strangers shall cut him off, and cast him down. In the day
that thou shalt go down into hell, I will cover the deep over him, and
thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircumcised (Ezek. 31:10, 18). The
foundations of Egypt shall be overturned; the pride of his strength
shall come down; and his cities shall be devastated in the midst of the
desolate cities. I will give fire in Egypt, and I will disperse Egypt
among the nations, and scatter them in the lands (Ezek. 30:1 to the
end). Woe to them that go down into Egypt for help, and look not to the
Holy One of Israel; for Egypt is man, and not God; and its horses are
flesh and not spirit (Isa. 31:1, 3). Egypt ascendeth as a river; it
saith, I will ascend, I will cover the earth, and I will destroy: come
up, ye horses; rage, ye chariots; the sword shall devour you, and shall
be made drunk with blood; there is no healing to thee (Jer. 46:2, 8-11).
How say ye to Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, and the son of the
kings of antiquity? where now are thy wise men? let them know: the
princes of Zoan have become foolish; they have seduced Egypt, the
cornerstone of the tribes; there shall be no work for Egypt, that it may
make the head and the tail (Isa. 19:1-17). Prophesy against Egypt: O
great whale, that liest in the midst of thy rivers; because he hath
said, The river is mine, and I have made it myself; therefore I will put
hooks in thy jaws, and I will make the fish of thy rivers to stick to
thy scales, and I will leave thee in the wilderness: and therefore shall
the land of Egypt become a desert and a waste (Ezek. 29:1-12). Besides
other places, as Isa. 30:2, 7; Jer. 2:17, 28, 36; 42:13-18; Ezek. 16:26,
28-29; 23:2-33; Hos. 7:11, 13, 16; 9:1, 3, 6; 11:5; 12:1; Joel 3:19;
Lam. 5:2, 4, 6, 8; Deut. 17:16; 1 Kings 14:25, 26; 2 Kings 18:21. \[4\]
Because the Egyptians had become such, therefore they were devastated as
to all the goods and truths of the church. Their devastations are
described by the miracles performed there, which were plagues, and
signified so many lusts of the natural man separated from the spiritual,
which acts solely from one's own intelligence and the pride thereof. The
plagues significative of his lusts were that: The waters in the river
were turned into blood, insomuch that the fish died, and the river stank
(Exod. 7:17-18). That from the rivers and pools frogs were produced over
the land of Egypt; that the dust of the earth was turned into lice; that
swarms of noxious flies were sent (Exod. 8:3-4, 17-18). That boils
breaking forth with pustules were brought upon man and beast; that it
rained hail mingled with fire (Exod. 9:8-10). That locusts were sent;
that there was thick darkness in all the land of Egypt (Exod. 10:4-6,
13-15). That all the first-born in the land of Egypt died (Rev. 11:4-6).
And, finally, that the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea (Exod.
14:28). By these hell is signified. What these things specifically
signify, may be seen in The Arcana Coelestia, where they are explained.
Hence it is evident, what is meant by "the plagues and diseases of
Egypt" (Deut. 7:15; 28:60); what by "being drowned by the river of
Egypt" (Amos 8:8; 9:5); and whence it is that Egypt is called "the land
of bondage" (Micah 6:4); "the land of Ham" (Ps. 106:22); also "the iron
furnace" (Deut. 4:20; 1 Kings 8:51). \[5\] The reason why "Egypt"
signifies not only intelligence but also insanity in spiritual things,
is because the Ancient Church, which extended through many kingdoms of
Asia, was also in Egypt, at which time the Egyptians excelled all others
in cultivating the science of correspondences between spiritual things
and natural, as appears from their hieroglyphics. But when that science
was turned by them into magic, and became idolatrous, then their
intelligence in things spiritual became insanity; for which reason,
"Egypt," in the opposite sense, signifies such insanity. From what has
been said, it may now be seen, what is meant by "the great city which is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt."

<span class="margnote"><span id="504.">504.</span></span>

Where also our Lord was crucified, signifies non-acknowledgment of the
Lord's Divine Human, and thus a state of rejection. It is said in the
church, that they "crucify the Lord" who blaspheme Him; as do those also
who, like the Jews, deny Him to be the Son of God. The reason why they
who deny the Lord's Human to be Divine are like the Jews is because
every man regards the Lord as a Man, and he who regards His Human as
like the human of another man cannot then think of His Divine, howsoever
he may call this the Son of God, born from eternity, and equal to the
Divine of the Father. When it is spoken and read, it is heard indeed,
but still it is not at the same time believed; when the Lord is thought
of as a material man like any other man, and retaining the like
properties of the flesh; and as His Divine is then removed and not
regarded, therefore the same state is induced as if it were denied, for
he denies that His Human is the Son of God, as did the Jews, for which
reason they crucified Him. That the Lord's Human is nevertheless the Son
of God, is openly said (in Luke 1:32, 35; Matt. 3:16-17; and in other
places). \[2\] From these things it appears, why the men of the church
approach God the Father immediately, and many also the Holy Spirit
immediately, but scarcely anyone approaches the Lord immediately. Since
the Jews, from the denial that the Lord was the Messiah, the Son of God,
crucified Him, therefore their Jerusalem is also called Sodom (Isa. 3:9;
Jer. 23:14; Ezek. 16:46, 48). And the Lord says: On the same day that
Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and
destroyed them all; even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man
is revealed (Luke 17:29-30). What is meant by fire and brimstone may be
seen above (n. 452, 494).

<span class="margnote"><span id="505.">505.</span></span>

Verse 9. And they of the peoples, and tribes, and tongues, and nations,
shall see their bodies three days and a half, signifies that when all
they who, until the end of the present church and the beginning of the
New Church, have been and will be in falsities of doctrine and thence in
evils of life from faith alone, have heard and shall hear of these two
essentials, which are the acknowledgment of the Lord and of works
according to the Decalogue. By "peoples, and tribes, and tongues, and
nations," are meant all of the Reformed who have been and will be in
falsities of doctrine, and thence in evils of life from faith alone; by
"peoples" are signified those who are in falsities of doctrine (n. 483);
by "tribes" falsities and evils of the church (n. 349); by "tongues,"
confession and reception thereof (n. 483); and by "nations" those who
are in evils of life (n. 483). Therefore, by these four are signified
all and everyone who have been and who will be such, thus all they who
have been "in that great city," and they that are like unto them; who
will thenceforth come there out of the world. By "their bodies," or
those "of the two witnesses," are signified the two essentials of the
New Church above mentioned (n. 501); by "they shall see" is signified
when they have heard and shall hear of them, because "to see" is said of
their bodies, and "to hear," of these two essentials; by "three days and
a half" is signified to the end and the beginning, that is, to the end
of the present church and the beginning of the New. Now from these
things collected into one sense, it is evident, that by these words,
"They of the peoples, and tribes, and tongues, and nations, shall see
their bodies three days and a half," the things above mentioned are
signified in the spiritual sense. The reason why "three days and a half"
signify to the end and the beginning is because "day" signifies state;
the number "three," what is complete to the end; and "a half," the
beginning; for the same is signified by "three days and a half" as by "a
week," six days of which signify what is complete to the end, and the
seventh day signifies what is holy; for the number "3 1/2" is half of
the number "7," which makes a week, and a double number, and the divided
number of which it consists, have a similar signification. \[2\] That
"three" signifies what is complete, thus to the end, may be seen from
these passages in the Word, that: Isaiah walked naked and barefoot three
years (Isa. 20:3). Jehovah called Samuel three times, and Samuel ran
three times to Eli, and the third time Eli understood (1 Sam. 3:1-8).
Elijah stretched himself three times over the widow's son (1 Kings
17:21). Elijah commanded them to pour water upon the burnt-offering
three times (1 Kings 18:34). Jesus said, The kingdom of the heavens is
like unto leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures till the
whole was leavened (Matt. 13:33). Jesus said unto Peter, that be would
deny Him three times (Matt. 26:34). The Lord asked Peter three times,
Lovest thou Me? (John 21:15-17). Jonah was in the belly of the whale
three days and three nights (Jonah 1:17). Jesus said the temple would be
destroyed, and He would build it up again in three days (Matt. 26:61).
Jesus prayed three times in Gethsemane (Matt. 26:39-44). Jesus rose
again on the third day (Matt. 28:1). Besides many others; as in Isa.
16:14; Hosea 6:2; Exod. 3:18; 10:22-23; 19:1, 11, 15-16, 18; Lev.
19:23-25; Num. 19:11, to the end; 31:19-25; Deut. 19:2-3; 26:12; Josh.
1:11; 3:2; 1 Sam. 20:5, 12, 19-20, 35-36, 41; 2 Sam. 24:11-13; Dan.
10:1-3; Mark 12:2, 4, 6; Luke 20:12-13:32-33. "Seven" as well as "three"
signifies what is full and complete; but "seven" is said of things holy,
and "three" of things not holy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="506.">506.</span></span>

And shall not suffer their bodies to be put into monuments, signifies
that they condemned and will condemn them. By "bodies" are here
signified the two essentials of the New Church (of which, n. 505 and
above); and by "not suffering them to be put into monuments," is
signified to reject them as condemned. This is signified, because by
"being put into monuments," or "buried," is signified resurrection and
continuation of life, for then those things are committed to the earth
which are from the earth, thus which are earthly and thence unclean;
therefore by "not being put into monuments," or "not being buried," is
signified to continue in things earthly and unclean, and for that reason
to be rejected as condemned. It was on this account that in the church
with the sons of Israel, which was a representative church, it was
instituted, that they who were considered as condemned, should be cast
forth and not buried, as is evident from these things: Thus saith
Jehovah concerning them, they shall die of grievous deaths, they shall
not be lamented, neither shall they be buried; they shall be as dung
upon the face of the earth; and their carcass shall be for food to the
birds of the heavens, and for the beasts of the earth (Jer. 16:3-4). The
prophets that prophesy a lie shall be cast out in the streets of
Jerusalem, none burying (Jer. 14:16). In that day they shall bring out
the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of his princes, and the bones
of the priests, and the bones of the prophets out of their sepulchers;
they shall not be collected nor buried; they shall be for dung upon the
face of the earth (Jer. 8:1-2). That the dogs devoured Jezebel in the
field, none burying (2 Kings 9:10). Thou wast cast out of thy sepulchre
like an abominable shoot; as a carcass trodden under feet (Isa.
14:19-20); besides other places; as in Jer. 25:32-33; 22:19; 7:32-33;
19:11-12; 2 Kings 23:16).

<span class="margnote"><span id="507.">507.</span></span>

Verse 10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them and
be glad, signifies the delight of the affection of the heart and the
soul in the church on that account among those who were in faith alone,
as to doctrine and life. By "them that dwell on the earth" are meant
they who are in the church, in the present case, they who are in the
church where faith alone prevails; the earth signifies the church in
which they are (n. 285); "to rejoice and be glad" signifies to have the
delight of the affection of the heart and soul; the delight of the
affection of the heart is of the will, and the delight of the affection
of the soul is of the understanding; for, in the Word, by "heart and
soul" are meant man's will and understanding; hence it is, that it is
said "to rejoice and be glad," although joy and gladness seem to be one
thing; yet in these two expressions there is the marriage of the will
and the understanding, which also is the marriage of good and truth,
which exists in the whole and in every particular of the Word, as is
shown in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred
Scripture (n. 80-90). This is the reason why both these expressions, "to
rejoice and be glad" and "joy and gladness," frequently occur in other
parts of the Word, as in these passages: Behold, joy and gladness,
killing an ox (Isa. 22:13; 35:10; 51:11). Joy and gladness are cut off
from the house of our God (Joel 1:16). The voice of joy and the voice of
gladness shall cease (Jer. 7:34; 15:10). The fast of the tenth shall be
for joy and gladness (Zech. 8:19). Rejoice ye in Jerusalem, be ye glad
in her (Isa. 66:10). Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom (Lam.
4:21). Let the heavens rejoice, and the earth be glad (Ps. 96:11; 68:3).
Make me to hear joy and gladness (Ps. 51:8). Joy and gladness shall be
found in Zion (Isa. 51:3). Thou shalt have gladness, many shall rejoice
at his birth (Luke 1:14). Then will I cause to cease the voice of joy
and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of
the bride (Jer. 7:34; 16:9; 25:10; 33:10-11). Let all that seek thee
rejoice and be glad (Ps. 40:16; 70:4). But let the just be glad and
rejoice in gladness (Ps. 68:3). Be glad in Jerusalem, rejoice for joy
with her (Isa. 66:10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="508.">508.</span></span>

And shall send gifts one to another, signifies consociation through love
and friendship. "To send gifts" signifies to be consociated by love and
friendship, because a gift consociates, for it produces love, and causes
friendship; "one to another" signifies mutually.

<span class="margnote"><span id="509.">509.</span></span>

Because these two prophets tormented them that dwell upon the earth,
signifies that these two essentials, one concerning the Lord and
concerning the Divine Human; and the other concerning a life according
to the commandments of the Decalogue, are contrary to the two essentials
received in the church of the Reformed, one of which relates to a
Trinity of Persons, and the other to faith alone being saving without
the works of the law, and that by reason of this contrariety, those two
essentials of the New Church, which is the New Jerusalem, are held in
contempt, dislike, and aversion. That this is what is signified, when by
"the two prophets" or "witnesses" are meant the two essentials of the
New Church, and when by "them that dwell upon the earth" are meant they
who are in the two essentials of the church of the Reformed, follows as
a necessary consequence; by "tormenting" is signified to be held in
contempt, dislike, and aversion.

<span class="margnote"><span id="510.">510.</span></span>

Verse 11. And after three days and a half the spirit of life from God
entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, signifies that these
two essentials of the New Church, at the end of the former, when the New
Church is beginning and progressing, are vivified by the Lord with those
who receive them. By "three days and a half" is signified to the end and
the beginning (n. 505), thus from the end of the present church to the
beginning of the New, in this case, with those among whom the New Church
begins and progresses, because it is now said of "the witnesses," that
"the spirit of life entered into them, and they stood upon their feet."
By "the spirit of life from God" is signified spiritual life; and by
"standing upon their feet" is signified natural life agreeing with
spiritual life, and thus vivification from the Lord. The reason why this
is signified, is, because by "the spirit of life" is meant the internal
of man, which is called the internal man, which, considered in itself,
is spiritual, for the spirit of man thinks and wills, and to think and
will in itself is spiritual. By "standing upon their feet" is signified
the external of man, which is called the external man, which is in
itself natural; for the body speaks and acts what its spirit thinks and
wills, and to speak and to act is natural; that feet signify things
natural, may be seen (n. 49, 468). \[2\] What is specifically meant by
this expression, shall be explained: Every man who is reformed, is first
reformed as to the internal man, and afterwards as to the external. The
internal man is not reformed by merely knowing and understanding the
truths and goods by which man is saved, but by willing and loving them;
but the external man, by speaking and doing the things which the
internal man wills and loves, and, in proportion as this takes place, in
the same proportion man is regenerated. The reason why he is not
regenerated before, is, because his internal is not before in the
effect, but only in the cause, and, unless the cause be in the effect,
it is dissipated. It is like a house built upon ice, which sinks to the
bottom when the ice is melted by the sun; in a word, it is like a man
without feet to stand and walk upon. It is the same with the internal or
spiritual man, if it is not founded on the external or natural man. Such
then is the signification of "the two witnesses standing upon their feet
after the spirit from God entered into them"; and also of similar
expressions in Ezekiel: Jehovah said unto me, Prophesy unto the wind,
and when I prophesied, the spirit entered into them, and they stood upon
their feet (Ezek. 37:9-10). In the same: A voice speaking unto me, said,
Son of man, stand upon thy feet; and the spirit entered into me and
stood me upon my feet (Ezek. 2:1-2). And in the same: I fell on my face,
then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet (Ezek.
3:23-24). This is what is meant also by the Lord's words to Peter: Peter
said, Thou shalt not wash my feet only, but also my hands and my head.
Jesus said to him, He that is washed needeth not save to wash his feet,
and the whole is clean (John 13:9-10).

<span class="margnote"><span id="511.">511.</span></span>

And great fear fell upon them that saw them, signifies commotion of mind
and consternation at Divine truths. "Fear" has various significations
according to the thing which causes it; here "great fear" signifies
commotion of mind, and consternation at Divine truths; for Divine truths
have these effects with the evil, for they terrify them when at the same
time they hear of hell and eternal damnation; but that terror soon
vanishes, together with the faith that there is any life after death.

<span class="margnote"><span id="512.">512.</span></span>

Verse 12. And they heard a great voice out of heaven, saying unto them,
Come up hither, signifies that these two essentials of the New Church
were taken up by the Lord into heaven, whence they came, and where they
are, and the protection of them. By "a great voice from heaven" is
signified from the Lord, for a voice from heaven is from no other
source; "come up hither," signifies their being taken up into heaven,
whence they came, and where they are, and their protection.

<span class="margnote"><span id="513.">513.</span></span>

And they went up into heaven in a cloud, signifies the taking them up
into heaven, and conjunction there with the Lord by the Divine truth of
the Word in its literal sense. By "ascending up to heaven" is signified
their being taken up by the Lord into heaven, as above (n. 512); in the
present case, also, conjunction with the Lord there, because they
ascended "in a cloud," for by "a cloud" is signified the literal sense
of the Word (n. 24), and by this there is conjunction with the Lord, and
consociation with the angels, see The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem
concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 62-69).

<span class="margnote"><span id="514.">514.</span></span>

And their enemies saw them, signifies that they who are in faith
separated from charity heard them, but remained in their own falsities.
By "seeing the two witnesses" is signified to hear these two essentials
of the New Church, and also to see the confirming things from the Word;
because they saw them "ascending in a cloud," and by "a cloud" is
signified the sense of the letter of the Word (n. 24, 513); that,
nevertheless, they did not receive them, but remained in their own
falsities, is evident from this, that no more is said than that "they
saw," and it follows that "there was a great earthquake," in which they
perished. By "enemies" are meant "they who were in the great city, which
is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt," who were those that are in faith
separated from charity, as may be seen above (n. 501, 502, and following
numbers).

<span class="margnote"><span id="515.">515.</span></span>

Verse 13. And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the city fell, signifies a remarkable change of state then took
place with them, and they were torn away from heaven and sank down into
hell. "In that hour" signifies at the time when they saw "the two
witnesses" ascend into heaven, and nevertheless they remained in their
falsities as above (n. 514); for "the two witnesses prophesied," that
is, taught them (verse 3), and afterwards were killed, and revived; they
also saw them ascend up to heaven, and still did not recede from their
falsities, then there became a great earthquake. That a similar thing
happened with the Two Doctrines of the New Jerusalem, one concerning the
Lord, and the other concerning the Life according to the Commandments of
the Decalogue, may in some measure be seen from the Relations after each
chapter. Those two doctrines are the two witnesses here treated of. By
"an earthquake" is signified a change of state (n. 331), here their
destruction, because in it "a tenth part of the city fell"; by "a tenth
part" is signified all there, for "ten" signifies much and all (n. 101);
in like manner, "the tenth part," or "a tenth," as "the fourth part," or
"a fourth," signifies the same as "four" (n. 322); and "the third part"
or "a third" the same as "three" (n. 400). By "falling" is signified to
sink down into hell, which takes place when they are torn away from
heaven; for the cities in the world of spirits which are in evils and
falsities, after they that dwell therein are visited, informed, and
warned, and still remain in their evils and falsities, are shaken with
an earthquake, by which a gulf is opened, into which they sink down, and
then their inhabitants appear to themselves to be at the bottom, as it
were, in a desert, whence they are severally removed to their places in
hell. That it was so done to this city, will be seen below (n. 531).

<span class="margnote"><span id="516.">516.</span></span>

And in the earthquake were killed the names of men seven thousand,
signifies that in that state all they who were in the confession of
faith alone, and therefore made no account of works of charity,
perished. By "being killed" is signified here, as before, to be killed
spiritually, which is to perish as to the soul; by an "earthquake" is
signified a change of state among them, and their destruction, as above;
by "names of men seven thousand" are signified all who were in the
confession of faith alone, and for that reason made no account of the
works of charity, and therefore condemned those two holy essentials of
the New Church; by "names" are signified they who are such, for "a name"
signifies the quality of a man (n. 81, 122, 165); and by "seven
thousand" are signified all who were such, for the same is signified by
"seven thousand" as by "seven," just as by "twelve thousand" is
signified the same as by "twelve" (n. 348). That "seven" signifies all,
and all things and is predicated of the holy things of heaven and the
church, and, in the opposite sense, of the same when profaned may be
seen (n. 10, 391).

<span class="margnote"><span id="517.">517.</span></span>

And the rest were terrified, and gave glory to the God of heaven,
signifies that they who had adjoined some goods of charity to faith,
when they saw their destruction, acknowledged the Lord, and were
separated. By "the rest" are here meant they who adjoined some goods of
charity to faith; by "being terrified" is signified through fear, when
they saw the destruction of the others; by "giving glory to the God of
heaven" is signified to acknowledge the Lord as the God of heaven and
earth; by "giving glory" is signified to acknowledge and worship; and by
"the God of heaven and earth" is meant the Lord, because He is the God
of heaven and earth (Matt. 28:18). These, because they acknowledged the
Lord from fear, were separated, in order that they might be explored as
to the origin from which they did good, whether from themselves or from
the Lord. All they do good from themselves who do not shun evils as
sins, that is, who do not live according to the commandments of the
Decalogue; but they do good from the Lord, who so shun and live.

<span class="margnote"><span id="518.">518.</span></span>

Verse 14. The second woe is past; behold, the third woe cometh quickly,
signifies lamentation over the perverted state of the church, and then
the last lamentation, to be treated of presently. That "woe" signifies
lamentation over the perverted state of the church, may be seen above
(n. 416); by "the third woe" is signified the last lamentation, when it
is complete and there is an end; for "three" and "a third" have that
signification (n. 505). "To come quickly" signifies hereafter, and
"hereafter" means from chapter 12 to 17, and, lastly, chapter 20, where
it treats of the Last Judgment upon them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="519.">519.</span></span>

Verse 15. And the seventh angel sounded, signifies the exploration and
manifestation of the state of the church after the consummation, when
the coming of the Lord and of His kingdom takes place. By "sounding with
a trumpet" is signified to explore and make manifest the state of the
church after its consummation, when the coming of the Lord and of His
kingdom takes place. The reason is, because this is signified by "the
seventh angel sounding"; for by the six angels and their trumpets
sounding, were signified explorations and manifestations of the state of
the consummated church, as appears from the foregoing chapter, where its
consummation only is treated of; but that now its state after
consummation, which is the coming of the Lord and of His kingdom, is
treated of, appears from what follows in this verse, and afterwards in
this verse: And the seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices
in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of the world are become our Lord's and
His Christ's, and He shall reign for ages of ages (Rev. 11:15). The
reason why this manifestation is effected by "the sounding of the
seventh angel," is, because "seven" signifies the same as a week, and
six days of the week are days of labor, and of what belongs to man, and
the seventh is holy and the Lord's. That by consummation is meant the
devastation of the church when there is no longer any truth of doctrine
and good of life therein, thus when its end has come, may be seen (n.
658, 750); and because then is the coming of the Lord and of His
kingdom, therefore both "the consummation of the age" and "the coming of
the Lord" are spoken of in Matt. 24:3, and they are both also foretold
in that chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="520.">520.</span></span>

And there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of the world
are become our Lord's and His Christ's and He shall reign for ages of
ages, signifies celebrations by the angels, because heaven and the
church are become the Lord's, as they were from the beginning; and that
now they have also become the kingdom of His Divine Human, thus that the
Lord as to both will now reign over heaven and the church to eternity.
"There were great voices" signifies celebrations by the angels; saying,
"The kingdoms of the world are become our Lord's and His Christ's"
signifies that heaven and the church are become the Lord's, as they were
from the beginning, and that now they are also the kingdom of His Divine
Human; "and He shall reign for ages of ages" signifies that the Lord,
both as to His Human and Divine, will reign over them. "Great voices in
heaven" signify celebrations of the Lord, because He has now taken His
great power, appears from verse 17 where "those great voices" are extant
in a summary. By "the Lord" is here meant the Lord from eternity, who is
Jehovah; and by "Christ" is meant His Divine Human, which is the Son of
God (Luke 1:32, 35). \[2\] That the Lord as to His Divine Human also
will reign, manifestly appears from these words: The Father hath given
all things into the hand of the Son (John 3:35). The Father hath given
the Son power over all flesh (John 17:2). Father, all Mine are Thine and
Thine are Mine (John 17:10). All power is given unto Me in heaven and in
earth (Matt. 28:18). Of His Divine Human he also said that: The Father
and He are one. And that He is in the Father and the Father in Him (John
10:30, 38; 14:5-12). To this may be added, that unless the Lord's Human
is acknowledged to be Divine the church must perish, for in that case
the Lord cannot be in man and man in the Lord, as He Himself teaches
(John 14:20; 15:4-6; 17:23); and this conjunction makes the man of the
church, and thus the church. \[3\] The reason why the Lord's Divine
Human is meant by "Christ" is because Christ is the Messiah, and the
Messiah is the Son of God, who was expected to come into the world. That
Christ is the Messiah appears from this: We have found the Messiah,
which is, being interpreted, the Christ (John 1:41). The woman said, I
know that the Messiah cometh, which is called Christ (John 4:25). For
"Messiah," in the Hebrew language, is the Anointed, as Christ is in the
Greek language. That the Messiah is the son of God, appears from the
following passages: The high priest asked Him, whether He was the Christ
(Messiah) the Son of God (Matt. 26:63; Mark 14:61; Luke 22:67; John
20:31). Thou art the Christ the Son of God, which should come into the
world (John 11:27). Peter said, We believe and acknowledge that Thou art
the Christ the Son of the living God (John 6:69). That the Lord as to
the Divine Human is the Son of God: The angel said to Mary, Thou shalt
conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son; He shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest. The Holy Spirit shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore,
that Holy One that shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God
(Luke 1:31-32, 35; and many others). From these things it is plain what
is signified by "their becoming the kingdoms of our Lord and of His
Christ."

<span class="margnote"><span id="521.">521.</span></span>

Verse 16. And the four-and-twenty elders, who sit before God on their
thrones, fell upon their faces and adored God, signifies the
acknowledgment by all the angels of heaven, that the Lord is the God of
heaven and earth, and the highest adoration. By "the four-and-twenty
elders who sit on thrones" are signified all in heaven, specifically in
the spiritual heaven (n. 233, 251); and by "falling upon their faces and
adoring God" is signified the highest adoration, and acknowledgment that
the Lord is the God of heaven and earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="522.">522.</span></span>

Verse 17. Saying, We give Thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, who is, and
who was, and who is to come, signifies the confession and glorification
by the angels of heaven, that the Lord is He who is, who lives, and has
power from Himself, and who rules all things, because He alone is
eternal and infinite. By "giving thanks" is signified the acknowledgment
and glorification of the Lord; that the Son of man, who is the Lord as
to the Divine Human, is the Almighty, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning
and the End, the First and the Last, also who is, and who was, and who
is to come, may be seen above in Revelation (chap. 1:8, 11, 17; 2:8;
4:8); and that thereby is signified that it is He who is, lives, and has
power from Himself, who rules all things, and is alone eternal and
infinite, and God, may be seen above (n. 13, 29-31, 38, 57, 92).

<span class="margnote"><span id="523.">523.</span></span>

Because Thou hast taken Thy great power, and hast entered into Thy
kingdom, signifies the New Heaven and the New Church, where they
acknowledge Him to be the only God, as He is and was. "Because Thou hast
taken to Thee Thy great power" signifies the Divine omnipotence, which
is His, and was His from eternity. "That Thou hast entered into Thy
kingdom" signifies that heaven and the church are now His, as before; by
His "kingdom" is here meant the New Heaven and New Church, treated of in
Revelation (chaps. 21, 22). Revelation from beginning to end treats only
of the state of the former heaven and church, and of their abolition,
and afterwards of the New Heaven and New Church, and of their
establishment, in which one God will be acknowledged in whom there is a
Trinity, and that that God is the Lord. This Revelation teaches from
beginning to end; for it teaches that the Son of man, who is the Lord as
to the Divine Human, is the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the
End, the First and the Last, He that is, was, and is to come, and the
Almighty (n. 522); and, lastly, that the New Church, which is the New
Jerusalem, will be the church of the Lamb, that is, of His Divine Human,
thus at the same time of the Divine, from whence all things are, as is
plain from the following passages: Let us rejoice and exult, for the
time of the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife hath made herself
ready (Rev. 19:7). And there came one of the seven angels, and said unto
me, Come, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife; and he showed me
the holy city Jerusalem (Rev. 21:9, 10). I Jesus am the Root and the
Offspring of David, the bright and morning star; the Spirit and the
Bride say, Come, and let him that heareth say, Come (Rev. 22:16, 17).
There was given unto the Son of man, dominion and glory, and a kingdom;
His dominion is the dominion of an age, and His kingdom shall not perish
(Dan. 7:14).

<span class="margnote"><span id="524.">524.</span></span>

Verse 18. And the nations were angry, signifies those who were in faith
alone, and thence in evils of life, that they were enraged, and infested
those who are against their faith. By "the nations" are meant those who
are in evils of life, and abstractly, evils of life (n. 147, 483); but
here they who are in faith alone, because these are here treated of, and
these are in evils of life, because their religion is that the law does
not condemn them, provided they have faith that Christ took away its
condemnation. "Their being angry" signifies not only that they were
enraged, but also that they infested those who are against that faith,
as may appear from what follows concerning "the dragon" (chap. 12:17,
and afterwards).

<span class="margnote"><span id="525.">525.</span></span>

And Thy anger is come, and the time of judging the dead, signifies their
destruction, and the Last Judgment upon those who have not any spiritual
life. By "Thy anger" is signified the Last Judgment (n. 340), thus their
destruction; the reason why this is signified by "the Lord's anger," is,
because it seems to them as if the Lord cast them down into hell from
anger, when nevertheless it is the wicked who cast themselves down. For
it is like a malefactor who attributes his punishment to the law, or to
the fire that burns, if he thrusts his hand in it, or like ascribing to
a drawn sword in the hand of one defending himself, if he is thrust
through, when he has run against its point. Thus it happens with
everyone who is against the Lord, and, out of anger, rushes against
those whom the Lord protects. By "the dead" who are to be judged, in the
universal sense, are meant they who have died out of the world, but, in
a proper sense, are meant they who have not any spiritual life; judgment
being predicated of these (John 3:18; 5:24, 29). The reason is, because
they are called "the living" who have spiritual life. Spiritual life is
with those only who approach the Lord, and at the same time shun evils
as sins. \[2\] They who have no spiritual life are meant in these
passages: They joined themselves to Baalpeor and ate the sacrifices of
the dead (Ps. 106:28). The enemy persecuteth my soul, he hath caused me
to sit in darkness as the dead of the world (Ps. 143:3). To hear the
groaning of the bound, and to open to the sons of death (Ps. 102:20). I
know thy works, that thou hast a name, that thou livest, but art dead;
be watchful and strengthen the remaining things which are ready to die
(Rev. 3:1-2). The reason these are meant by "the dead," is because
spiritual death is meant; therefore also by "the slain" they are
signified who are destroyed by that death (n. 321, 325), and in other
places. But they who have died out of the world are meant by the dead in
these passages: And the dead were judged from those things which were
written in the books (Rev. 20:12). The rest of the dead lived not again
(Rev. 20:5). The reason is, because, by "the first death" there is meant
natural death, which is from the world; and by "the second death" is
meant spiritual death, which is damnation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="526.">526.</span></span>

And of giving reward to Thy servants the prophets, and to the saints,
signifies the happiness of eternal life to those who are in truths of
doctrine from the Word, and in a life according to them. By "reward" is
signified the happiness of eternal life, as will be seen presently; by
"prophets" are signified they who are in truths of doctrine from the
Word (n. 8, 133); and by "saints" they who are in a life according to
them (n. 173). By "reward" is here meant the happiness of eternal life,
arising from the delight and pleasantness of the love and affection of
good and truth; for every affection of love has its accompanying delight
and pleasantness, and the affection of the love of good and truth has a
delight and pleasantness such as the angels of heaven have; and all
affection continues with man after death. The reason is, because
affection is of the love, and love is the life of man, therefore the
life of everyone after death is such as his ruling love had been in the
world; and the ruling love of truth and good is with those who have
loved the truths of the Word, and have lived according to them. Nothing
else but the delight of good and the pleasantness of truth is meant by
"reward" in the following passages: Behold the Lord Jehovah will come in
strength; behold, His reward is with him (Isa. 40:10; 62:11). Behold, I
come quickly, and My reward is with Me (Rev. 22:12). My judgment is with
Jehovah, and the reward of my work is with my God (Isa. 49:4). For I
Jehovah love judgment, I will give the reward of their work (Isa. 61:8).
Do good hoping for nothing again; and your reward shall be great; and ye
shall be the sons of the Highest (Luke 6:35). And in other places; as in
Jer. 31:15-17; Matt. 2:18; 5:3-12; 10:41-42; Mark 9:41; Luke 6:22-23;
14:12-14; John 4:35-36.

<span class="margnote"><span id="527.">527.</span></span>

And to them that fear Thy name, the small and the great, signifies who
love the things which are of the Lord in a lesser and in a greater
degree. By "fearing the name of the Lord" is signified to love the
things which are of the Lord; "to fear" signifies to love, and "the name
of the Lord" signifies all things by which He is worshiped (n. 81); by
"the small and the great" are signified they who fear the Lord in a
lesser and a greater degree. The reason why "to fear" here signifies to
love is because everyone who loves also fears to do evil to him whom he
loves. Genuine love is not given without that fear. Therefore he who
loves the Lord fears to do evils, because evils are contrary to Him,
being contrary to His Divine laws in the Word, which are from Him and
thus are Himself; yea, they are contrary to His Divine essence, which is
that He wills to save all, for He is the Savior, and cannot save man
unless man lives according to His laws and commandments. And, what is
more, he who loves evils also loves to do evil to the Lord, yea to
crucify Him. This lies inmostly hid in all evil, even among those who
confess Him with their lips in the world. That it is so is unknown to
men, but it is well known to the angels. \[2\] That "to fear God"
signifies to love the things which are of God, by doing them, and by not
willing to do those which are against Him, appears from these passages:
What doth Jehovah God require of thee, but to fear Jehovah thy God, to
walk in all His ways, and to love Him (Deut. 10:12, 20). Ye shall walk
after Jehovah your God, and fear Him, and keep His commandments (Deut.
13:4). Thou shalt fear Jehovah thy God, Him shall thou serve, and to Him
shalt thou cleave (Deut. 10:20; 6:2, 13, 24; 8:6; 17:19; 28:58; 31:12).
Who shall grant that there may be a heart in them, to fear Me, and to
keep My commandments (Deut. 5:29). Teach me Thy way, O Jehovah, unite my
heart to the fear of Thy name (Ps. 86:11). Happy is he that feareth
Jehovah; that walketh in His ways (Ps. 128:1; 112:1; Jer. 44:10). If I
am the Father, where is My honor? and if I am the Lord, where is My
fear? (Mal. 1:6; 2:5; Isa. 11:2-3.) I will give them one heart and one
way to fear Me, and I will put My fear in their heart, that they depart
not from Me (Jer. 32:39-40). The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of
wisdom (Ps. 111:10). Besides other places; as in Isa. 8:13; 25:3; 29:13;
50:10; Jer. 33:9; Ps. 22:23; 33:8, 18; 34:7, 9; 55:19; 115:11, 13;
147:11; Rev. 14:7; Luke 1:50. But the fear of God with the evil is not
love, but the fear of hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="528.">528.</span></span>

And to destroy them that destroy the earth, signifies the casting of
those into hell who have destroyed the church. The reason why by
"destroying them that destroy the earth," is signified the casting of
those into hell who have destroyed the church, is, because by "the
earth" the church is signified (n. 285), and because it follows after
these things, "And the time of the dead is come that they should be
judged," by which is signified the Last Judgment upon those who have no
spiritual life (n. 525); thus here, by "the time is come of destroying
them that destroy the earth," is signified the casting down into hell of
those who have destroyed the church. The like is said of Lucifer, by
whom Babylon is meant, in Isaiah: Because thou hast destroyed thy land
and hast slain thy people (Isa. 14:20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="529.">529.</span></span>

Verse 19. And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen
in His temple the ark of His covenant, signifies the New Heaven, in
which the Lord in His Divine Human is worshiped, and they live according
to the commandments of His Decalogue, which are the two essentials of
the New Church, by which is conjunction. By "the temple of God" is
signified the Lord's Divine Human, likewise heaven, where angels are,
and also the church on earth; that these three are signified by "the
temple of God," and that they cannot be separated, may be seen (n. 191);
but here, by "the temple of God," is signified the Lord in His Divine
Human in heaven where the angels are, because it is called "the temple
of God in heaven." By "the ark in the temple" is meant the Decalogue,
for in the ark there were only the two tables on which the Decalogue was
written. By the temple being "open" is signified that these two, the
Divine Human and the Decalogue, which are the two essentials of the New
Church, are now seen, and were seen after the evil were cast into hell
(n. 528). The reason why it is said "the ark of His covenant was in His
temple," is, because a covenant signifies conjunction, as will be seen
below. \[2\] But something shall first be said of the Decalogue. What
nation is there in the whole world which does not know that it is evil
to kill, to commit adultery, to steal, to testify falsely? If mankind
did not know these things, and if laws were not made to guard against
these crimes, they must perish; for a society, republic, and kingdom,
would fall without such laws. Who can suppose that the Israelitish
nation could have been so much more stupid than all others, as not to
know that these things were evils? Therefore anyone may wonder why these
laws, universally known throughout the whole world, should have been
promulgated by Jehovah Himself from Mount Sinai with so great a miracle,
and were written with His own finger. But hear: they were promulgated
with so great a miracle by Jehovah Himself, and were written by His
finger, to make known to them that those laws were not only civil and
moral laws, but also spiritual laws, and that to act contrary to them,
was not only to commit evil against a fellow citizen and against
society, but that it was also to sin against God. Wherefore these laws,
by being promulgated from Mount Sinai by Jehovah, were made laws of
religion. For it is evident that whatsoever Jehovah God commands, He
commands that it may be a thing of religion, and that it should be done
for His sake, and for man's sake, that he may be saved. \[3\] These
laws, because they were the first fruits of the church about to be
established by the Lord among the Israelitish nation, and because they
were in a short summary the complex of all things of religion, whereby a
conjunction of the Lord with man and of man with the Lord was given,
therefore they were so holy, that nothing could be more holy. That they
were most holy may appear from this that: Jehovah Himself, that is the
Lord, descended in fire, and the mountain then smoked and quaked, and
there were thunders, and lightnings, and a thick cloud, and the voice of
a trumpet (Exod. 19:16, 18; Deut. 5:22-26). The people before the
descent of Jehovah prepared and sanctified themselves three days (Exod.
19:10-11, 15). The mountain was hedged about lest anyone come near to
the lowest part, lest he die (Exod. 19:12-13, 20-23; 24:1-2). This law
was written upon two tables of stone, and that it was written with the
finger of God (Exod. 31:18; 32:15-16; Deut. 9:10). The face of Moses
shone, when he brought those tables a second time down from the mount
(Exod. 34:29-35). Those tables were deposited in the ark (Exod. 25:16;
40:20; Deut. 10:5; 1 Kings 8:9). The place in the tabernacle, where the
ark was, was called the Holy of Holies (Exod. 26:33; and in other
places). The ark, from the law in it, was called Jehovah there (Num.
10:35-36; 2 Sam. 6:2; Ps. 132:8). Jehovah spoke with Moses over the ark
(Exod. 25:22; Num. 7:89). On account of the holiness of that law, it was
not permitted Aaron to enter within the veil, where the ark was, except
with sacrifices and incense, lest he die (Lev. 16:2-14 seq.). From the
Lord's presence and power in the law which was in the ark, the waters of
Jordan were divided, and so long as it rested in the midst, the people
passed over on dry ground (Josh. 3:1-17; 4:5-20). By carrying the ark
around Jericho, the walls fell down (Josh. 6:1-20). Dagon, the god of
the Philistines, fell down to the earth before the ark, and afterwards
lay upon the threshold of the temple with his head broken off (1 Sam.
5:3-4). The Ekronites and the Bethshemites were smitten on account of
the ark to the number of several thousands (1 Sam. 5; 6). The ark was
introduced by David into Zion with sacrifices and rejoicing (2 Sam.
6:1-19). Uzzah, because he then touched it, died (2 Sam. 6:6-7). The ark
in the temple of Jerusalem was the inmost part (1 Kings 6:19 seq.;
8:3-9). The tables upon which the law was written, were called the
tables of the covenant, and the ark, from them, was called the ark of
the covenant, and the law itself the covenant (Num. 10:33; Deut. 4:13,
23; 5:2-3; 9:9; Josh. 3:11; 1 Kings 8:19, 21; and other places). \[4\]
By that law called "a covenant," conjunction is signified; the reason
is, because covenants were entered into for the sake of love, of
friendship, of consociation, and thus of conjunction. Therefore it is
said of the Lord, that: He shall be for a covenant to the people (Isa.
42:6; 49:8). And He is called: The angel of the covenant (Mal. 3:1). And
His blood: The blood of the covenant (Matt. 26:28; Zech. 9:11; Exod.
24:4-10). And therefore the Word is called the Old and the New Testament
or Covenant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="530.">530.</span></span>

And there were lightnings, and voices, and thunders, and an earthquake,
and great hail, signifies that then below there were reasonings,
commotions, and falsifications of good and truth. By "lightnings,
voices, and thunders," are signified reasonings (n. 396); by
"earthquakes" are signified changes of the state of the church (n. 331),
here commotions; by "great hail" are signified falsifications of truth
and good (n. 399). These things took place in the parts below, where the
evil still abode, before the Last Judgment was executed upon them; for
it is said in the preceding verse (18), "And the time is come of judging
the dead, and of destroying them which destroy the earth." Such things
exist in the world of spirits, from the presence and influx of heaven
which is above them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="531.">531.</span></span>

To the above I will add this Relation. I was once seized suddenly with a
disease almost deadly. My whole head was weighed down. A pestilential
smoke ascended from that Jerusalem which is called "Sodom and Egypt." I
was half dead with the severe pain. I expected the end. Thus I lay in my
bed three days and a half. My spirit became such, and from it my body.
And then I heard voices about me, saying, "Lo, he who preached
repentance for the remission of sins, and the Man Christ alone, lies
dead in the streets of our city." And they asked some of the clergy
whether he was worthy of burial. They said, "No; let him lie to be
looked at." And they passed to and fro, and mocked. All this befell me,
of a truth, when I was explaining this chapter of Revelation. Then were
heard harsh speeches of scoffers, especially these, "How can repentance
be performed without faith? How can the man Christ be adored as God?
Since we are saved of free grace without any merit of our own, what need
we then but the faith alone, that God the Father sent the Son to take
away the curse of the law, to impute His merit to us, and so to justify
us in His sight, and absolve us from our sins by His herald the priest,
and then give us the Holy Spirit to operate all good in us? Are not
these things according to Scripture, and also according to reason?"
These things the crowd standing by applauded. \[2\] I heard these
things, nor could I reply, because I lay almost dead. But after three
days and a half my spirit recovered, and, being in the spirit, I left
the street and went into the city, and said again, "Do the work of
repentance, and believe in Christ, and your sins will be remitted, and
ye will be saved; but otherwise ye will perish. Did not the Lord Himself
preach repentance for the remission of sins, and that they should
believe in Him? Did not He command the disciples to preach the same?
Does not a full security of life follow the dogma of your faith?" But
they replied, "What idle talk! Has not the Son made satisfaction? And
does not the Father impute it to us, and justify us who have believed in
it? Thus are we led by the spirit of grace; what sin can then be with
us? What power has death over us? Do you comprehend this Gospel, thou
preacher of sin and repentance?" But then a voice came forth out of
heaven, saying, "What is the faith of an impenitent man, but a dead
faith? The end is come, the end is come upon you that are secure,
blameless in your own eyes, justified in your own faith, devils." And
suddenly a deep gulf was opened in the midst of that city, which spread
itself far and wide; and the houses fell one upon another, and were
swallowed up; and presently water began to bubble up from the wide
whirlpool, and overflowed the waste. \[3\] When they were thus
submerged, and they seemed inundated, I desired to know their lot in the
deep. And it was said to me from heaven, "Thou shalt see and hear." And
then the waters, in which they seemed to be inundated, disappeared
before my eyes; for waters in the spiritual world are correspondences,
and hence appear around those who are in falsities. Then they appeared
to me in a sandy place, where heaps of stones were piled up; amongst
which they were running, and lamenting that they were cast out of their
great city. And they lifted up their voices, and cried, "Why has all
this befallen us? Are we not, by our faith, clean, pure, just, and
holy?" And others said, "Are we not, by our faith, cleansed, purified,
justified, and sanctified?" And others said, "Are we not, by our faith,
become such as to appear before God the Father, and to be seen and
reputed clean, pure, just, and holy, and declared so before the angels?
Are we not reconciled, propitiated, expiated, and thus absolved, washed,
and cleansed from sins? And is not the condemnation of the law taken
away by Christ? Why then are we cast down here as the condemned? We have
heard from an audacious preacher of sin in our great city, 'Believe in
Christ and repent.' But have we not believed in Christ whilst we
believed in His merit? And have we not done the work of repentance while
we confessed ourselves sinners? Why then has all this befallen us?"
\[4\] But immediately a voice from one side said to them, "Do you know
any sin in which you are? Have you ever examined yourselves? Have you,
in consequence, shunned any evil as a sin against God? For he who does
not shun sin, remains in it; and is not sin the devil? Ye are therefore
of those of whom the Lord said: Then shall ye begin to say, We have
eaten and drunk in Thy presence, and Thou hast taught in our streets;
but He shall say, I say to you, I know you not, whence ye are; depart
from Me all ye workers of iniquity (Luke 13:26-27); and of whom in Matt.
7:22, 23. Depart ye, therefore, everyone to his own place. You see the
openings into those caverns, enter, and there work shall be given each
of you to do, and afterwards food in proportion to your work; if not,
still hunger will compel you to enter." \[5\] After this there came a
voice from heaven to some on earth, who were without that great city,
and who are described also (verse 13), crying aloud, "Take heed to
yourselves, take heed how you associate with such persons; can you not
understand that evils, which are called sins and iniquities, render man
unclean and impure? How can man be cleansed and purified from them, but
by actual repentance, and by faith in Jesus Christ? Actual repentance is
to examine one's self to know and acknowledge his sins, to hold himself
guilty, to confess them before the Lord, to implore help and the power
to resist them, and thus to desist from them, and lead a new life, doing
all these things as of yourselves. Do this once or twice a year, when
you approach the Holy Communion, and afterwards when the sins, of which
you have found yourselves guilty, recur; then say to yourselves, We will
not consent to them because they are sins against God. This is actual
repentance. \[6\] "Who cannot understand that he who does not search out
and see his sins, remains in them? For all evil is delightful from
birth; for it is delightful to revenge, to commit whoredom, to defraud,
to blaspheme, and especially to rule over others from self-love; is it
not the delight that causes them not to be seen, and if perchance it is
said they are sins, do you not from that delight excuse them? Yea, you
persuade yourselves by falsities and confirm that they are not sins, and
thus continue in them, and practice them afterwards more than before,
even till you no longer know what sin is, or whether there be sin. It is
otherwise with everyone who actually repents. His evils which he knows
and acknowledges, he calls sins, and on that account begins to shun and
turn away from them, and to feel their delight as undelightful. And in
proportion as this is the case, he sees and loves goods, and at length
feels delight in them, which is the delight of heaven. In a word, so far
as anyone rejects the devil, so far he is adopted by the Lord, and by
Him is taught, led, withheld from evils, and is held in goods. This and
no other is the way from hell to heaven." \[7\] It is wonderful, that
the Reformed have a certain deep-rooted opposition and aversion to
actual repentance, which is so great, that they cannot force themselves
to examine themselves, neither can they see their sins, and confess them
before God. It is as if a horror invades them when they think of it. I
have inquired of many in the spiritual world concerning this, and they
all said that it was beyond their power. When they heard that the
Papists do it, that is, that they examine themselves and confess their
sins openly before a monk, they have greatly wondered, more especially
as the Reformed cannot do the same in private before God, although it is
alike enjoined them before they approach the Holy Supper. Some have
inquired into the cause of this, and it was discovered that faith alone
induced such a state of impenitence, and such a heart. And then it was
given them to see that those of the Papists who adore Christ, and do not
invoke saints, nor adore His vicar, so-called, and any key-bearer of
His, are saved. \[8\] After this, there was heard as it were thunder,
and a voice speaking from heaven, saying, "We are astonished! say to the
assembly of the Reformed, Believe in Christ, and do the work of
repentance, and you will be saved." And I said further, "Is not Baptism
a sacrament of repentance, and thence an introduction into the church?
What else do the sponsors promise for the person to be baptized, but
that he will renounce the devil and his works? Is not the Holy Supper a
sacrament of repentance, and hence an introduction into heaven? Is it
not declared to the communicants, that they should by all means do the
work of repentance before they approach? Does not the Catechism, which
is the universal doctrine of the Christian church, teach repentance? Is
it not said in the six commandments of the second table, Thou shalt not
do this and that evil, and not, Thou shalt do this and that good? Hence
you may know, that as far as anyone shuns evil, so far he loves good,
and that before this he does not know what good is, nor even what evil
is."

<span class="margnote"><span id="532.">532.</span></span>

Revelation 12 1. And a great sign was seen in heaven; a woman clothed
with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelve stars. 2. And being with child, she cried, travailing and pained
to bring forth. 3. And another sign was seen in heaven; and behold, a
great red dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and upon his heads
seven diadems. 4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of
heaven, and cast them to the earth; and the dragon stood before the
woman who was about to bring forth, that after she had brought forth, he
might devour her offspring. 5. And she brought forth a son, a male, who
was to tend all nations with a rod of iron; and her offspring was caught
up unto God and His throne. 6. And the woman fled into the wilderness,
where she hath a place prepared by God, that they may nourish her there
a thousand two hundred and sixty days. 7. And there was war in heaven,
Michael and his angels fought with the dragon, and the dragon fought and
his angels. 8. And they prevailed not, and their place was not found any
more in heaven. 9. And that great dragon was cast out, that old serpent
called the Devil and Satan, that seduceth the whole world; he was cast
out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 10. And I
heard a great voice in heaven saying, Now is come the salvation, and the
power, and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of His Christ; for
the accuser of our brethren is cast down, that accused them before our
God day and night. 11. And they overcame him through the blood of the
Lamb, and through the word of their testimony; and they loved not their
soul even unto death. 12. For this rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that
dwell in them. Woe to those that inhabit the earth and the sea, for the
Devil is come down unto you, having great anger, knowing that he hath
but a short time. 13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the
earth, he persecuted the woman that brought forth the son. 14. And to
the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into
the wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished for a time \[and
times\], <span id="fr_44"></span>[532-1](#fn_44) and half a time, from
the face of the serpent. 15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water
as a river after the woman, that he might cause her to be swallowed up
by the river. 16. And the earth helped the woman; and the earth opened
her mouth, and swallowed up the river which the dragon cast out of his
mouth. 17. And the dragon was angry with the woman, and went away to
make war with the rest of her seed, that keep the commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. 18. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[532-2](#fn_45) And I stood upon the sand of the sea.
THE SPIRITUAL SENSE The contents of the whole chapter It treats here of
the New Church and its doctrine: by "the woman" is here meant the New
Church, and by "the offspring" which she brought forth, its doctrine:
and it also treats of those in the present church, who from doctrine
believe in a Trinity of Persons, and in the duality of the Person of
Christ, likewise in justification by faith alone; these are meant by
"the dragon." Then it treats of the persecution of the New Church by
these, on account of its doctrine, and its protection by the Lord, until
from a few it increases among many. The contents of each verse Verse 1.
"And a great sign was seen in heaven," signifies revelation from the
Lord concerning His New Church in the heavens and on earth, and
concerning the difficult reception of and resistance to its doctrine (n.
532). "A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet,"
signifies the Lord's New Church in the heavens, which is the New Heaven,
and the Lord's New Church about to be upon earth, which is the New
Jerusalem (n. 533). "And upon the head a crown of twelve stars,"
signifies its wisdom and intelligence from the knowledges of Divine good
and Divine truth from the Word (n. 534). Verse 2. "And being with child,
she cried travailing and pained to bring forth," signifies the doctrine
of the New Church about to come forth, and its difficult reception on
account of the resistance by those who are meant by the dragon (n. 535).
Verse 3. "And another sign was seen in heaven," signifies revelation
from the Lord concerning those who are against the New Church and its
doctrine (n. 536). "And behold a great red dragon," signifies those in
the Church of the Reformed who make God three and the Lord two, and who
separate charity from faith, and make faith saving, and not charity at
the same time (n. 537). "Having seven heads," signifies insanity from
the truths of the Word falsified and profaned (n. 538). "And ten horns,"
signifies much power (n. 539). "And upon his heads seven diadems,"
signifies all the truths of the Word falsified and profaned (n. 540).
Verse 4. "And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and
cast them to the earth," signifies that by falsifications of the truths
of the Word they have alienated all spiritual knowledges of good and
truth from the church, and by applications to falsities have entirely
destroyed them (n. 541). "And the dragon stood before the woman who was
about to bring forth, that after she had brought forth, he might devour
her offspring," signifies that they who are meant by "the dragon" will
endeavor to extinguish the doctrine of the New Church at its first
appearance (n. 542). Verse 5. "And she brought forth a son, a male,"
signifies the doctrine of the New Church (n. 543). "Who was to tend all
nations with a rod of iron," signifies which, by truths from the literal
sense of the Word, and, at the same time, by rational things from
natural light will convince all who are in dead worship from faith
separated from charity, that are willing to be convinced (n. 544). "And
her offspring was caught up unto God and His throne," signifies the
protection of the doctrine by the Lord, and its being guarded by the
angels of heaven (n. 545). Verse 6. "And the woman fled into the
wilderness," signifies the church at first among a few (n. 546). "Where
she hath a place prepared by God, that they may nourish her there a
thousand two hundred and sixty days," signifies the state of that church
then, that meanwhile provision is making for its increase among many
until it arrives at its full growth (n. 547). Verse 7. "And there was
war in heaven, Michael and his angels fought with the dragon, and the
dragon fought and his angels," signifies the falsities of the former
church fighting against the truths of the New Church (n. 548). Verse 8.
"And they prevailed not, and their place was not found any more in
heaven;" signifies that they were convinced of being in falsities and
evils, but still they remained in them, and that therefore they were
torn away from conjunction with heaven and cast down (n. 549). Verse 9.
"And that great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the Devil
and Satan," signifies this turning from the Lord to themselves, and from
heaven to the world, and thence coming into the evils of their lusts and
into falsities (n. 550). "That seduceth the whole world," signifies that
they pervert all things of the church (n. 551). "He was cast out into
the earth, and his angels <span id="fr_46"></span>[532-3](#fn_46) with
him," signifies into the world of spirits, which is intermediate between
heaven and hell, from whence there is immediate conjunction with men
upon earth (n. 552). Verse 10. "And I heard a great voice in heaven
saying, Now is come the salvation and the power, and the kingdom of our
God and the authority of His Christ," signifies the joy of the angels of
heaven, because the Lord alone now reigns in heaven and in the church,
and that they are saved who believe in him (n. 553). "For the accuser of
our brethren is cast down, that accused them before our God day and
night," signifies that by the Last Judgment they are removed who opposed
the doctrine of the New Church (n. 554). Verse 11. "And they overcame
him through the blood of the Lamb, and through the word of their
testimony," signifies victory by the Divine truth of the Word, and by
the acknowledgment of the Lord (n. 555). "And they loved not their soul
even unto death," signifies who did not love themselves more than the
Lord (n. 556). Verse 12. "For this rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that
dwell in them," signifies a new state of heaven, that they are in the
Lord and the Lord in them (n. 557). "Woe to those that inhabit the earth
and the sea! for the Devil is come down unto you, having great anger,"
signifies lamentation over those in the church who are in the falsities
of faith, and thence in evils of life, because they are in conjunction
with the dragon (n. 558). "Knowing that he hath but a short time,"
signifies, because he knows that the New Heaven is formed, and that thus
there is about to be the New Church upon earth, and that then he with
his like will be cast into hell (n. 559). Verse 13. "And when the dragon
saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman that
brought forth the son," signifies that the dragonists in the world of
spirits, immediately upon their being thrust down, began to infest the
New Church on account of its doctrine (n. 560). Verse 14. "And to the
woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the
wilderness, into her place," signifies the Divine circumspection over
that church, and its protection, while as yet confined to a few (n.
561). "Where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time,
from the face of the serpent," signifies that by reason of the
craftiness of seducers, provision is made with circumspection that its
numbers may increase until it comes to its full growth (n. 562). Verse
15. "And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a river after the
woman, that he might cause her to be swallowed up by the river,"
signifies reasonings from falsities in abundance to destroy the church
(n. 563). Verse 16. "And the earth helped the woman; and the earth
opened her mouth, and swallowed up the river which the dragon cast out
of his mouth," signifies that those reasonings in all their abundance
fall to nothing before the spiritual truths rationally understood, which
the Michaels, of whom the New Church consists, bring forward (n. 564).
Verse 17. "And the dragon was angry with the woman, and went away to
make war with the rest of her seed, that keep the commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ," signifies hatred kindled in
those who think themselves wise from their confirmations of the mystical
union of the Divine and the Human in the Lord, and of justification by
faith alone, against those who acknowledge the Lord alone as the God of
heaven and earth, and that the Decalogue is the law of life; and their
assaults on novitiates with intent to seduce them (n. 565a). Verse 18.
\[English Bible 13:1\]. "And I stood upon the sand of the sea,"
signifies his state now spiritual-natural (n. 565). THE EXPLANATION.
Verse 1. And a great sign was seen in heaven, signifies revelation from
the Lord concerning His New Church in the heavens and on earth, and
concerning the difficult reception and resistance to its doctrine. By "a
sign from heaven" is here meant a revelation concerning things to come;
and by "a great sign seen in heaven" is meant a revelation concerning
the New Church, for "the woman clothed with the sun," which is the
subject treated of in this chapter, signifies that church. "The male"
which she brought forth signifies its doctrine; her being pained to
bring forth signifies its difficult reception; "the dragon desiring to
devour the male" and afterward "he persecuted the woman," signifies the
resistance it meets with. These things are meant by "a great sign was
seen in heaven." "A sign" is mentioned in the Word of things to come,
and then it is revelation; it is also spoken of truth, and then it is
testification; and it is also spoken of the quality of any state or
thing, and then it is manifestation. "A sign" is spoken of things to
come, and then it is revelation, in the following passages: They shall
tell you what shall happen, that we may know their end, or make you hear
things to come; show signs of the future (Isa. 41:22-23). The disciples
said unto Jesus, What shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the
consummation of the age? (Matt. 24:3; Mark 13:4; Luke 21:7). There shall
be signs from heaven, and signs in the sun, the moon, and the stars
(Luke 21:11, 25). And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man
(Matt. 24:30). It was said unto king Hezekiah, This shall be a sign unto
thee that Jehovah will do this thing, the shadow on the degrees of Ahaz
shall be brought back. Afterwards Hezekiah said, What is the sign that I
shall go up into the house of Jehovah? (Isa. 38:7-8, 22; and in other
places). That "a sign" is said of truth, and then it is testification,
and also it is said of the quality of any state, and then it is
manifestation, is evident from other passages in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="533.">533.</span></span>

A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, signifies the
Lord's New Church in the heavens, which is the New Heaven, and the
Lord's New Church about to be upon earth, which is the New Jerusalem.
That the Lord's New Church is signified by this "woman," is evident from
the particulars in this chapter understood in the spiritual sense; that
by "a woman," in other parts of the Word also, the church is signified,
may be seen (n. 434); and the church is signified, because the church is
called the Bride and Wife of the Lord. The reason why she was seen
"clothed with the sun," is because the church is in love to the Lord,
for it acknowledges Him and does His commandments, and this is to love
Him (John 14:21-24). That "the sun" signifies love (see n. 53). The
reason why "the moon" was seen under the woman's feet is because the
church on earth, which is not yet conjoined with the church in the
heavens, is meant. By "the moon" is signified intelligence in the
natural man, and faith (n. 423); and by being seen "under the feet," is
signified that it is about to be upon earth; otherwise by "feet" is
signified the church itself when it is conjoined. \[2\] It is to be
known, that there is a church in the heavens as well as on earth, for
there also is the Word; there are temples also, and preachings in them,
and there are ministerial and priestly offices. For all angels there
were men, and their departure out of the world was only a continuation
of their life; therefore they are also perfected in love and wisdom,
everyone according to the degree of the affection of truth and good
which he took with him out of the world. The church among them is here
meant by "the woman clothed with the sun," who had upon her head a crown
of twelve stars;" but because the church in the heavens cannot subsist,
except there be also a church on earth, which is in concordant love and
wisdom, and as this was about to be, therefore "the moon was seen under
the feet of the woman," which here specifically signifies faith, by
which, such as it is at this day, there is no conjunction. \[3\] The
reason why the church cannot subsist in the heavens unless there is a
church on earth in conjunction with it, is because heaven where angels
are, and the church where men are, act as one, like the internal and the
external with man; and the internal with man cannot subsist with its
state, unless an external be conjoined with it; for an internal without
an external is like a house without a foundation, or like seed upon the
ground and not in the ground, thus like anything without a root; in a
word, like a cause without an effect in which it may exist. From these
things, it may be seen how absolutely necessary it is that there should
be a church somewhere in the world, where the Word is, and where by it
the Lord is known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="534.">534.</span></span>

And upon her head a crown of twelve stars, signifies its wisdom and
intelligence from knowledges of Divine good and Divine truth from the
Word. By "the crown upon the head" is signified wisdom and intelligence
(n. 189, 235, 252); by "stars" are signified the knowledges of Divine
good and Divine truth from the Word (n. 51, 420); and by "twelve" are
signified all things of the church, which have relation to its good and
truth (n. 348); consequently, by "a crown of twelve stars on the woman's
head," is signified the wisdom and intelligence of the New Church from
the knowledges of Divine good and Divine truth from the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="535.">535.</span></span>

Verse 2. And being with child, she cried, travailing, and pained to
bring forth, signifies the nascent doctrine of the New Church, and its
difficult reception on account of the resistance by those who are meant
by "the dragon." "To be with child" signifies the nascent doctrine,
because by "the offspring which was in the womb" (whose birth is treated
of in verse 5), is signified the doctrine of the New Church; for nothing
else is signified by "being with child," "in travail," and "bringing
forth," in the spiritual sense of the Word, than to conceive and bring
forth those things which are of spiritual life, concerning which
presently. By "she cried, travailing, and pained to bring forth," is
signified the difficult reception of that doctrine, because of
resistance by those who are meant by "the dragon." This is plain from
what follows in this chapter, as "that the dragon stood before the woman
about to bring forth, that he might devour her offspring," and
afterwards he pursued her into the wilderness. \[2\] That by "being with
child," "travailing," and "bringing forth," nothing else is signified in
the Word, appears from the following passages: Jesus said, except one be
born again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; that which is born
of the flesh is flesh, but that which is born of the spirit is spirit
(John 3:3-6). Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear, shout, thou that
didst not travail, for more are the sons of the desolate than the sons
of the married (Isa. 54:1). They have ceased until the barren hath borne
seven, and she that hath many children lacketh (1 Sam. 2:5). By "the
barren" are signified the Gentiles, who had no genuine truths, because
they had not the Word; by "the married" and "she that hath many
children" are signified the Jews who had the Word. She that hath borne
seven languisheth, she hath breathed out her soul (Jer. 15:9). Speaking
also of the Jews: We have conceived, we have travailed, we have as it
were brought forth wind, we have not wrought any deliverance in the
earth (Isa. 26:18). Before she travailed, she brought forth, before her
pain came she was delivered of a male; hath the earth travailed in one
day, shall a nation be born at once? shall I break and not bring forth?
and cause to be generated and shut (Isa. 66:7-9)? Thou travailest, O
earth, before the Lord, before the God of Jacob (Ps. 114:7). Alas, this
day, sons have come to the mouth of the matrix, and there is not
strength to bring forth (Isa. 37:3). Sin shall travail, and No shall be
for a breaking through (Ezek. 30:15-16). I have heard the voice of one
sick, as of her that travaileth with her first born, the voice of the
daughter of Zion, she sighs, she spreadeth her hands, Woe is me, my soul
is wearied because of slayers (Jer. 4:31). Pangs and sorrows take hold,
they travail like one bringing forth (Isa. 13:8). The iniquity of
Ephraim is bound up, the pains of one in travail shall come upon him; he
is a son not wise, for he stayeth not the time in the womb of sons (Hos.
13:12-13). Ephraim, thy glory shall fly away like a bird, from the
birth, and from the belly, and from conception; give them, O Jehovah, a
miscarrying womb, and dry breasts; even when they have begotten, I will
slay the desires of their belly (Hos. 9:11, 14, 16). In these passages
also is described the difficulty of receiving the truths of doctrine
from the Word, by many things relating to "pain in bringing forth," and
in like manner in many other places. Moreover, Jehovah, that is, the
Lord, is called "the Former from the womb" (Isa. 44:2, 24; 49:1, 5); and
by "Former from the womb" is meant the Reformer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="536.">536.</span></span>

Verse 3. And another sign was seen in heaven, signifies revelation from
the Lord concerning those who are against the New Church and its
doctrine. By "a sign" is signified revelation from the Lord, as above
(n. 532). It is called "another sign" because it is a revelation
concerning those who will be against the New Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="537.">537.</span></span>

And behold, a great red dragon, signifies those in the church of the
Reformed who make God three, and the Lord two, and separate charity from
faith, and who make faith saving but not charity together with it. These
are here meant, and in what follows, by "the dragon;" for they are
against the two essentials of the New Church, which are, that God is one
in Essence and in Person, in whom there is a Trinity, and that the Lord
is that God; also that charity and faith are one like an essence and its
form; and that no others have charity and faith, but they who live
according to the commandments of the Decalogue, which are that evils are
not be done; and so far as anyone does not do evils, shunning them as
sins against God, in the same proportion he does the goods which are of
charity, and believes the truths which are of faith. \[2\] That they who
make God three, and the Lord two, and who separate charity from faith,
and make faith saving, and not charity, are against those two essentials
of the New Church, may be seen by anyone who considers the matter. It is
said, they who make God three, and the Lord two, by whom are meant those
who think of three Persons as three Gods, and separate the Lord's Human
from His Divine. And who thinks otherwise, or can think otherwise,
whilst, according to a formula of faith, he prays, "That God the Father
for the sake of the Son would send the Holy Spirit?" Does he not pray to
God the Father as to one God, and for the sake of the Son as another,
and concerning the Holy Spirit as a third? From which it is evident that
although in thought he makes three Persons one God, still he divides
them, that is, divides his idea into three gods when he so prays. The
same formula of faith also makes the Lord two, since he thinks only of
the Lord's Human, and not at the same time of His Divine; "for the sake
of the Son" means for the sake of His Human which suffered the cross.
From what has now been said, it may appear who they are that are meant
by the dragon, who would devour the woman's offspring, and afterwards
"pursued the woman into the wilderness on account of her offspring."
\[3\] The reason why the dragon is called "great," is because all the
churches of the Reformed distinguish God into three Persons, and make
faith alone saving, except some here and there, who do not think alike
concerning the Trinity, and concerning faith. They who divide God into
three Persons, and adhere to these words of the Athanasian doctrine,
"There is one Person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of
the Holy Spirit"; and also to these, "The Father is God, the Son is God,
and the Holy Spirit is God"; these, I say, cannot make one God out of
three; they may indeed say that they are one God, but they cannot think
so. In like manner they who think concerning the Lord's Divine from
eternity as concerning the second Person of the Divinity, and concerning
His Human in time as concerning the human of another man, cannot do
otherwise than make the Lord two, although it is said in the Athanasian
doctrine that His Divine and Human are one Person, united as the soul
and the body. \[4\] The dragon is called "red" because "red" signifies
falsity from the evils of lusts, which is infernal falsity. Now because
these two essentials of the doctrine in the churches of Reformed are
falsities, and as falsities devastate the church, since they take away
its truths and goods, therefore they were represented by "a dragon." The
reason is, because by "a dragon," in the Word, is signified the
devastation of the church, as may appear from the following passages: I
will make Jerusalem heaps, a habitation of dragons, and I will reduce
the cities of Judah to a waste (Jer. 9:11). Behold, a great tumult out
of the land of the north, to reduce the cities of Judah to a waste, a
habitation of dragons (Jer. 10:22). Hazor shall become a habitation of
dragons, a desolation forever (Jer. 49:33). That it may be a habitation
of dragons, a court for the daughters of the owl (Isa. 34:13). In the
habitation of dragons is his couch (Isa. 35:7). I will go despoiled and
naked, I will make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning like the
daughters of the owl (Micah 1:8). I cried, I am become a brother to
dragons, and a companion to the daughters of the screech owl (Job
30:28-29). The ijim shall answer in his palaces, and dragons in temples
(Isa. 13:22). Babylon shall become heaps, a habitation of dragons, a
hissing and an astonishment (Jer. 51:37). Thou hast broken us in the
place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death (Ps. 44:19). I
have laid the mountains of Esau and his heritage a waste for the dragons
of the wilderness (Mal. 1:3, besides other places; as in Isa. 43:20;
Jer. 14:6; Ps. 91:13, 14; Deut. 32:33). \[5\] That by "the dragon" are
here meant those who are in faith alone, and reject the works of the law
as not saving, has sometimes been testified to me in the spiritual world
by living experience. I have seen several thousands of them assembled
together, when from a distance they have appeared like a dragon with a
long tail, that seemed set with spines like thorns, which signified
falsities. Once, also, there was seen a dragon still larger, which
raising his back and lifting up his tail towards heaven, endeavored to
draw down the stars from thence. Thus it was made manifest before my
eyes that no others are meant by "the dragon."

<span class="margnote"><span id="538.">538.</span></span>

Having seven heads, signifies insanity from the truths of the Word
falsified and profaned. By "the head" is signified wisdom and
intelligence, and, in the opposite sense, insanity; but by "seven heads"
here, because they were the dragon's, is properly signified insanity
from the truths of the Word falsified and profaned; for "seven" is
predicated of things holy, and, in the opposite sense, of things profane
(n. 10); therefore it follows that on his heads were seen "seven
diadems," and by "diadems" are signified the truths of the Word, here
falsified and profaned. That by "the head" is signified wisdom and
intelligence, is plain from these passages: I will give you men wise,
and intelligent, and make them your heads (Deut. 1:13). Jehovah hath
closed your eyes, the prophets, and your heads, the seers, hath he
covered (Isa. 29:10). By the head of Nebuchadnezzar's image of pure gold
(Dan. 2:32), nothing else is signified but the wisdom of the first age,
which was with the men of the Most Ancient Church. By "the head" in the
opposite sense is signified insanity and folly; in David: God shall
wound the head of the enemies, the hairy crown of him who goeth on in
his guilt (Ps. 68:21). Nor is anything else signified by "the head of
the serpent," which was to be trodden down (Gen. 3:15); and by "smiting
the head over many countries" (Ps. 110:6, 7); also by "putting dust on
the head;" and by "inducing baldness," and by "putting the hand on the
head," when they were ashamed, or grieved at having acted insanely
against wisdom (Isa. 7:20; 15:2; Ezek. 7:18; 27:30; Jer. 2:37; 14:3, 4;
Lam. 2:10; 2 Sam. 13:19). But by "seven heads" is also signified
insanity from truths falsified and profaned in what follows in
Revelation (13:1, 3; 17:3, 7, 9).

<span class="margnote"><span id="539.">539.</span></span>

And ten horns, signifies much power. "A horn" signifies power (n. 270),
and "ten" signifies much (n. 101). The reason why it is said that the
dragon has much power, is, because the salvation of man by faith alone,
without the works of the law, which faith is meant by "the dragon,"
captivates minds, and then confirmations persuade. It captivates,
because man, on hearing that the damnation of the law is taken away, and
the Lord's merit is imputed to him through faith alone in this, he can
indulge in the pleasures of his mind and body, without any fear of hell;
hence comes the power which is signified by "the ten horns of the
dragon." That such has been his power, evidently appears from the
reception of that faith everywhere throughout the Reformed Christian
world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="540.">540.</span></span>

And upon his heads, seven diadems, signifies all the truths of the Word
falsified and profaned. By "diadems" or precious stones, are signified
the truths of the Word; specifically, the truths of the sense of the
letter of the Word, but here, those truths falsified and profaned, from
their being seen "upon the seven heads of the dragon," by which is
signified insanity from truths falsified and profaned (n. 538). \[2\]
That by "diadems," or precious stones, are signified the truths of the
sense of the letter of the Word, may be seen in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem Concerning the Sacred Scripture (n.43-45); where it is shown
that Divine truths in ultimates, which are the truths of the sense of
the letter of the Word, are signified by: The twelve precious stones in
the breastplate of Aaron, which was the Urim and Thummim (Exod. 28:6,
15-21, 30). And by the precious stones in the garden of Eden, in which
the king of Tyre is said to have been (Ezek. 28:12-13). Also by the
twelve precious stones, of which the foundations of the wall of the New
Jerusalem consisted (Rev. 21:17-20). The truths of the sense of the
letter of the Word are signified by "diadems," or precious stones,
because all things of the sense of the letter of the Word are
transparent before angels, from its spiritual sense, thus from the light
of heaven, in which the spiritual truths of the Word are; for "a stone,"
in the Word, signifies truth in ultimates; hence, "a precious stone"
signifies that truth transparent. \[3\] The reason why the truths of the
Word, when falsified and profaned, are also called "diadems," is because
they shine from themselves, whether they be possessed by this person or
that; in the same manner as diadems on earth, in whosesoever hand they
are. It has sometimes been given me to see adulterous women, on their
first coming from the earth into the world of spirits, decked with
diadems; and Jews, likewise, selling diadems, which they had procured to
themselves from heaven; from which it was plain, that evils and
falsities, with such, do not change the light and splendor of the truths
of the Word. Therefore the like is signified by: The ten diadems upon
the horns of the beast which came up out of the sea (Rev. 13:1). And by
the precious stones on the woman who sat on the scarlet beast (Rev.
17:3-5). That the truths of the Word are what are signified by
"diadems," appears manifestly in Revelation, that: There were seen upon
the head of Him who sat upon the white horse, and whose name was the
Word of God, many diadems (Rev. 19:12-13).

<span class="margnote"><span id="541.">541.</span></span>

Verse 4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and
cast them to the earth, signifies that by falsifications of the truths
of the Word they have alienated all spiritual knowledges of good and
truth from the church, and, by applications to falsities, have entirely
destroyed them. By "the tail," when the subject treated of relates to
those who have confirmed heretical things from the Word, are signified
the truths of the Word falsified (n. 438); by "stars" are signified
spiritual knowledges of good and truth (n. 51, 420); by "the third part"
is signified all (n. 400, 505); and by "drawing them from heaven, and
casting them to the earth," is signified to alienate them from the
church, and to destroy them utterly; for when they are drawn down from
heaven, they are also drawn down from the church, because every truth of
the Word is insinuated from the Lord through heaven into the man of the
church; nor are truths drawn down by anything else than by
falsifications of them in the Word, since there and thence are the
truths of heaven and the church. \[2\] That all the truths of the Word
have been destroyed by those who are meant by "the dragon" spoken of
above (n. 537), cannot be believed by anyone in the world, and yet they
have been so destroyed, so that not one doctrinal truth remains; this
was examined into in the spiritual world, with the learned of the
clergy, and was found to be so. The reasons I know, but I shall here
mention only one of them. They assert, that whatsoever proceeds from
man's will and judgment is not good; and that therefore the goods of
charity, or good works, being done by man, contribute nothing to
salvation, but faith only; when, nevertheless, that alone, by virtue of
which man is man, and by which he is conjoined with the Lord, is that he
can do good and believe truth, as from himself, that is, as from his own
will according to his own judgment. If this faculty were taken away from
him, all power of conjunction of man with the Lord, and of the Lord with
man, would also be taken away at the same time; for this is the
reciprocal of love, which the Lord gives to everyone who is born a man,
and which He also preserves in him to the end of his life, and
afterwards to eternity. If this were taken away from man, every truth
and good of the Word would also be taken away, insomuch that the Word
would be nothing but a dead letter and an empty volume; for the Word
teaches nothing but the conjunction of man with the Lord by charity and
faith, and both from man as from himself. \[3\] They who are meant by
"the dragon" (spoken of above, n. 537), have broken this only bond of
conjunction, by asserting that the goods of charity, or good works,
which proceed from man, and his will and judgment, are only moral,
civil, and political works, by which man has conjunction with the world,
and none at all with God and with heaven; and when that bond is thus
broken, there is then no doctrinal truth of the Word remaining; and if
the truths of the Word are applied to confirm faith alone as saving
without the works of the law, then they are all falsified; and if the
falsification proceeds so far as to affirm, that the Lord has not
commanded good works in the Word for the sake of man's conjunction with
Himself, but only for the sake of his conjunction with the world, then
the truths of the Word are profaned; for thus the Word becomes no longer
a Holy Book, but a profane book; but see the experience on this subject
at the end of the chapter. The like things are signified by these words
in Daniel, concerning the he-goat: The he-goat with his horn cast down
some of the host of heaven and of the stars to the earth, and trampled
upon them; and he cast down truth to the earth (Dan. 8:10, 12).

<span class="margnote"><span id="542.">542.</span></span>

And the dragon stood before the woman who was about to bring forth, that
after she had brought forth, he might devour her offspring, signifies
that they who are meant by "the dragon" will endeavor to extinguish the
doctrine of the New Church in its first origin. Who they are that are
meant by "the dragon" may be seen above (n. 537); that by "the woman" is
signified the New Church (n. 533); that by "bringing forth" is signified
to receive the goods and truths of doctrine from the Word (n. 535); that
by "the offspring" which she brought forth is signified the doctrine of
the New Church, will be seen in the next article. "To devour" signifies
to extinguish, because by "the offspring" is signified doctrine; and
when "to devour" is said in relation to the offspring, to extinguish is
said in relation to doctrine. The reason why this was the case in its
first origin, is because it is said, that "the dragon" stood before the
woman, to devour her offspring after she had brought forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="543.">543.</span></span>

Verse 5. And she brought forth a son, a male, signifies the doctrine of
the New Church. By "a son," in the Word, is signified the truth of
doctrine, and also the understanding, and thence the thought, of truth
and good; but by "a daughter" is signified the good of doctrine, as also
the will, and thence the affection of truth and good; and by "a son, a
male" is signified truth conceived in the spiritual man, and born in the
natural man. The reason is, because by "generations and births," in the
Word, are signified spiritual generations and births, all which in
general relate to good and truth (n. 535); for nothing else is begotten
and born of the Lord as Husband, and of the church as Wife. Now since by
"the woman" who brought forth is signified the New Church (n. 533), it
is plain that by "the son, a male" is signified the doctrine of that
church. The doctrine here meant is The New Jerusalem and Its Heavenly
Doctrine, published in London, 1758; as also The Doctrines concerning
the Lord, concerning The Sacred Scripture, and concerning Life according
to the Commandments of the Decalogue, published in Amsterdam; for by
doctrine all the truths of doctrine are meant, because doctrine is the
complex of them. When these doctrines were written, the dragonists stood
around me, and endeavored, with all their fury, to devour, that is, to
extinguish them. This news it is permitted me to relate, because of a
truth it so happened. The dragonists who stood around me were from all
parts of the Reformed Christian world. \[2\] Since there is no other
offspring born from the spiritual marriage, a male offspring is truth
and good in the understanding and thence in the thought; and a female
offspring is truth and good in the will, and thence in the affections;
therefore by "a son" in the Word is signified truth. To confirm this
some passages shall be adduced, from which this may in some measure be
seen: Lo, sons are an heritage of Jehovah, and the fruit of the belly is
His reward; as arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the sons of
youth (Ps. 127:3-5). Make thee bald, and poll thee for the sons of thy
delights, for they have gone from thee (Micah 1:16). I saw two olive
trees near the lampstand; and he said, These are the two sons of the
olive tree that stand near the Lord of the whole earth (Zech. 4:11, 14).
My tent is devastated, My sons have gone forth from Me, and they are not
(Jer. 10:20). My sons are become devastated, because the enemy hath
prevailed (Lam. 1:16). Thy sons, O Jerusalem, have fainted, they lie at
the head of all the streets (Isa. 51:20). The fathers shall eat the sons
in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers, and the
whole remnant of thee will I scatter to every wind (Ezek. 5:10). The son
shall be divided against the father, and the father against the son
(Matt. 10:21; Mark 13:12; Luke 12:53). Thou hast taken the vessels of
thy ornament from My gold, and hast made to thyself images of a male,
with which thou didst commit whoredom (Ezek. 16:17). Jesus said, The
seed are the sons of the kingdom, and the tares are the sons of the evil
one (Matt. 13:38). \[3\] That "the Son of man" is the Divine truth of
the Word, thus the Lord, may be seen in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem concerning the Lord (n. 19-28). In the passages quoted above,
by "sons" are meant they who are in truths of doctrine from the Word,
and, abstractly, the truths themselves; in like manner in other places;
as in Isa. 13:17, 18; 14:21, 22; 43:6; 49:17, 22; 51:17, 18; 60:9; Jer.
3:24, 25; 5:17; Ezek. 14:16-18, 20; 16:20, 36, 45; 20:26, 31; 23:37;
Hos. 11:9-11; Zech. 9:13; Ps. 144:11, 12; Deut. 32:8. That by "a
daughter" is signified the affection of the truth of the church, thus
the church as to that affection, appears from so many passages in the
Word, that to adduce them would fill many pages; nothing else is meant
by "the daughter of Zion," "the daughter of Jerusalem," "the daughter of
Judah," "the daughter of Israel." Some passages respecting "the daughter
of Zion" may be seen adduced (n. 612). Who cannot see that not any
"daughter of Zion," "Jerusalem," "Judah," and "Israel," so often
mentioned in the Word, can be meant?

<span class="margnote"><span id="544.">544.</span></span>

Who was to tend all nations with a rod of iron, signifies which, by
truths from the sense of the letter of the Word, and, at the same time,
by rational things from natural light, will convince all who are in dead
worship from faith separated from charity, that are willing to be
convinced. This is concerning the doctrine of the New Church, because it
is spoken of "the son a male," by whom that doctrine is signified (n.
543); "to tend" signifies to teach and instruct (n. 383); here to
convince those who are willing to be convinced; by "nations" are
signified they who are in evils of life (n. 483); here, they who are in
dead worship from faith separated from charity, because these are here
treated of; and these are in evils of life, for when charity is
separated, there is not any good of life, and where good is not, there
evil is. That "to rule with a rod of iron" signifies by the truths of
the literal sense of the Word, and, at the same time, by rational things
from natural light, may be seen above (n. 148).

<span class="margnote"><span id="545.">545.</span></span>

And her offspring was caught up unto God and His throne, signifies the
protection of the doctrine by the Lord, because it is for the New
Church, and its being guarded by the angels of heaven. By these words is
signified the protection of the doctrine by the Lord, because it is said
that "the dragon stood before the woman about to bring forth, to devour
her offspring after it was brought forth;" and by "offspring" and "a
son, a male" is signified the doctrine for the New Church (n. 542, 543).
Being guarded by the angels is also signified, because it is said, that
"it was caught up unto God and to His throne;" and by "a throne" is
signified the angelic heaven (n. 14, 221, 222).

<span class="margnote"><span id="546.">546.</span></span>

Verse 6. And the woman fled into the wilderness, signifies the church
which is the New Jerusalem, at first among a few. By "the woman" is
signified the New Church (n. 533); and by "a wilderness" is signified
where there are no longer any truths. That its being at first among a
few is signified, because it follows, "where she hath a place prepared
by God, that they should nourish her there a thousand two hundred and
sixty days," by which is signified its state at that time, that in the
meanwhile it may be provided among many; even until it increases to its
appointed state (n. 547). By "a wilderness," in the Word, is signified:
(1) The church devastated, or in which all the truths of the Word are
falsified, such as it was among the Jews at the time of the Lord's
advent. (2) The church in which there are no truths, because they have
not the Word, such as it was among the upright Gentiles in the Lord's
time. (3) A state of temptation in which man is, as it were, without
truths, because he is surrounded by evil spirits who induce temptations,
and then as it were they deprive him of truths. \[2\] (1) That by "a
wilderness" is signified the church devastated, or in which all the
truths of the Word are falsified, such as it was among the Jews in the
Lord's time, appears from these passages: Is this the man that made the
earth to quake, that did shake kingdoms, that made the world a
wilderness? (Isa. 14:16-17). This is concerning Babylon: Thorns and
briers are come up on the land of My people; the palace shall be a
wilderness (Isa. 32:13-14). I saw, and lo, Carmel was a wilderness, the
whole land shall be waste (Jer. 4:26-27). "The earth" is the church (n.
285): The pastors have destroyed My vineyard, they have made My
desirable places a wilderness of solitude; the wasters are come in the
wilderness (Jer. 12:10, 12). A vine is planted in the wilderness, in a
dry and thirsty land (Ezek. 19:13). The fire hath consumed the
habitations of the wilderness (Joel 1:19, 20). The day of Jehovah
cometh, the land is as the garden of Eden before Him, but behind Him a
waste wilderness (Joel 2:1, 3). See ye the word of Jehovah; have I been
a wilderness to Israel, or a land of darkness? (Jer. 2:31). The voice of
him that crieth in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of Jehovah; make
straight in the desert a highway for our God (Isa. 40:3; besides other
places; as in Isa. 33:9; Jer. 3:2; 23:10; Lam. 5:9; Hos. 2:2-3; 13:15;
Joel 3:19; Mal. 1:3; Ps. 107:33-34; Matt. 24:26; Luke 13:35). That such
also is the state of the church at this day, may be seen below (n. 566).
\[3\] (2) That by "a wilderness" is signified the church in which there
are no truths, because they have not the Word, as with the upright
Gentiles in the Lord's time, appears from these passages: The spirit
shall be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness shall be a
fruitful field, then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness (Isa.
32:15-16). I will place fountains in the midst of the valleys, and make
the wilderness a pool of waters; I will give in the wilderness the
cedar, shittim, and the olive tree (Isa. 41:18-19). He shall make the
wilderness into a pool of waters and the dry land to springs of water
(Ps. 107:35). I will make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the
desert, to give drink to My people, My chosen (Isa. 43:19-20). Jehovah
will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of
Jehovah; gladness and joy shall be found therein (Isa. 51:3). The
habitations of the wilderness drop (Ps. 65:12). Let the wilderness lift
up its voice, let the inhabitants of the rock sing (Isa. 42:11). \[4\]
(3) That by "a wilderness" is signified a state of temptation, in which
man is as it were without truths, because surrounded by evil spirits,
who induce temptation, and then as it were deprive him of truths,
appears from Matt. 4:1-3; Mark 1:12-13; Luke 4:1-3; Ezek. 20:34-37; Jer.
2:2, 6-7; Hos. 2:13-16; Ps. 107:4-7; Deut. 1:31, 33; 8:2-4, 15-16;
32:10.

<span class="margnote"><span id="547.">547.</span></span>

Where she hath a place prepared by God, that they may nourish her there
a thousand two hundred and sixty days, signifies the state of the church
at that time, that in the meantime it may be provided among many, even
until it increases to its appointed state. By "place" is signified state
(n. 947); and by "to nourish," provision for its increase, for thus is
the church nourished; hence by "having a place prepared by God that they
may nourish her," is signified the state of the church that in the
meantime it may be provided among many; by "a thousand two hundred and
sixty days" is signified to the end and the beginning (n. 491), that is,
to the end of the former church and the beginning of the New, the same
as by a time, and times, and half a time, Verse 14 (n. 562); thus, also,
to its appointed state, that is, until it exists as has been provided.
It is of the Lord's Divine providence, that the church should at first
be among a few, and that it should successively increase among many,
because the falsities of the former church must first be removed; for
before this, truths cannot be received, since truths, which are received
and implanted before falsities are removed, do not remain, and they are
also dissipated by the dragonists; the like happened with the Christian
church, which increased successively from a few to many. Another reason
is, that the New Heaven is first to be formed, which will act as one
with the church that will be on earth; therefore we read that: He saw a
New Heaven, and the Holy Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God
(Rev. 21:1-2). It is certain that the New Church, which is the New
Jerusalem, will exist, because it is foretold in Revelation (chapters
21-22); and it is also certain that the falsities of the former church
are first to be removed, because they are what it treats of in
Revelation as far as chapter 20.

<span class="margnote"><span id="548.">548.</span></span>

Verse 7. And there was war in heaven, Michael and his angels fought with
the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, signifies the
falsities of the former church fighting against the truths of the New
Church. By "war" is signified spiritual war, which is of falsity against
truth, and truth against falsity (n. 500), for no other war can take
place in heaven, where this is said to have existed; neither can it take
place in heaven, when once formed of angels; but it was done in "the
former heaven which passed away" (spoken of in Rev. 21:1). Concerning
which heaven, see the explanation there given; for that heaven passed
away by the Last Judgment on the dragon and his angels, which is also
signified by "the dragon was cast down, and his place was found no more
in heaven," as appears from what follows. What the falsities are, which
are meant by "the dragon," and which are about to fight against the
truths of the New Church, may be seen above (n. 537). By "Michael" is
not meant any archangel; neither by "Gabriel, and Raphael," but
ministries in heaven are meant; the ministry signified by "Michael" is
performed by those who confirm from the Word, that the Lord is the God
of heaven and earth, and that God the Father and He are one, as the soul
and body are one; also that men ought to live according to the
commandments of the Decalogue, and that then men have charity and faith.
"Michael" is also mentioned in Daniel (10:13, 21; 12:1); and by him a
similar ministry is meant, as appears from chapters 9-11, and from the
last verses of chapter 12. But by "Gabriel" is meant the ministry of
those who teach from the Word, that Jehovah came into the world, and
that the Human He there assumed is the Son of God, and Divine; for which
reason, the angel who announced the same to Mary is called "Gabriel"
(Luke 1:19, 26-35). They also, who are engaged in those ministries, are
named "Michaels" and "Gabriels" in heaven. By "an angel," in the highest
sense, is meant the Lord; and, in a relative sense, the heaven of
angels, as also an angelic society as may be seen above (n. 5, 65, 258,
342, 344, 415, 465); but here, a ministry is signified, because they are
mentioned by name; and, in Daniel, Michael is called "a prince"; and by
"a prince" in the Word, is signified a principal truth, and by "a king,"
truth itself (n. 20).

<span class="margnote"><span id="549.">549.</span></span>

Verse 8. And they prevailed not, and their place was not found any more
in heaven, signifies that they were convicted of being in falsities and
evils, but still they remained in them, and that therefore they were
torn away from conjunction with heaven and cast down. That this may be
understood, something must first be said concerning the state of those
who come into the other life after death. All there are first instructed
by angels, and led from one society to another, and explored whether
they will receive the truths of heaven, and live according to them. But
still, all those who have confirmed themselves in falsities in the world
do not receive them; therefore they are sent into societies where they
are who are in similar falsities, which societies have no conjunction
with heaven, but with hell. Therefore after some time in the world of
spirits they sink down into hell, and are sent away to their places,
everyone according to his evil and falsity thence; this is what is meant
by their being convicted of being in falsities and evils, and still they
remain in them, and that therefore they are torn away from conjunction
with heaven, and cast down. What their lot is there, may be seen above
(n. 153, 531).

<span class="margnote"><span id="550.">550.</span></span>

Verse 9. And that great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called
the Devil, and Satan, signifies that they who are meant by "the dragon"
turned from the Lord to themselves, and from heaven to the world, and
thence became sensual from the corporeal, who could not but be in the
evils of their lusts and thence in falsities, and by separation from the
Lord and heaven became devils and satans. Who are meant by "the dragon,"
may be seen (n. 537); these, inasmuch as they make God three, and the
Lord two, and because they place the commandments of the Decalogue among
works by which there is not any salvation, are called "the old serpent,
the Devil, and Satan;" and by "a serpent" is signified a man sensual
from the corporeal (n. 424), who turns from the Lord to himself, and
from heaven to the world; and by "the Devil" are signified they who are
in the evils of lusts; and by "Satan," they who are thence in falsities
(n. 97, 153 at the end, 856, 857). Such, also, was the serpent which
seduced Eve and Adam, as appears from his description and the curse
pronounced upon him (Gen. 3:1-5, 14-15). "The dragon" is here called
"the Devil and Satan," but he is so called, because all in hell are
devils and satans; and thence hell in the aggregate is so called.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[532-1](ar11.htm#fr_44) The original Latin omits
"and times," but it is in the explanation below.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[532-2](ar11.htm#fr_45) \[English Bible 13:1.\]

<span id="fn_46"></span>[532-3](ar11.htm#fr_46) The original Latin omits
"were cast out."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 551-600](ar12)
