[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ar16)  [Next](ar18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877852006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Apocalypse Revealed*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1766\], tr. by John
Whitehead \[1912\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Apocalypse Revealed

<span class="margnote"><span id="801.">801.</span></span>

Verse 24. And in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and
of all that have been slain upon the earth, signifies that from the
religious persuasion, which is meant by "the city Babylon," is the
adulteration and profanation of every truth of the Word and thence of
the church, and that falsity has emanated therefrom into the whole
Christian world. By "blood" is signified the falsification, adulteration
and profanation of the Word (n. 327, 379, 684). By "prophets" are
signified all those who are in Divine truths from the Word, and
abstractly truths of doctrine from the Word (n. 8, 133). That by
"saints" are signified those who are of the Lord's church and abstractly
the holy truths of the church (n. 173, 586, 666). That by "the slain"
are signified those who are spiritually slain, and they are called
spiritually slain who perish by falsities (n. 325, and in many other
places). And because by "earth" is signified the church, by "all that
are slain on the earth" are signified all in the Christian church who
have perished by falsities; because the falsity with them emanated from
that religious persuasion. It is also said of Babel in Jeremiah, that:
There are the slain of all the earth (Jer. 51:49, 52). And in Isaiah,
that: Lucifer (which there is Babel) hath destroyed her land, and hath
slain her people (Isa. 14:20). That many falsities have emanated from
the Babylonish religious persuasion into the churches of the Reformed,
may be seen above (n. 751); where this passage was explained, that: The
woman whom thou sawest is the great city which hath a kingdom over the
kings of the earth (Rev. 17:18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="802.">802.</span></span>

It is said that from the religious persuasion which is meant by "the
city Babylon" is the adulteration and profanation of every truth of the
Word and thence of every holy thing of the church; and it has been said
many times in what precedes, that that religious persuasion has not only
adulterated the goods and truths of the Word, but has also profaned
them; and that "Babel" therefore in the Word signifies the profanation
of what is holy. It shall now be said how that profanation has been and
is effected. It was said above, that the love of having dominion from
the love of self over the holy things of the church and over heaven, and
thus over all the Divine things of the Lord, is the devil. Now because
that dominion as an end resides in the minds of those who founded that
religious persuasion, they could not do otherwise than profane the holy
things of the Word and the church. Suppose that that love, which is the
devil, should reside in the mind of anyone interiorly, as every ruling
love does; then place some Divine truth exteriorly before its eyes; will
it not tear it to pieces, cast it to the earth, and trample it down, and
in place of it summon a falsity that agrees with itself? \[2\] The love
of possessing all the things of the world is satan, and the devil and
satan act as one, as if joined in a covenant, with such as from the one
love are in the other. It may be concluded from this, whence it is that
profanation is signified in the Word by "Babylon." For example: place
before that love which is the devil this Divine truth, that God alone is
to be worshiped and adored, and not any man; and thus that the vicarship
is an invention and a fiction, which is to be rejected. In like manner
this truth, that to invoke dead men, to fall down to their images, to
kiss them and their bones, is simply and foully idolatrous, which is
also to be rejected. Would not that love which is the devil reject these
two truths in the vehemence of its anger, fulminate against them, and
tear them in pieces? \[3\] But if anyone should say to that love which
is the devil, that to open and shut heaven, or to loose and to bind, and
thus to remit sins, which is the same as to reform and regenerate, and
so to redeem and save man, is purely Divine, and that a man cannot
ascribe to himself anything Divine without profanation; and that Peter
did not ascribe it to himself, and therefore did not exercise any such
authority; moreover, that the succession is a thing invented by that
love; as also the transferring of the Holy Spirit from man to man; on
hearing these things, would not that love which is the devil, belabor
the speaker with anathemas, and in the fire of its fury command him to
be delivered to the inquisitor, and to be cast among the damned? If
anyone were to say further, How can the Lord's Divine authority be
transferred to you? How can the Lord's Divinity be separated from His
soul and body? Is it not according to your faith that it cannot? How can
God the Father introduce His Divine power into the Son, except into His
Divinity, which is the receptacle? How can this be transcribed into a
man that it may be his? Besides other similar things. On hearing these,
would not that love which is the devil be silent, kindle into wrath
within, gnash the teeth, and cry out, "Lead him forth, crucify him,
crucify him; go, go all of you, see the great heretic, and delight
yourselves with him"?

<span class="margnote"><span id="803.">803.</span></span>

Revelation 19 1. After these things I heard as it were a voice of a
great multitude in heaven, saying, Alleluia, salvation and glory and
honor and power unto the Lord our God; 2. For true and just are His
judgments; for He hath judged the great harlot, who corrupted the earth
with her whoredom, and He hath avenged the blood of His servants at her
hand. 3. And a second time they said, Alleluia; and her smoke shall go
up unto the ages of the ages. 4. And the twenty-four elders and the four
animals fell down, and adored God who sitteth upon the throne, saying,
Amen. Alleluia. 5. And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise
our God, all ye His servants, and ye that fear Him, both the small and
the great. 6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and
as it were the voice of many waters, and as it were the voice of mighty
thunders, saying, Alleluia, for the Lord God the Almighty reigneth. 7.
Let us rejoice and exult, and let us give the glory to Him; for the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife hath made herself ready. 8.
And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen clean
and bright; for the fine linen is the just deeds of the saints. 9. And
He said unto me, Write, Happy are they that have been called unto the
marriage supper of the Lamb. And He said, These are the true words of
God. 10. And I fell down before his feet to adore him; and he said unto
me, See thou do it not; I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren
that have the testimony of Jesus; adore God; for the testimony of Jesus
is the spirit of prophecy. 11. And I saw heaven opened; and behold a
white horse; and He that sitteth upon him is called faithful and true;
and in justice He doth judge and make war. 12. And His eyes were as a
flame of fire, and upon His head were many diadems; having a name
written, which no one knew but Himself: 13. And He was clothed with a
garment dipped in blood; and His name is called, The Word of God. 14.
And the armies which are in heaven followed Him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen white and clean. 15. And out of His mouth went
forth a sharp sword, that with it He should smite the nations; and He
shall tend them with a rod of iron: and He treadeth the wine-press of
the wine of the fury and anger of God Almighty. 16. And He hath upon His
garment and upon His thigh a name written, King of kings and Lord of
lords. 17. And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a
great voice, saying to all the birds that fly in the midst of heaven,
Come, and gather yourselves together unto the supper of the great God;
18. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of commanders of
thousands, and the flesh of the mighty, and the flesh of horses, and of
them to sit upon them, and the flesh of all, free and bond, both small
and great. 19. And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth and their
armies gathered together to make war with Him that sat upon the horse,
and with His army. 20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false
prophet, that did signs before him, with which he seduced them that
received the mark of the beast, and that adored his image; these two
were cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone. 21. And
the rest were slain by the sword of Him that sat upon the horse, that
proceeded out of His mouth; and all the birds were satiated with their
flesh. THE SPIRITUAL SENSE The contents of the whole chapter The
glorification of the Lord by the angels of heaven, because the Roman
Catholic religious persuasion is removed in the spiritual world, whereby
they have come into the light and into their happiness (verses 1-5).
Annunciation concerning the Lord's coming, and concerning the New Church
from Him (verses 6-10). The opening of the Word as to the spiritual
sense for that church (verses 11-16). The calling of all to it (verses
17-18). Resistance by those who are in faith separated from charity
(verse 19). Their removal and damnation (verses 20-21). The contents of
each verse Verse 1. "After these things I heard as it were a voice as of
a great multitude in heaven, saying, Alleluia," signifies thanksgiving,
confession and celebration of the Lord by the angels of the lower
heavens, on account of the removal of the Babylonians (n. 803).
"Salvation and glory and honor and power unto the Lord our God,"
signifies that now there is salvation from the Lord, because now there
is reception of Divine truth and Divine good from His Divine power (n.
804). Verse 2. "For true and just are His judgments; for He hath judged
the great harlot, who corrupted the earth with her whoredom," signifies
because in justice the profane Babylonish religious persuasion is
condemned, which has destroyed the Lord's church by filthy adulterations
of the Word (n. 805). "And He hath avenged the blood of His servants at
her hand," signifies retribution for the injuries and violence offered
to the souls of the worshipers of the Lord (n. 806). Verse 3. "And a
second time they said, Alleluia; and her smoke goeth up unto the ages of
the ages," signifies thanksgiving and celebration of the Lord from joy
that that profane religious persuasion is condemned to eternity (n.
807). Verse 4. "And the twenty-four elders and the four animals fell
down, and adored God who sitteth upon the throne, saying, Amen.
Alleluia," signifies adoration of the Lord as the God of heaven and
earth, and as the Judge of the universe, by the angels of the higher
heavens, and confirmation of the thanksgiving, confession, and
celebration of the Lord by the angels of the lower heavens (n. 808).
Verse 5. "And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God,
all ye His servants, and ye that fear Him," signifies influx from the
Lord into heaven, and thus unanimity of the angels, that all who are in
the truths of faith and in the goods of love should worship the Lord as
the only God of heaven (n. 809). "Both small and great," signifies those
who worship the Lord from the truths of faith and the goods of love in a
less or a greater degree (n. 810). Verse 6. "And I heard as it were the
voice of a great multitude, and as it were the voice of many waters, and
as it were the voice of mighty thunders, saying, Alleluia, for the Lord
God the Almighty reigneth," signifies the joy of the angels of the
lowest heaven, of the angels of the middle heaven, and of the angels of
the highest heaven, that the Lord alone reigns in the church which is
now to come (n. 811). Verse 7. "Let us rejoice and exult and let us give
the glory to Him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come," signifies joy
of soul and heart, and thence the glorification of the Lord, that
henceforth there may be the full marriage of Him with the church (n.
812). "And His wife hath made herself ready," signifies that they who
will be of this church, which is the New Jerusalem, are collected
together, inaugurated and instructed (n. 813). Verse 8. "And it was
given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen clean and bright,"
signifies that they are instructed by the Lord in genuine and pure
truths through the Word (n. 814). "For the fine linen is the just deeds
of the saints," signifies that through truths from the Word those who
are of the Lord's church have the goods of life (n. 815). Verse 9. "And
he said unto me, Write, Happy are they that have been called to the
marriage supper of the Lamb," signifies an angel sent from heaven to
John, and speaking with him concerning the Lord's New Church, and saying
that it was given to know on earth, that those have eternal life who
receive the things which are of that church (n. 816). "And he said,
These are the true words of God," signifies that this is to be believed
because it is from the Lord (n. 817). Verse 10. "And I fell down before
his feet to adore him; and he said, See thou do it not; I am thy
fellow-servant and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus;
adore God," signifies that the angels of heaven are not to be adored and
invoked, because there is nothing Divine in them; but that they are
associated with men, as brethren with brethren, with those who worship
the Lord, and thus that in consociation with them the Lord alone is to
be adored (n. 818). "For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy," signifies that the acknowledgment that the Lord is the God of
heaven and earth, and at the same time a life according to His precepts,
in the universal sense the all of the Word and of doctrine therefrom (n.
819). Verse 11. "And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse,"
signifies the spiritual sense of the Word revealed by the Lord, and the
interior understanding of the Word disclosed thereby, which is the
coming of the Lord (n. 820). "And He that sitteth upon him is called
faithful and true; and in justice He doth judge and make war," signifies
the Lord as to the Word, that it is the Divine good itself and the
Divine truth itself, from both of which He executes judgment (n. 821).
Verse 12. "And His eyes were as a flame of fire," signifies the Divine
wisdom of the Lord's Divine love (n. 822). "And upon His head were many
diadems," signifies the Divine truths of the Word from Him (n. 823).
"Having a name written which no one knew but Himself," signifies that
what the quality of the Word is in its spiritual and celestial senses no
one sees but the Lord, and he to whom He reveals it (n. 824). Verse 13.
"And He was clothed with a garment dipped in blood; and His name is
called The Word of God," signifies the Divine truth in its ultimate
sense, or the Word in the letter, to which violence has been offered (n.
825). Verse 14. "And the armies which are in heaven followed Him upon
white horses, clothed in fine linen white and clean," signifies the
angels in the New Christian heaven, who were conjoined to the Lord in
the interior understanding of the Word, and thus who are in pure and
genuine truths (n. 826). Verse 15. "And out of His mouth went forth a
sharp sword," signifies the dispersion of falsities by the Lord by
doctrine therefrom (n. 827). "That with it He should smite the nations;
and He shall tend them with a rod of iron," signifies that He will
convince all who are in dead faith, by the truths of the sense of the
letter of the Word, and by rational things (n. 828). "And He treadeth
the winepress of the fury and anger of God Almighty," signifies that the
Lord endured alone all the evils of the church, and all the violence
offered to the Word, and thus to Himself (n. 829). Ver. 16. "And He hath
upon His garment and upon His thigh a name written, King of kings, and
Lord of lords," signifies that the Lord teaches in the Word what He is,
that He is the Divine truth of the Divine wisdom and the Divine good of
the Divine love, thus that He is the God of the universe (n. 830). Verse
17. "And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a great
voice, saying to all the birds that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and
gather yourselves together to the supper of the great God," signifies
the Lord from the Divine love, and thence from Divine zeal, calling and
assembling all who are in the spiritual affection of truth and think of
heaven, to the New Church, and to conjunction with Himself, and thus to
eternal life (n. 831). Verse 18. "That ye may eat the flesh of kings,
and the flesh of commanders of thousands, and the flesh of the mighty,
and the flesh of horses and of them that sit upon them, and the flesh of
all, free and bond, and small and great," signifies the appropriation of
goods from the Lord through the truths of the Word and of doctrine
thence, in every sense, degree, and kind (n. 832). Verse 19. "And I saw
the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together
to make war with Him that sat upon the horse, and with His army,"
signifies that all the interiorly evil, who have professed faith alone,
with the leaders and their followers, will fight against the Lord's
Divine truths in His Word, and will infest those who will be of the
Lord's New Church (n. 833). Verse 20. "And the beast was taken, and with
him the false prophet that did signs before him, with which he seduced
them that received the mark of the beast, and adored His image,"
signifies all those who professed faith alone, and were interiorly evil,
both the laity and the common people, as also the clergy and the
learned, who by reasonings and attestations that faith alone is the only
means of salvation, have led others to receive that faith, and to live
according to it (n. 834). "These two were cast alive into the lake of
fire burning with brimstone," signifies that all those, as they were,
were cast into hell, where are loves of falsity and at the same time
lusts of evil (n. 835). Verse 21. "And the rest were slain by the sword
of Him that sat upon the horse, that proceeded out of His mouth,"
signifies that all from the various heresies among the Reformed, who
have not lived according to the Lord's commandments in the Word, which
they knew, being judged from the Word, perish (n. 836). "And all the
birds were satiated with their flesh," signifies that from their lusts
of evil, which are their proprium, the infernal genii are as it were
nourished. THE EXPLANATION Verse 1. After these things I heard as it
were a voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, Alleluia, signifies
thanksgiving, confession, and celebration of the Lord by the angels of
the lower heavens, on account of the removal of the Babylonians. By "a
great multitude in heaven," are signified the angels of the lower
heavens; by "their voice saying, Alleluia," is signified thanksgiving,
confession, and celebration of the Lord by them; by "Alleluia," in the
Hebrew language, is signified, Praise ye God, therefore it was an
expression of thanksgiving, confession, and celebration of the Lord from
joy of heart, as appears from these passages: Bless Jehovah, O my soul.
Alleluia (Ps. 104:35). Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel from
everlasting to everlasting; and let all the people say, Amen. Alleluia
(Ps. 106:48). We will bless Jah from now even to eternity. Alleluia (Ps.
115:18). Let every soul praise Jah. Alleluia (Ps. 150:6; besides other
places, as Ps. 105:45; 106:1; 111:1; 112:1; 113:1, 9; 116:19; 117:2;
135:3; 148:1, 14; 149:1, 9; 150:1). That it is on account of the
rejection of the Babylonians, is evident from the preceding chapter,
which treats of the Babylonians, for which reason it is said, "After
these things," and also from what follows (verses 2, 3) in this chapter.
That the angels of the lower heavens are meant by "a great multitude in
heaven," is plain from verse 4 of this chapter, where it is said that
"the twenty-four elders and the four animals adored Him that sat upon
the throne, saying Amen. Alleluia," by whom the angels of the higher
heavens are meant.

<span class="margnote"><span id="804.">804.</span></span>

Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God,
signifies that now there is salvation from the Lord, because now there
is a reception of Divine truth and Divine good from His Divine power. By
salvation to the Lord our God, is signified the acknowledgment and
confession that there is salvation from the Lord; by "glory and honor to
the Lord our God," is signified acknowledgment and confession, that
there is Divine truth and Divine good from the Lord, thus the reception
thereof (n. 249, 629, 693). By "power unto the Lord our God," is
signified the acknowledgment and confession, that the Lord has power. To
say that salvation, glory, honor, and power belong unto the Lord, is
according to the sense of the letter; as also in other places, that to
the Lord belongeth blessing, but this, when considered in the spiritual
sense, means that these things, being in the Lord, are also from the
Lord, here, that now they are communicated by Him to angels and men in
consequence of the Babylonians being removed and rejected, who
intercepted, weakened, and prevented the influx of those things from the
Lord; in like manner as black clouds in the world, when they come
between the sun and men; for as the light of the sun of this world is
intercepted, weakened, and obstructed by the interposition of black
clouds, so is the light of the sun of heaven, which is the Lord, by the
black falsities interposed by the Babylonians. The thing is altogether
similar, only that one is natural, and the other spiritual. Falsities
also in the spiritual world appear like clouds, dark and black according
to their quality. This is likewise the cause, that not until after the
Last Judgment was the spiritual sense of the Word revealed, and that the
Lord alone is the God of heaven and earth. For by the Last Judgment the
Babylonians were removed, and also the Reformed who confessed faith
alone; whose falsities were like dusky clouds interposed between the
Lord and men on earth; and were likewise like cold, that takes away
spiritual heat, which is the love of good, and truth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="805.">805.</span></span>

Verse 2. For true and just are His judgments; for He hath judged the
great harlot, who corrupted the earth with her whoredom, signifies
because in justice the profane Babylonish religious persuasion is
condemned, which has destroyed the Lord's church by foul adulterations
of the Word. By "true and just are Thy judgments," the Divine truths and
goods of the Word are signified, according to which judgment is executed
by the Lord (n. 668, 689); which together are called "justice:" for by
justice, in speaking of the Lord, nothing else is signified; as below
(verse 11; also Isa. 63:1; Jer. 23:5, 6; 33:15, 16). By "for he hath
judged the great harlot" is signified because the profane Babylonish
religious persuasion is condemned, which was treated of in the foregoing
chapter. It is called "the great harlot," from the adulteration and
profanation of the Word. By "who corrupted the earth with her whoredom"
is signified, which has destroyed the Lord's church by foul
adulterations of the Word. By "her whoredom" the adulteration of the
Word is signified (n. 134), and by "earth" the church (n. 285, 721).

<span class="margnote"><span id="806.">806.</span></span>

And He hath avenged the blood of His servants at her hand, signifies
retribution on account of the injuries and violence offered to the souls
of the worshipers of the Lord. That by "He hath avenged the blood of His
servants at her hand," is signified retribution on account of the
injuries and violence offered to the souls of the worshipers of the
Lord, because by "He avenged" is signified retribution. By "shedding
blood" is signified to offer violence to the Lord's Divinity and to the
Word (n. 327, 684); here to the worshipers of the Lord, who are meant by
"His servants." They offered injuries and violence to the souls of these
by transferring to themselves the Divine worship of the Lord, and by
prohibiting the reading of the Word. It is said of the Lord, that He
avenged or revenged the blood of His servants, as if He did this from
vengeance or revenge; but still it is not from vengeance or revenge, as
it is not from anger and wrath, which however are attributed to the Lord
in many places in the Word, see above (n. 525, 635, 658, 673). Anger and
vengeance are said of the Lord, when the evil separated from the good
are cast into hell, which is done at the day of the Last Judgment; on
which account that day is called "a day of anger," and likewise "anger;"
also "a day of vengeance;" not that the Lord is angry and avenges, but
that they are angry with the Lord, and breathe vengeance against Him. It
is as when a malefactor, after sentence is passed, is angry at the law,
and breathes vengeance against the judge; for the law is not angry, nor
is the judge revengeful. \[2\] "Vengeance" is meant in this sense in the
following passages: The day of vengeance is in My heart, and the year of
My redeemed is come (Isa. 63:4). Here it treats of the Lord and the last
judgment: The day of Jehovah's vengeance, the year of retributions for
the controversy of Zion (Isa. 34:8). Behold, your God will come with
vengeance, with the retribution of God will He come, and He will save
you (Isa. 35:4). These are the days of vengeance, that all things that
are written may be fulfilled (Luke 21:22). Here it treats of the
consummation of the age, when the Last Judgment comes: The spirit of the
Lord Jehovih is upon Me, to proclaim the day of the good pleasure of
Jehovah, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn
(Isa. 61:1-2). Shall not My soul take vengeance for this (Jer. 5:9, 29)?
I will take vengeance on Babel, nor will I make a man to intercede (Isa.
47:3). The thought is against Babel to destroy it, because this is the
vengeance of Jehovah, the vengeance of His temple (Jer. 51:11, 36).
Sing, ye nations, His people; for He hath avenged the blood of His
servants, and He will render vengeance to His enemies, and will expiate
His land, His people (Deut. 32:43).

<span class="margnote"><span id="807.">807.</span></span>

Verse 3. And a second time they said, Alleluia, and her smoke went up
for ages of ages, signifies thanksgiving and celebration of the Lord
from joy, that that profane religious persuasion is condemned to
eternity. "That they said a second time" is from their varying affection
of joy, that they were liberated from infestation from those who were in
that religious persuasion, also from fear lest they should rise again
and infest again. That thanksgiving and celebration of the Lord is
signified by "Alleluia" may be seen above (n. 803). By "her smoke" is
signified that religious persuasion as to its direful falsities, since
falsities from evil appear like the smokes from fire (n. 422); the fire
here is the love of self (n. 468, 494, 766). That by "the smoke of a
burning," when treating of Babylon, profanation is signified (n. 766,
767). By "its going up for ages of ages" is signified her damnation to
eternity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="808.">808.</span></span>

Verse 4. And the twenty-four elders and the four animals fell down and
adored God who sitteth upon the throne, saying, Amen. Alleluia signifies
adoration of the Lord as the God of heaven and earth and as the Judge of
the universe by the angels of the higher heavens, and the confirmation
of the thanksgiving, confession, and celebration of Him made by the
angels of the lower heavens. By "falling down and adoring" is signified
humiliation, and from the humiliation adoration, as above (n. 370). By
"the twenty-four elders and the four animals" the higher heavens are
signified (n. 369). By "Him that sitteth upon the throne" is meant the
Lord as the God of heaven, and as the Judge of the universe; since by
"the throne" is signified heaven and the kingdom there (n. 14, 221,
222), and likewise judgment; here judgment, because it is concerning the
judgment upon Babel, which precedes. That "He that sitteth upon the
throne" is the Lord, may be seen below. By "Amen. Alleluia," is
signified the confirmation of the thanksgiving, confession, and
celebration made by the angels of the lower heavens. By "Amen" is
signified confirmation and consent from the truth (n. 23, 28, 61, 371,
375); and by "Alleluia" is signified thanksgiving, confession, and
celebration of the Lord (n. 803). That it is those which were made by
the angels of the lower heavens, is because they first spoke, and
celebrated the Lord as the God of heaven, the Judge, and the Avenger;
and said "Alleluia"; as is manifest from verses 1 and 2, and from the
explanation above (n. 803, 804). The confirmation of these things by the
angels of the higher heavens is signified by "Amen. Alleluia." \[2\]
That "He that sitteth upon the throne" is the Lord, is manifest from
Revelation (chap. 1:4; 2:8; 3:21; 4:2-6, 9; 5:13; 6:16; 7:9-11; 22:1,
3); in which places it is said, "God" and "Lamb" "upon the throne." By
"God" there the Divine Itself of the Lord is meant, which is called the
Father; and by "the Lamb" the Divine Human, which is called the Son (n.
269, 291), thus the Lord alone. This is also manifest from chapter 7
where it is said: The Lamb Who is in the midst of the throne shall feed
them (Rev. 7:17), And in Matthew: When the Son of man shall sit upon the
throne of His glory, He shall judge (Matt. 19:28). When the Son of man
shall come in His glory, and all the angels with Him, then shall He sit
upon the throne of His glory (Matt. 25:31).

<span class="margnote"><span id="809.">809.</span></span>

Verse 5. And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, all
ye His servants, and ye that fear Him, signifies influx from the Lord
into heaven, and thus the unanimity of the angels, that all who are in
the truths of faith and in the goods of love should worship the Lord as
the only God of heaven. By "the voice which came out of the throne" is
signified influx from the Lord into heaven. That it is from the Lord is
because "He that sitteth upon the throne" was the Lord, as was shown
just above (n. 808). Therefore by "the voice" that came out therefrom is
meant influx; for the Lord, because He is above the heavens, and appears
before the angels as a sun, does not speak from it to the angels, but
flows in; and that which flows in, is received in heaven, and is
uttered. Wherefore that voice, although from the throne, yet was heard
by John out of heaven, and thus from the angels there; and whatever the
angels speak out of heaven is from the Lord. By "Praise our God" is
signified that they should worship the Lord as the only God of heaven.
That "to praise God" is to worship Him will be seen below. By "all His
servants" are signified all who are in the truths of faith (n. 3, 380);
by "all that fear Him" are signified they who are in the goods of love
(n. 527, 628). \[2\] That "to praise God" signifies to worship Him, and
hence that the praise of Him is the worship of Him, is evident from many
passages in the Word, a few only of which are adduced: Suddenly there
was with the angel a multitude of them that praise God (Luke 2:13, 20).
The whole multitude of the disciples began to praise God with a great
voice (Luke 19:37). They were in the temple praising and blessing God
(Luke 24:53). Cause to be heard, praise ye, and say, O Jehovah, save Thy
people (Jer. 31:7). Praise ye Jehovah in the heavens; praise Him in the
heights; praise ye Him, His angels; praise ye Him, His hosts; praise ye
Him, sun and moon; praise Him, all ye stars of light; praise Him, ye
heavens of heavens; praise ye the name of Jehovah; praise Jehovah from
the earth; He hath exalted praise from all peoples (Ps. 148:1-5, 7, 13,
14). Out of the mouths of infants and sucklings Thou hast perfected
praise (Matt. 21:16). All the people gave praise unto God (Luke 18:43;
besides other places, as Isa. 42:8; 60:18; Joel 2:26; Ps. 113:1, 3;
117:1). These things which are said in this verse do not have reference
to those which precede concerning Babylon, but to the things that follow
concerning the New Church to be established by the Lord; which is here
treated of in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="810.">810.</span></span>

Both small and great, signifies those who worship the Lord from the
truths of faith and the goods of love in a lesser and in a greater
degree. By "the small and the great" in the natural sense they are meant
who are in a lesser and in a greater degree of dignity, but in the
spiritual sense those who are in a lesser and in a greater degree of
worship of the Lord, and thus who worship the Lord less and more holily
and fully from the truths of faith and the goods of love. This is
signified because it follows after "Praise God, all ye His servants, and
ye that fear Him;" by which such things are signified (n. 809; see also,
n. 527, 604).

<span class="margnote"><span id="811.">811.</span></span>

Verse 6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as
it were the voice of many waters, and as it were the voice of mighty
thunders, saying, Alleluia, for the Lord God the Almighty reigneth,
signifies the joy of the angels of the lowest heaven, of the angels of
the middle heaven, and of the angels of the highest heaven, that the
Lord alone reigns in the church which is now to come. By "the voice" is
signified the joy of worship, confession, and celebration of the Lord;
because it follows that they said, "Alleluia," and then "Let us rejoice
and exult, and give glory to Him." By "the voice of a great multitude"
the joy of the angels of the lowest heaven is signified, as above (n.
803). By "the voice of many waters" is signified the joy of the angels
of the middle heaven, as above (n. 614). The joy of these was thus heard
because "many waters" signify truths in abundance (n. 50, 614, 685); and
the angels of the middle heaven are in truths, because in intelligence.
By "the voice of mighty thunders" the joy of the angels of the highest
heaven is signified. That their voice or discourse is heard as thunder,
may be seen above (n. 615). By "saying Alleluia" is signified the joy of
worship, confession, and celebration of the Lord, as above (n. 803). By
"for the Lord God the Almighty reigneth," is signified because the Lord
alone reigns; for the Lord is called the Almighty (Rev. 1:8; 4:8; 11:17;
15:3; 16:7, 14; 19:15; 21:22; where the explanations may be seen). That
these things are said of the New Church to be established by the Lord,
is evident from the three verses following, in which it is said, "For
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and His Wife hath made herself ready."
Also, "Happy are they that are called unto the marriage supper of the
Lamb." On account of this is the joy of all the heavens, which is
described in this and the following verse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="812.">812.</span></span>

Verse 7. Let us rejoice and exult, and give the glory to Him; for the
marriage of the Lamb is come, signifies joy of soul and heart, and
thence the glorification of the Lord, that henceforth there may be a
full marriage of Him with the church. By "rejoice and exult" is
signified joy of soul and heart. Joy of soul is joy of the
understanding, or from the truth of faith; and joy of heart is joy of
the will, or from the goods of love. The two are mentioned on account of
the marriage of truth and good in each thing of the Word, spoken of
above (n. 373, 689). By "giving glory to Him" is signified to
acknowledge and confess that all truth is from the Lord (n. 629); also
to acknowledge that the Lord is the God of heaven and earth (n. 693);
here therefore is signified to glorify, because this involves both. By
"for the marriage of the Lamb is come," is signified because henceforth
there is the full marriage of the Lord and the church. That this may be
signified, it is therefore said "the Lamb;" and by "the Lamb" is meant
the Lord as to the Divine Human (n. 269, 291). \[2\] It may be evident
almost without explanation, that when the Lord's Human is acknowledged
to be Divine, there is effected a full marriage of the Lord and the
church; for it is known in the Reformed Christian world, that the church
is a church from the marriage of the Lord with her; for the Lord is
called the Lord of the vineyard, and the church is the vineyard; and the
Lord is also called the Bridegroom and Husband, and the church is called
the Bride and Wife. That the Lord is called the Bridegroom, and the
church the Bride, may be seen (n. 797). That there is then the full
marriage of the Lord and the church, when His Human is acknowledged to
be Divine, is manifest; for then God the Father and He are acknowledged
to be one, as the soul and the body. When this is acknowledged, the
Father is not approached for the sake of the Son; but then the Lord
Himself is approached, and God the Father through Him; because the
Father is in Him, as the soul is in the body, as was said. Before the
Lord's Human is acknowledged to be Divine, there is indeed a marriage of
the Lord with the church; but only with those who approach the Lord, and
think of His Divine, and not at all whether His Human is Divine or not.
The simple in faith and in heart do this; but rarely the learned and
erudite. Moreover also there cannot be given three husbands to one wife,
nor three souls to one body; and therefore, unless one God is
acknowledged, in whom is the Trinity, and that that God is the Lord,
there is no marriage. \[3\] That from this time that marriage may take
place, because it could not fully take place until after the Babylonians
were separated in the spiritual world by the Last Judgment; as also the
Philistines, who are they that profess faith alone; and because their
separation is treated of in what goes before, it is said "from
henceforth." That there is a marriage of the church with the Lord may be
evident from these passages: Jesus said, The children of the marriage
cannot mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them (Matt. 9:15; Mark
2:19). The kingdom of the heavens is like unto a man a king, who made a
marriage for his son, and sent out his servants, and invited to the
marriage (Matt. 22:1-14). The kingdom of the heavens is like unto ten
virgins, who went forth to meet the bridegroom; of whom five, being
ready, went in with the bridegroom to the marriage (Matt. 25:1-12). That
here the Lord meant Himself is manifest from verse 13 following, where
He said: Watch, for ye know neither the day nor the hour in which the
Son of man will come (Matt. 25:13). And in another place: Let your loins
be girded and your candles shining, and ye like to them that wait for
their Lord, when He is about to return from the marriage (Luke
12:35-36).

<span class="margnote"><span id="813.">813.</span></span>

And His Wife hath made herself ready, signifies that they who will be of
this church, which is the New Jerusalem, are collected together,
inaugurated, and instructed. By "the Wife" the Lord's New Church is
signified, which is the New Jerusalem; which is clearly manifest from
chap. 21, following, where are these words: I saw the holy city, the New
Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride
adorned for her Husband (Rev. 21:2). An angel came unto me, saying,
Come, I will show thee the Bride, the Lamb's Wife; and he showed me the
great city, the holy Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God (Rev.
21:9-10). By "His Wife hath made herself ready" is signified that they
who will be of that New Church of the Lord are collected together,
inaugurated, and instructed; and because these things are signified by
"she hath made herself ready," it therefore follows that the Wife "was
arrayed in fine linen clean and bright;" by which is signified
inauguration by instruction; and therefore there also follows the
account of "the white horse," by which is signified the understanding of
the Word from the Lord for them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="814.">814.</span></span>

Verse 8. And it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine
linen clean and bright, signifies that they who will be of the Lord's
New Church are instructed by the Lord in genuine and pure truths through
the Word. By "it was given to her" is meant to Wife, by whom is
signified the Lord's New Church, which is the New Jerusalem, as just
above (n. 812). By "being clothed" is signified to be instructed in
truths, because truths are signified by "garments" (n. 166); and by
"white garments" genuine truths (n. 212). By "fine linen clean and
bright" is signified shining from good and pure truths; and because pure
truth is not given from any other source than from the Lord through the
Word, therefore this also is signified. It is called "clean and bright,"
because "clean" signifies that which is free from evil, thus that which
shines from good; and "bright" signifies what is free from falsity, thus
what is pure from truth. By "fine linen" or "linen cloth" genuine truth
is signified in the following places also: O Jerusalem, I have clothed
thee with needlework, I have girded thee with fine linen, and I have
covered thee with silk; thus wast thou adorned with gold and silver, and
thy raiment was fine linen and silk (Ezek. 16:10, 13). Fine linen in
needlework from Egypt was thy spreading forth (Ezek. 27:7). This is
concerning Tyre, by which the church as to the knowledges of truth and
good is signified. The armies in heaven followed Him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen white and clean (Rev. 14). Joseph was clothed in
garments of fine linen by Pharaoh (Gen. 41:42). This signifies the same.
Truth from the Word with them, though not in them, is signified by: The
fine linen of Babylon (Rev. 18:12, 16). And upon the rich man (Luke
16:19). Fine linen is also called cotton \[xylinum\], wherefore genuine
truth is also signified by the latter in these passages in Moses: Thou
shalt make a checkerwork a tunic of cotton for Aaron; and thou shalt
make a miter of cotton (Exod. 28:39). They made tunics of cotton for
Aaron and for his sons (Exod. 39:27). Thou shalt make the habitation of
cotton interwoven, and hyacinth, and purple, and scarlet double-dyed
(Exod. 26:1; 36:8). Thou shalt make hangings for the court of cotton
interwoven (Exod. 27:9, 18; 38:9). Also the veil of the court with
cotton interwoven (Exod. 38:18).

<span class="margnote"><span id="815.">815.</span></span>

For the fine linen is the just deeds of the saints, signifies that
through truths from the Word those who are of the Lord's church have the
goods of life. By "fine linen" are signified genuine truths, which are
truths from the Lord through the Word, as just above (n. 814). By "just
deeds" are signified the goods of life with those who are in truths (n.
668). By "the saints" are signified those who are of the Lord's church
(n. 173, 586). That "just deeds" are the goods of life with those who
are in truths, is because no one can be called just, unless he lives
according to truths; for in the natural sense everyone is called just
who lives well according to the civil and moral laws; but in the
spiritual sense he is called "just" who lives well according to the
Divine laws, and the Divine laws are truths from the Word. He who
believes himself to be just, consequently in the good of life, without
the truths according to which he should live, is much deceived; for a
man cannot be reformed and regenerated, consequently become good, except
by truths, and by life according to them. Hence it is manifest, that by
"the fine linen is the just deeds of the saints," is signified that
those who are of the Lord's church have the goods of life through truths
from the Word. This is plainly manifest from the angels of heaven; the
more they are in truths and in life according to them they appear
clothed in the brighter garments; the reason is, that they are in
brighter light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="816.">816.</span></span>

Verse 9. And He said unto me, Write, Happy are they that are called to
the marriage supper of the Lamb, signifies an angel sent from heaven to
John, and speaking with him concerning the Lord's New Church, and saying
that it was given to know on earth, that those have eternal life who
receive the things which are of that church. That it was an angel sent
from heaven to John that spoke these things to him, may be evident from
the following verse, that John fell down at his feet to adore him; and
that the angel answered, that he was his fellow-servant; therefore that
not he, but God, was to be adored. That the former things which John
heard were from heaven itself, and by many angels speaking together from
the Lord, is plainly manifest from the preceding verses 5-7; where it is
said that "a voice came out of the throne," and that thus was heard "as
it were a voice of a great multitude, and as of many waters, and as of
mighty thunders," and of them that said, "Let us rejoice and exult."
These were in the plural; but now it is in the singular, and thus by a
single angel sent to him. \[2\] But I will relate how it is, when angels
speak with man. They never speak with him from heaven; but the voice
which is heard thence is from the Lord through heaven. But when it is
given to the angels to speak with a man, they send one from their
society, who is near the man; and they speak with the man through him.
He who is sent is the subject of many, and it was such a subject who now
spoke with John. This was done, that it might be announced on earth,
that the whole heaven acknowledges the Lord alone as the God of heaven,
and that He alone is to be adored; also that the New Church is to be
established by the Lord on the earth, as it has been established in the
heavens; for a church is first established in the heavens by the Lord,
and then through the heavens on the earth. This is the arcanum in these
words. \[3\] Now to the explanation. "Write" signifies that he should
commit this to posterity for remembrance (n. 39, 63, 639); here, that he
should make these things known; this is meant by "write." "Happy are
they that are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb," signifies that
those have eternal life who receive those things which are of the New
Church. They are called "happy," who have eternal life (n. 639). By "the
marriage of the Lamb" the New Church is signified, which is in
conjunction with the Lord, as above (n. 812). By "the called" are meant
all who receive (n. 744). All are called, indeed; but they who do not
receive, reject the call. \[4\] It is called "the marriage supper of the
Lamb," because this is done in the last state of the church, which is
called evening; and in the evening suppers take place; but the first
state of the New Church is called morning. In the evening man is called
to the church; and when the called are present, the morning comes. That
the last state of the church is called evening and night, and its first
state the dawn and morning, may be seen above (n. 151). And because it
was the last state of the Jewish church, and thus evening, when the Lord
went from Jerusalem to suffer, the Lord therefore then supped with the
disciples, and instituted the Eucharist; whence it is called the holy
supper; by which also is effected the conjunction of the Lord with the
man of the church, or a marriage, if the man, after repentance, goes
directly to Him; but if otherwise, presence is effected, and not
conjunction. From this it may be evident what is signified by "supper"
and "to sup" elsewhere in the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="817.">817.</span></span>

And he said, These are the true words of God, signifies that this is to
be believed, because from the Lord; namely, that "they are happy who are
called to the marriage supper of the Lamb," that is, that they on earth
who receive the things which are of the Lord's New Church, have eternal
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="818.">818.</span></span>

Verse 10. And I fell down before his feet to adore him; and he said to
me, See thou do it not; I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren
that have the testimony of Jesus; adore God, signifies that the angels
of heaven are not to be adored and invoked, because there is nothing
Divine in them; but that they are associated with men as brethren with
brethren, with those who worship the Lord, and thus that, in
consociation with them, the Lord alone is to be adored. "I fell down
before His feet to adore Him, and He said unto me, See thou do it not,
adore God," signifies that no angel of heaven is to be adored and
invoked, but the Lord alone. "I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy
brethren," signifies that the Divine does not belong to an angel, but
that He is associated with man as brother with brother. By "having the
testimony of Jesus" is signified that he is in like manner in
conjunction with the Lord, through the acknowledgment of the Divine in
His Human, and through a life according to His commandments. That this
is signified by "having the testimony of Jesus" will be seen in the
following paragraph. That the angels of heaven are not superior to men,
but that they are their equals, and that they are therefore equally the
Lord's servants, as men are, is because all the angels have been men,
born in the world, and not any of them were created immediately; as may
be evident from the things which are written and shown in the work on
Heaven and Hell, published at London, 1758. They indeed excel men in
wisdom; but this is for the reason that they are in a spiritual state,
and thence in the light of heaven, and not in a natural state, and so in
the light of the world, as men are upon earth. But as far as any angel
excels in wisdom, so far he acknowledges that he is not above men, but
like them; on which account there is not any conjunction of men with the
angels, but there is consociation with them. Conjunction is given with
the Lord alone. But how conjunction with the Lord, and consociation with
the angels, by the Word, are effected, see the Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 62-69).

<span class="margnote"><span id="819.">819.</span></span>

For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, signifies that the
acknowledgment that the Lord is the God of heaven and earth, and at the
same time a life according to His commandments, is in the universal
sense the all of the Word and of doctrine therefrom. By "the testimony
of Jesus" is signified the Lord's attestation in heaven, that man is
His, and thus that he is in heaven one among the angels there; and
because that attestation cannot be given to any others but to those who
are in conjunction with the Lord, who acknowledge Him as the God of
heaven and earth, as he teaches in Matt. 28:18, and at the same time
live according to His commandments, especially according to the
commandments of the Decalogue, these two things are therefore signified
by "the testimony of Jesus," see above (n. 6, 490). By that testimony is
"the spirit of prophecy," is signified that it is the all of the Word
and of doctrine therefrom; for the Word in the universal sense treats
only of the Lord, and of life according to His commandments. Hence it
is, that the Lord is the Word; for He is the Word, because the Word is
from Him, and treats of Him alone, and teaches solely how He is to be
acknowledged and worshiped; and these are the commandments of the Word,
which are called Divine truths, according to which one must live, that
he may be able to come into conjunction with the Lord. That the Word
treats of the Lord alone, and that it is thence that the Lord is called
the Word, may be seen in Doctrine of the Lord (n. 1-7, 8-11, 19-28,
37-44); and in Doctrine of the Sacred Scripture (n. 80-90, 98-100). This
is also what the Lord says, that: The Spirit of Truth, which is the Holy
Spirit, will testify concerning the Lord; and that he will not speak
from himself, but that he will receive of the things which are of the
Lord's, and announce them (John 15:26; 16:13, 15).

<span class="margnote"><span id="820.">820.</span></span>

Verse 11. And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, signifies
the spiritual sense of the Word revealed by the Lord, and the interior
understanding of the Word disclosed thereby; which is the coming of the
Lord. By "heaven was seen open" is signified a revelation from the Lord,
and the manifestation, concerning which below. By "a horse" is signified
the understanding of the Word, and by "a white horse" the interior
understanding of the Word (n. 298); and as this is signified by "a white
horse," and as the spiritual sense is the interior understanding of the
Word, therefore that sense is signified here by "the white horse." The
reason that this is the coming of the Lord, is because it manifestly
appears by that sense that the Lord is the Word, and that the Word
treats of Him alone, and that He is the God of heaven and earth, and
that from Him alone the New Church exists. The Lord said that: They
should see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with glory and
power (Matt. 17:5; 24:30; 26:64; Mark 14:61, 62; Luke 9:34-35; 21:27;
Rev. 1:7; Acts 1:9, 11). And the Lord said this also where He spoke with
the disciples concerning the consummation of the age, which is the last
time of the church, when the judgment takes place. Everyone who does not
think beyond the sense of the letter, believes that when the Last
Judgment shall come, the Lord will appear in the clouds of heaven with
the angels and sounds of trumpets. But that this is not meant, but that
He will appear in the Word, may be evident from the explanation above
(n. 24, 642). And the Lord appears manifestly in the spiritual sense of
the Word. It appears not only that He is the Word, that is, the Divine
truth itself, and that He is the inmost of the Word, and thence the all
of it; but also that He Himself is the one God, in whom is the Trinity,
and thus the only God of heaven and earth; and moreover that He came
into the world, that He might glorify His Human, that is, make it
Divine. The Human which He glorified, that is, made Divine, was the
natural human, which He could not glorify or make Divine but by taking
on the human in a virgin in the natural world; to which He then united
His Divine, which He had from eternity. That unition was effected by
temptations admitted into the human that He had taken, the last of which
was the passion of the cross, and at the same time by the fulfilling of
all things of the Word; not only by the fulfilling of all things of the
Word in its natural sense, but also by the fulfilling of all things of
the Word in its spiritual sense and in its celestial sense; in which, as
was said above, He alone is treated of. But on these things, see what
are manifested in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Lord,
and in The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred
Scripture. Now, because the Lord is the Word, and the Word became flesh
(John 1:1-2, 14), and the Word became flesh that He might fulfill it, it
is manifest that the Lord's coming in the Word is meant by His appearing
"in the clouds of heaven." That "the clouds of heaven" signify the Word
in the sense of the letter, may be seen above (n. 24, 642). It is
manifest that the Lord's appearing in the Word is meant, because the
interior understanding of the Word is signified by "the white horse,"
and it is said that the name of Him that sat upon the horse is "The Word
of God," and that His name is "King of kings and Lord of lords" (verses
13, 16). It is now manifest from this, that by "I saw heaven opened, and
behold, a white horse," is signified the spiritual sense of the Word
revealed by the Lord, and thereby the interior understanding of it
disclosed; which also is the coming of the Lord. That the spiritual
sense of the Word is at this day revealed, concerning which no one in
the Christian world has before known anything, may be seen in the Arcana
Coelestia, where the two books of Moses, Genesis and Exodus are
explained according to that sense; also in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 5-26); in a little work
Concerning the White Horse from beginning to end, and in the things
collected there from the Arcana Coelestia concerning the Sacred
Scripture; and besides in these explanations upon Revelation, where not
a single verse can be understood without the spiritual sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="821.">821.</span></span>

And He that sitteth upon him is called faithful and true, and in justice
He doth judge and make war, signifies the Lord as to the Word, that it
is the Divine good itself and the Divine truth itself, from both of
which He executes judgment, and separates the good from the evil. By "He
that sitteth upon him," that is, upon the white horse, the Lord is meant
as to the Word. That it is the Lord as to the Word, is manifest from
verse 13, seq., where it is said that "He was clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood, and His name is called the Word of God." By "faithful
and true" are signified the Divine good and the Divine truth; by
"faithful," the Divine good, because this is faithful. That "faithful,"
when speaking of men, means one who is in the inmost or third heaven,
and thus who is in celestial good, may be seen above (n. 744). That by
"true," when speaking of the Lord, the Divine truth is signified, is
manifest. That by "justice" both are signified, as well good as truth,
and, where it is speaking of the Lord, the Divine good and Divine truth,
may be seen above (n. 805). Hence it follows, that by "judging from
justice" is signified to execute judgment from the Divine good and the
Divine truth. That all judgment is executed by the Lord through the
Word, and thus that the Word itself judges everyone, may be seen above
(n. 233). That "to make war from justice" signifies to separate the good
from the evil, is because the Lord does not make war against anyone, but
separates the good from the evil; and when the good are separated from
the evil, the evil then cast themselves into hell.

<span class="margnote"><span id="822.">822.</span></span>

Verse 12. And His eyes were as a flame of fire, signifies the Divine
wisdom of the Lord's Divine love, may be seen above (n. 48), where are
similar things; and they are said of the Son of man, by whom the Lord as
to the Word is meant (n. 44).

<span class="margnote"><span id="823.">823.</span></span>

And upon His head were many diadems signifies the Divine truths of the
Word from Him. "Upon the head" signifies from the Lord; for by the head
wisdom from love is signified; and man is ruled from the head by wisdom
from love. "Diadems upon the head" were seen because the Divine truths
of the Word, which are signified by "diadems," are from Him. That
"diadems" signify the Divine truths of the Word, may be seen (n. 231,
540). That "the head" when speaking of the Lord, signifies the Divine
wisdom of the Divine love (n. 47); what more is signified by the head
(n. 538, 565). In the spiritual world the Divine truths of the Word
correspond to diadems, and they appear there from correspondence, and in
heaven upon the head of those who hold the Word as holy. Hence it is
that "diadems" signify the Divine truths of the Word in the sense of its
letter. The reason is, because the sense of the letter is translucent
from its spiritual and celestial sense, as a diadem is from light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="824.">824.</span></span>

Having a name written which no one knew but Himself, signifies that no
one sees of what quality the Word is in its spiritual and celestial
senses but the Lord, and he to whom He reveals it. By "a name" is
signified the quality of anyone (n. 165, and elsewhere); here the
quality of the Word, or what the Word is within, that is, in its
spiritual and celestial senses. It is said, "a name written," because
the Word is both with men on earth and with the angels in the heavens;
see The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture
(n. 70-75). By "no one knew but Himself," is signified that no one sees
but the Lord Himself, and he to whom He reveals it, that is, what the
quality of the Word is in the spiritual sense. That no one sees the
spiritual sense of the Word but the Lord alone, and hence that no one
sees that sense except from the Lord, and no one from the Lord unless he
is in Divine truths from Him, may be seen in The Doctrine of the New
Jerusalem concerning the Sacred Scripture (n. 26).

<span class="margnote"><span id="825.">825.</span></span>

Verse 13. And He was clothed with a garment dipped in blood, and His
name is called the Word of God, signifies the Divine truth in its
ultimate sense, or the Word in the letter, to which violence has been
offered. By a garment is signified truth clothing good (n. 166, 212,
328); and when concerning the Word, it signifies the Word in the sense
of the letter; for this is like a garment, in which its spiritual and
celestial senses are clothed. By "the blood" is signified violence
offered to the Lord's Divine and to the Word (n. 327, 684). The reason
that this is signified is that the Lord's Divine truth in the Word is
signified by blood (n. 379, 653); wherefore by "shedding blood" is
signified to offer violence to the Lord's Divine and to the Word. By
"the Word of God" is signified here the Word in the sense of the letter;
for violence has been offered to this, but not to the Word in the
spiritual sense, because this sense has not been known; and if it had
been known, violence would have been offered to it also. Wherefore that
sense was not revealed until after the Last Judgment was accomplished,
and the New Church was to be instituted by the Lord. Nor is it revealed
to anyone at this day, except to him who is in Divine truths from the
Lord; see The Doctrine of the New Jerusalem concerning the Sacred
Scripture (n. 26). \[2\] That violence has been offered to the Lord's
Divine and to the Word, is plainly manifest from the Roman Catholic
religious persuasion, and from the religious persuasion of the Reformed
concerning faith alone. The Roman Catholic religious persuasion gives
forth that the Lord's Human is not Divine, wherefore they have
transferred all things of the Lord to themselves; also that the Word is
to be interpreted only by them; yet the interpretation by them is
everywhere contrary to the Divine truth of the Word, as was shown in the
explanation of the preceding chapter 18. It is manifest from this, that
violence is offered to the Word by that religious persuasion. In like
manner by the religious persuasion of the Reformed concerning faith
alone. Neither does this make the Lord's Human Divine, and it founds
theology upon a single saying of Paul falsely understood; and it
therefore makes nothing of all the things which the Lord taught
concerning love and charity and concerning good works; which are yet so
prominent that everyone, if he only has eyes, can see. The like was done
with the Word by the Jews. \[3\] Their religious persuasion was, that
the Word was written for no others but themselves, and thus that no
others are meant therein; and that the Messiah who was to come would
exalt them above all in the whole world; by which and many other things
they falsified and adulterated all things of the Word. This is meant by
these words in Isaiah: Who is this that cometh from Edom, having
sprinkled garments from Bozrah? wherefore art Thou red as to Thy
garment, and Thy garments as of him that treadeth in the wine-press?
whence victory is sprinkled upon My garments, and I have polluted all My
vesture (Isa. 63:1-3). By "garments" here also the Divine truths of the
Word are signified: by "Edom" is signified red, here red from blood.
Hence it is manifest that by "clothed with a garment dipped in blood,
and His name is called the Word of God," is signified the Divine truth
in the ultimate sense, or the Word in the letter, to which violence has
been offered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="826.">826.</span></span>

Verse 14. And the armies in heaven followed Him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen white and clean, signifies the angels in the New
Christian heaven, who were conjoined with the Lord in the interior
understanding of the Word, and thus in pure and genuine truths. By "the
armies in heaven" are meant the angels who are in Divine truths and
goods (n. 447). By "heaven" is here meant the New Christian Heaven,
spoken of above (n. 612, 613, 626, 659, 661). The reason that this
heaven is meant, is because this is the New Heaven which is treated of
in Revelation. By "following the Lord" is signified to be conjoined to
Him (n. 621). By "the white horses" upon which they appeared, is
signified the interior understanding of the Word, as above (n. 820). By
"the fine linen white and clean," is signified pure and genuine truth
from the Lord through the Word (n. 814). It is also said of the New
Church, that it should be clothed in "fine linen clean and bright"
(verse 8 of this chapter); and so here of the New Christian Heaven,
through which, from the Lord, that church will exist.

<span class="margnote"><span id="827.">827.</span></span>

Verse 15. And out of His mouth went forth a sharp sword. That it
signifies the dispersion of falsities, by doctrine from the Lord is
manifest from the things explained above (n. 52), where similar things
are said of the Lord, who is there called the Son of man; and by the Son
of man is meant the Lord as to the Word (n. 44); here in like manner by
"Him that sitteth upon the white horse": for the dispersion of falsities
is effected by the Lord through the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="828.">828.</span></span>

That with it He should smite the nations; and He shall tend them with a
rod of iron, signifies that He will convince all who are in dead faith,
by the truths of the sense of the letter of the Word, and by rational
things. It is evident that these things are signified, from similar
things above (n. 544). It may there be seen, that by "the rod of iron"
with which the nations should be smitten, are signified truths from the
sense of the letter of the Word confirmed by rational things from the
natural man; and likewise in n. 148, 485. That faith alone without works
is dead, is clearly manifest in James 2:17, 20; who also says: Be ye
doers of the Word, not hearers only; how ye deceive yourselves (James
1:22 seq.). Paul says in like manner: Not the hearers of the law will be
justified by God, but the doers of the law will be justified (Rom.
2:13).

<span class="margnote"><span id="829.">829.</span></span>

And He treadeth the wine-press of the wine of the fury and anger of God
Almighty, signifies that the Lord endured alone all the evils of the
church, and all the violence offered to the Word, thus to Himself. By
"the wine of the fury and anger of God" are signified the goods and
truths of the church, which are from the Word, profaned and adulterated,
thus the evils and falsities of the church (n. 316, 632, 635, 758). By
"treading the wine-press" of that wine is signified to endure them, to
fight against them, and to condemn them, and thus to liberate the angels
in the heavens and the men on earth from infestation by them. For the
Lord came into the world to subjugate the hells, which had then
increased so that they began to infest the angels; and He subjugated
them by combats against them, and thus by temptations; for spiritual
temptations are nothing else than combats against the hells. And because
every man is in consort with spirits as to his affections and thence
thoughts, an evil man with spirits from hell and a good man with angels
from heaven, therefore when the Lord subjugated the hells, He not only
liberated the angels of heaven from infestation, but also the men of the
earth. \[2\] This therefore is what is signified by these words in
Isaiah: He hath borne our diseases, and He hath carried our pains; also
He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our
iniquities; and by His wound healing is given to us; Jehovah hath laid
upon Him the iniquity of us all; He sustained exaction; He was cut off
out of the land of the living, for the transgression of My people was He
stricken; and He hath laid guilt upon His soul (Isa. 53:4-10). These
things are concerning the Lord, and concerning His temptations by the
hells, and at length by the Jews, by whom He was crucified. The Lord's
combats are also described in Isa. 63:1-10; where are these words also:
Thy garments are as of him that treadeth in the wine-press; I have
trodden the wine-press alone (Isa. 63:2-3). By this is signified that He
alone endured the evils and falsities of the church, and all the
violence offered to the Word, thus to Himself. It is said, the violence
offered to the Word, and thus to Himself, because the Lord is the Word;
and violence is offered to the Word and to the Lord Himself by the Roman
Catholic religious persuasion, also by the religious persuasion with the
Reformed concerning faith alone. The Lord endured the evils and
falsities of both, when He executed the Last Judgment, by which He again
subjugated the hells; and unless they had been subjugated again, no
flesh could have been saved; as He says in Matt. 24:21, 22.

<span class="margnote"><span id="830.">830.</span></span>

Verse 16. And He hath upon His garment and upon his thigh a name
written, King of kings and Lord of lords, signifies that the Lord
teaches in the Word what He is, that He is the Divine truth of the
Divine wisdom and the Divine good of the Divine love, thus that He is
the God of the universe. By the Lord's "garment" the Word as to the
Divine truth is signified, as above (n. 825). By the Lord's "thigh" is
signified the Word as to Divine good. The "thighs" and "loins" signify
conjugial love; and as that love is the fundamental of all loves,
therefore "the thighs" and "the loins" signify the good of love. That
this is from correspondence may be seen above (n. 213). Therefore when
"the thigh" is spoken of in relation to the Lord, it signifies Himself
as to the good of love; here also the Word as to the same. By "the name
written" the Lord's quality is signified as above (n. 824). By "King of
kings" is meant the Lord as to the Divine truth of the Divine wisdom,
and by "Lord of lords" is meant the Lord as to the Divine good of the
Divine love. The like is signified by the Lord's kingdom and dominion,
where both are mentioned, see above (n. 664). \[2\] As it is said, "King
of kings and Lord of lords," and by them the Lord as to the Divine truth
and the Divine good is meant, it is therefore said also, "a name written
upon His garment and upon His thigh"; and by "the name written upon His
garment" is signified the Word as to the Divine truth, and by "the name
written upon His thigh," the Word as to the Divine good. Both are in the
Word. The Divine truth of the Word is in its spiritual sense, which is
for the angels of the middle or second heaven, who are in intelligence
from Divine truths; and the Divine good of the Word in its celestial
sense, which is for the angels of the highest or third heaven, who are
in wisdom from Divine goods. But the latter sense is deeply hidden,
perceptible to those only who are in love to the Lord from the Lord.
That it is the Lord, is openly said above in Revelation: They shall
fight with the Lamb; the Lamb shall overcome them, for He is Lord of
lords and King of kings (Rev. 17:14). \[3\] That "the thigh" signifies
the good of love, and when speaking of the Lord, the Divine good of the
Divine love, is evident from these passages in the Word: Justice shall
be the girdle of His loins, and truth the girdle of His thighs (Isa.
11:5). Over the head of the cherubim was the appearance of a Man upon a
throne; from the appearance of His loins and upward, and from the
appearance of His loins downward, was the appearance of fire and
brightness round about (Ezek. 1:26-28). By the "Man upon the throne" is
meant the Lord; by "the appearance of fire from the loins upward and
downward" His Divine love is signified; and by "the brightness round
about" is signified the Divine wisdom therefrom. The Man seen by Daniel,
whose loins were girded with gold of Uphaz (Dan. 10:6) was an angel in
whom was the Lord; by "the gold of Uphaz" the good of love is signified.
The like is signified by "the thigh" (Isa. 5:27; Ps. 45:3; and
elsewhere). Concerning the correspondence of the thighs or loins with
conjugial love, which is the fundamental of all loves, see the Arcana
Coelestia (n. 5050-5062).

<span class="margnote"><span id="831.">831.</span></span>

Verse 17. And I saw an angel standing in the sun, and He cried with a
great voice, saying to all the birds that fly in the midst of heaven,
Come, and gather yourselves together to the supper of the great God,
signifies the Lord from the Divine love and thence from Divine zeal
calling and calling together all who are in the spiritual affection of
truth, and who think of heaven, to the New Church, and to conjunction
with Himself, and thus to eternal life. By "the angel standing in the
sun" is meant the Lord in the Divine love; by "the angel" the Lord is
meant, and by "the sun" His Divine love. By "crying with a great voice"
is signified from Divine zeal; for a voice or influx from the Lord from
the Divine love is from Divine zeal; for zeal is of love. By "the birds
that fly in the midst of heaven" are signified all who are in the
spiritual affection of truth, and thence think of heaven. By "coming and
being gathered together to the supper of the great God," is signified a
calling and a calling together to the New Church and to conjunction with
the Lord; and because eternal life is from conjunction with the Lord,
therefore that is also signified. By crying "come" the calling is
signified, and by "gather yourselves together" is signified the calling
together. \[2\] That the Lord is meant in the Word by "an angel," may be
seen above (n. 5, 170, 258, 344, 465, 649, 657, 718); the more so here,
as He was seen to stand in the sun; and no angel appears in the sun, for
the Lord is the sun of the spiritual world; wherefore the Lord alone is
there. That by "the sun," when speaking of the Lord, the Divine love is
signified, may be seen (n. 53, 414). That by "crying with a great
voice," when said of the Lord in the Divine love, is signified to speak
or flow in from Divine zeal, is manifest; because the Divine zeal is of
the Divine love, here for the salvation of men. That such things as are
of the understanding and thence of the thought are signified by "birds,"
see above (n. 757); here they who are in the spiritual affection of
truth, and think concerning heaven, since it is said, "the birds that
fly in the midst of heaven:" and by "flying in the midst of heaven" is
signified to observe, attend, and think (n. 245, 415). That the New
Church, and thus conjunction with the Lord, are signified by "the supper
of the great God," see (n. 816); where their supper is called "the
marriage supper of the Lamb."

<span class="margnote"><span id="832.">832.</span></span>

Verse 18. That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of
commanders of thousands, and the flesh of the mighty, and the flesh of
horses and of them that sit upon them, and the flesh of all, free and
bond, and small and great, signifies the appropriation of goods from the
Lord through the truths of the Word and of doctrine thence, in every
sense, degree, and kind. Just above (n. 831), conjunction with the Lord
by the Word is treated of; here it is concerning appropriation of goods
from Him through the truths of the Word. By "eating" is signified
appropriation (n. 89); by "the flesh" which they should eat are
signified the goods of the Word and thence of the church; and by "kings,
commanders of thousands, the mighty, horses, them that sit upon them,
free and bond, small and great," are signified truths in every sense,
degree, and kind. By "kings" are signified those who are in the truths
of the church from the Word, and abstractly the truths of the church
from the Word (n. 20, 483). By "commanders of thousands" are signified
those who are in the knowledges of good and truth, and abstractly those
knowledges (n. 337). By "the mighty" are signified they who are in
erudition from doctrine from the Word, and abstractly erudition thence
(n. 337). By "horses" the understanding of the Word is signified; and by
"them that sit upon horses" are signified they who are in wisdom from
the understanding of the Word, and abstractly wisdom thence (n. 298,
820). By "the free and bond" are signified they who know from themselves
and they who know from others (n. 337, 604). By "small and great" those
are signified who are in a lesser and in a greater degree (n. 527, 810).
It is manifest from these things, that by "they may eat their flesh" is
signified the appropriation of goods from the Lord through the truths of
the Word and of doctrine thence in every sense, degree, and kind. \[2\]
It is to be known that no man has any spiritual good from the Lord,
except through truths from the Word; for the truths of the Word are in
the light of heaven, and its goods are in the heat of that light;
wherefore, unless the understanding is in the light of heaven through
the Word, the will cannot come into the heat of heaven. Love and charity
cannot be formed except through truths from the Word; a man cannot be
reformed except through truths therefrom. The church itself with man is
formed by them; but not by those truths in the understanding alone, but
by a life according to them; the truths thus enter into the will, and
become goods. Thus the face of truth is turned into the face of good;
for that which is of the will and thus of the love is called good, and
everything which is of the will or love is also of man's life. From this
it may be seen that the appropriation of good through truths in every
sense, degree, and kind from the Lord through the Word is here meant by
"eating the flesh" of those that are named. Who cannot see that flesh is
not here meant by "flesh"? Who can be so insane as to believe that the
Lord calls and calls together all to a great supper, that He may give
them to eat of the flesh of kings, commanders of thousands, the mighty,
horses, them that sit on them, the free and bond, the small and great?
Who cannot see that there is a spiritual sense in those things, and that
without that sense no one knows what they signify? Who persists in
denying that the Word is spiritual in its bosom? Would it not be more
than material, if those things should be understood according to the
sense of the letter, and not according to the spiritual sense? \[3\]
Similar to these things are the following from Ezekiel: Thus said the
Lord Jehovah, Say to the bird of every wing, and to every beast of the
field, gather yourselves together and come; gather yourselves together
from round about unto my great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel,
that ye may eat flesh and drink blood; ye shall eat the flesh of the
mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth, ye shall eat
fat to satiety, and drink blood even to drunkenness, of my sacrifice
which I sacrifice for you; ye shall be satiated at My table with horse
and chariot and every man of war; thus will I give My glory among the
nations (Ezek. 39:17-21). Here in like manner by "flesh" is signified
the good of the church from the Lord through the Word, and the truth of
the church by "blood." Who does not see that blood would not be given to
drink even to drunkenness, and that they would not be satiated at the
table of the Lord Jehovah with horse, chariot, the mighty, and with
every man of war? Since therefore by "flesh" is signified the good of
the church, and by "blood" the truth of the church, it is plainly
manifest that by the "flesh and blood" of the Lord in the Holy Supper
the Divine good and the Divine truth from the Lord are signified, the
same as by "the bread and wine" spoken of (John 6:51-58). "Flesh" also
signifies good in many other passages in the Word, as in these: I will
remove the heart of stone from their flesh, and will give them a heart
of flesh (Ezek. 11:19; 36:26). My flesh desireth thee in a land of
drought (Ps. 63:1). My heart and My flesh shout aloud for the living God
(Ps. 84:2). My flesh shall dwell confidently (Ps. 16:9). When thou seest
the naked and thou shalt cover him, and thou shalt not hide thyself from
thy flesh (Isa. 58:7).

<span class="margnote"><span id="833.">833.</span></span>

Verse 19. And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their
armies gathered together to make war with him that sat upon the horse,
and with his army, signifies that all the interiorly evil, who have
professed faith alone, with the leaders and their followers, will fight
against the Lord's Divine truths in His Word, and will infest those who
will be of the Lord's New Church. That by "the beast" are signified
those who are in the religious persuasion of faith alone, may be seen
above (n. 567, 576, 577, 594, 598, 601). That it is only they who are
interiorly evil, and have professed that religious persuasion, will be
seen below. By "the kings of the earth" are signified those who are in
the falsities of that religious persuasion more than the rest, thus the
leaders; for by "the kings of the earth" are signified those who are in
the truths of the church from the Word, and in the opposite sense those
who are in falsities (n. 20, 483, 704, 720, 737, 740); here those who
are in falsities. By "their armies" all those among them are signified
who in like manner are in falsities (n. 447). By "making war" is
signified to contend against, since by "war" in the Word spiritual war
is signified, which is that of falsity against truth, and of truth
against falsity (n. 500, 586, 707). By "Him that sat upon the horse" is
meant the Lord as to the Word (n. 820, 821); and because they cannot
fight against the Lord Himself, but against His Divine truths which are
in the Word, and thus they fight also against the Lord, because the Lord
is the Word, this therefore is meant by "making war with Him that sat
upon the horse." That by "an army" those are signified who are in Divine
truths, thus abstractly Divine truths, consequently those who are of the
Lord's New Heaven and New Church, because Divine truths are with them,
may be seen above (n. 826).

<span class="margnote"><span id="834.">834.</span></span>

Verse 20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet, that
did signs before him, with which he seduced them that receive the mark
of the beast and that adore his image, signifies all those who professed
faith alone, and were interiorly evil, as well the laity and common
people as the clergy and the learned, who by reasonings and attestations
that faith alone is the only means of salvation, have induced others to
receive that faith, and to live according to it. By "the beast" here is
meant "the beast out of the sea," spoken of (Rev. 13:1-10); and by "the
false prophet" is meant "the beast out of the earth," spoken of in the
same chapter (verses 11-18). That by "the beast out of the sea" are
meant the laity and the common people who are in the religious
persuasion concerning faith alone, and that by "the beast out of the
earth" are meant the clergy and the learned who are in that religious
persuasion, may be seen from the explanations of that chapter. That "the
false prophet" here is "the beast out of the earth," which is treated of
in that chapter (verses 11-18) is plainly manifest; because it is here
said of "the false prophet," that it is "he that did signs before the
other beast, with which he seduced them that receive the mark of the
beast, and that adore his image:" for similar things are said of the
beast out of the earth (chap. 13); namely, that: He did great signs
before the beast out of the sea, and seduced them that dwell upon the
earth, that they should adore his image, and receive his mark upon the
right hand and upon the forehead (Rev. 13:12-17): from which it is
manifest, that the clergy and the learned are here signified by "the
false prophet," who have confirmed themselves in the religious
persuasion concerning faith alone, and have seduced the laity and the
common people. They are called the false prophet, because by "a prophet"
those are signified who teach and preach falsities by perverting the
truths of the Word (n. 8, 701). That by "the signs" of that beast are
signified reasonings and attestations that faith alone is the only means
of salvation, may be seen above (n. 598, 599, 704). By "receiving the
mark of the beast and adoring his image" is signified to acknowledge and
receive that faith (n. 634, 637, 679).

<span class="margnote"><span id="835.">835.</span></span>

These two were cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone,
signifies that all those, as they were, were cast into the hell where
are the loves of falsity, and at the same time the lusts of evil. By
"alive" is signified as they were. By "these two," namely, "the beast
and the false prophet," are signified all those who professed faith
alone, and were interiorly evil, both the laity and the clergy; as just
above (n. 834). By "the lake of fire burning with brimstone" is
signified the hell where they are who are in the loves of that falsity,
and at the same time in the lusts of evil. By "a lake" is signified
falsities in abundance, treated of in what follows. By "fire" is
signified love, here their love of falsity. That "fire" signifies love
both in the good and the evil sense, may be seen (n. 468, 494, 599);
here the love of falsity, because it is said "a lake of fire." By
"brimstone" is signified the lust of evil and thence of falsity (n.
452). The like is said of "the dragon" and of these two in the following
chapter, in these words: The devil (that is, the dragon), who seduced
them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and
the false prophet are; and they shall be tormented day and night for
ages of ages (Rev. 20:10). \[2\] It is to be known that the hell where
such are, appears at a distance like a fiery lake with a green flame as
of brimstone. But they who are in it do not see this; they are shut up
there in their workhouses, where they wrangle among themselves
vehemently; and sometimes there appear knives in their hands, with which
they threaten, if they do not yield. It is their love of falsity,
together with the lusts of evil, that makes the appearance of such a
lake. That appearance is from correspondence. \[3\] That by "a lake" is
signified where there is truth in abundance, and thence in the opposite
sense where there is falsity in abundance, may be evident from the Word;
where there is truth in abundance, from these passages: From the
wilderness shall waters break forth and rivers in the plain of the
wilderness, and the dry place shall become a lake (Isa. 35:6-7). I will
make the wilderness a lake of waters, and the dry land springs of waters
(Isa. 41:18; Ps. 107:33, 35). I will make the rivers islands, and I will
dry up the lakes (Isa. 42:15). The God of Jacob who turneth the rock
into a lake of waters, and the flint into a fountain of waters (Ps.
114:7-8). All that make hire from the lakes of the soul (Isa. 19:10). In
the opposite sense from these: I will cut off from Babel the name and
the residue, and I will make her an inheritance of the bittern, and
lakes of waters (Isa. 14:22-23). Death and hell were cast into the lake
of fire (Rev. 20:14). Whoever was not found written in the book of life
was cast into the lake of fire (Rev. 20:15). Their part in the lake of
fire burning with brimstone, which is the second death (Rev. 21:8).

<span class="margnote"><span id="836.">836.</span></span>

Verse 21. And the rest were slain by the sword of Him that sat upon the
horse, that proceeded out of His mouth, signifies that all from the
various heresies among the Reformed, who have not lived according to the
Lord's commandments in the Word which they knew, being judged from the
Word, perish. By "the rest" are meant all from the various heresies
among the Reformed, who have not lived according to the Lord's
commandments in the Word which they knew, which are the commandments of
the Decalogue, who thus do not shun evils as sins; for they who do not
thus shun them are in evils of every kind; for the evils remain fixed in
them from birth, and thence from infancy even to the end of life; and
they increase daily, if they are not removed by actual repentance. Of
these it is said that "they were slain with the sword of Him that sat
upon the horse." By "being slain" is signified here, as often before, to
be slain spiritually, which is to perish as to the soul. By "the sword
of Him that sat upon the horse, that proceeded out of His mouth," the
truths of the Word fighting against the falsities of evil are signified.
For by "sword," "long sword," and "saber" is signified truth fighting
against falsity and falsity fighting against truth (n. 52). But the
"sword" \[gladius\] is upon the thigh, hence it is combat from love;
"saber" \[machoera\] is in the hand, hence it is combat with power; and
the "long sword" \[romphoea\] is of the mouth, hence it is combat from
doctrine; for which reason "the long sword proceeding out of the mouth
of the Lord," is combat from the Word against falsities (n. 108, 117,
827); for the Word proceeded out of the mouth of the Lord. The reason
that the combat with the Reformed, and not with the Babylonians, is here
treated of, is because the Reformed read the Word, and acknowledge the
truths therein as Divine truths. It is otherwise with the Babylonians;
these indeed acknowledge the Word, but still they do not read it; and
everyone regards the decrees of the pope as in the first place, and far
above it; wherefore with them there cannot be combat from the Word. They
also put themselves above it, and not under it. But still these are
judged from the Word, and from the decrees of the pope so far as these
agree with the Word.

<span class="margnote"><span id="837.">837.</span></span>

And all the birds were satiated with their flesh, signifies that from
their lusts of evil, which are their proprium, the infernal genii are as
it were nourished. By "the birds" are signified the falsities which are
from hell; and because the infernal genii are in those falsities, who
are together with men in the falsities which are of their love,
therefore they are here signified by "the birds." A man also who is in
those falsities, becomes one of such genii after death. That by useless
and injurious "birds," especially the unclean and rapacious, which feed
on carrion, are signified falsities which are of love, may be seen above
(n. 757). By "flesh" are here signified the evils of the lusts which are
of man's proprium (n. 748). By "being satiated with them" is signified
to be as it were nourished by them, and to draw them in with delight;
for the infernal genii, who are in similar lusts of evil, eagerly draw
in and fill their nostrils, and thence their life, from the lusts
exhaled from the thoughts and respiration of such; wherefore they also
live and dwell together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="838.">838.</span></span>

Let everyone therefore beware of that heresy, that man is justified by
faith without the works of the law; for he who is in it, and does not
fully recede from it before the end of life draws near, is consociated
after death with infernal genii; for they are the goats of whom the Lord
says: Depart from Me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the
devil and his angels (Matt. 25:41-42). For the Lord does not say of "the
goats" that they had done evils, but that they had not done goods. The
reason that they did not do goods is because they say in themselves, "I
cannot do good of myself; the law does not condemn me; the blood of
Christ cleanses me, and liberates me; the passion of the cross has taken
away the guilt of sin; the merit of Christ is imputed to me by faith; I
am reconciled to the Father, I am in grace, I am regarded as a son; and
He considers our sins as infirmities, which He immediately remits for
His Son's sake; thus He justifies through faith alone; and unless this
was the only means of salvation, no mortal could be saved. For what
other end should the Son of God suffer the cross, and fulfill the law,
but that He might take away the condemnation of our transgressions?"
These and many similar things they say within themselves, and thus do
not do goods which are goods; for from their faith alone, which is
nothing but a faith of knowledge, in itself a historical faith, thus
only science, there do not proceed any goods; for it is a dead faith,
into which no life or soul comes, unless the man approaches the Lord
immediately, and shuns evils as sins of himself; then the goods which he
does as of himself are from the Lord, and thus goods in themselves;
concerning which it thus speaks in Isaiah: Woe the sinful nation, laden
with iniquity, a seed of the evil, sons that are corrupt; when ye spread
forth your hands, I hide mine eyes from you; yea, though ye multiply
prayers, I do not hear; wash you, make you clean, put away the
wickedness of your works from before Mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do good; then though your sins have been as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow; though they have been red as purple, they shall be as
wool (Isa. 1:4, 15-18). And in Jeremiah: Stand in the gate of the house
of Jehovah, and proclaim there this word: Trust ye not in the words of a
lie, saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of
Jehovah are these (the church of God, the church of God, the church of
God is where our faith is); will ye, stealing, killing, committing
adultery, and swearing by a lie, then come and stand before Me in this
house, upon which My name is called, and say, We are delivered, while ye
do these abominations? Is this house become a den of robbers? Behold,
even I have seen, saith Jehovah (Jer. 7:2-4, 9-11).

<span class="margnote"><span id="839.">839.</span></span>

I looked forth into the world of spirits, and saw an army upon red and
black horses. They that sat upon them appeared like apes, with their
faces and breasts turned towards the loins and tails of the horses, and
with the backs of their heads and their backs towards the necks and
heads of the horses; and the reins hung around the necks of the riders.
And they cried out, "Let us fight against them that ride upon the white
horses." And they pulled the reins with both hands, and thus pulled back
the horses from the fight; and this continually. Then two angels
descended from heaven, and drew near to me, and said, "What do you see?"
And I related that I saw this ludicrous company of horsemen, and asked
what it was, and who they were. \[2\] And the angels answered, "They are
from the place which is called Armageddon (Rev. 16:16), where they have
been gathered together to the number of some thousands, to fight against
those who are of the Lord's New Church, which is called the New
Jerusalem. They spoke in that place concerning the church and religion;
and yet there was not anything of the church with them, because there
was not any spiritual truth; nor anything of religion, because there was
not any spiritual good. They spoke there on both subjects with the mouth
and with the lips, but for the reason that by means of them they might
have dominion. They learned in their youth to confirm faith alone, the
Trinity of God, and the duality of Christ; and when they were promoted
to more eminent offices in the church, they retained those things for
some time; but as they then began to think no more about God and heaven,
but about themselves and the world, and thus not about eternal happiness
and felicity, but about temporal eminence and opulence, they rejected
the doctrinals acquired in their youth from the interiors of the
rational mind, which communicate with heaven, and hence are in the light
of heaven, into the exteriors of the rational mind, which communicate
with the world, and hence are only in the light of the world; and at
length they thrust them down into the sensual natural; whence the
doctrinals of the church have become with them things of the mouth only,
and are no longer of the thought from reason, and still less of the
affection from love; and because they have made themselves such, they do
not admit any genuine truth which is of the church, nor any genuine good
which is of religion. The interiors of their minds have become
comparatively like bottles filled with iron filings mixed with powdered
sulphur, into which if water be poured, there first arises a heat, and
afterwards a flame, by which the bottles are burst. In like manner, when
they hear anything about living water, which is the genuine truth of the
Word, and this enters through the ears, they are violently heated and
inflamed, and reject it as a thing that would burst their heads. \[3\]
"These are they who appeared to you like apes riding, with the body
turned round, upon red and black horses, with the reins around their
necks; since they who do not love the truth and the good of the church
from the Word, will not look at the forward parts of any horse, but at
his hinder parts; for 'a horse' signifies the understanding of the Word;
'a red horse' the understanding of the Word destroyed as to good, and 'a
black horse' the understanding of the Word destroyed as to truth. The
reason why they cried out to fight against those riding upon the white
horses is that 'a white horse' signifies the understanding of the Word
as to truth and good. They were seen to pull back the horses by their
necks, because they feared the combat, lest the truth of the Word should
come to many, and so into the light. This is the interpretation." \[4\]
The angels said further, "We are from the society in heaven which is
called Michael, and were commanded by the Lord to descend into the place
called Armageddon, whence the company of horsemen was seen by you to
burst forth. By 'Armageddon,' with us in heaven, is signified the state
and purpose of fighting from falsified truths, arising from the love of
command and supereminence; and because we perceive with you the desire
of knowing about the combat there, we will tell about it. After our
descent from heaven, we approached the place called Armageddon, and saw
there some thousands gathered together. Nevertheless we did not enter
into that assembly; but there were two houses on the southern side of
that place, where there were boys with their masters. We went in
thither, and they received us kindly. We were delighted with their
company. Their faces were all handsome, from the life in their eyes, and
from the zeal in their discourse. The life in their eyes was from the
perception of truth, and the zeal in their discourse from the affection
of truth; on which account also caps had been given them from heaven,
the borders of which were ornamented with bands of golden threads
interwoven with pearls; and garments were also given, variegated with
white and blue colors. We asked them whether they looked into the
neighboring place, which is called Armageddon. They said that they did
so through a window under the roof of the house, and that they saw there
a congregation, but under various figures, now as tall men, and now not
as men, but as statues and carved idols, and an assembly around them
bending the knees. They also appeared to us under various forms; now as
men, now as leopards, now as goats; the latter with horns bent
downwards, with which they dug up the ground. We interpreted those
metamorphoses, whom they represented and what they signified. \[5\] "But
to the point: They that were gathered together, when they heard that we
had entered into those houses, said among themselves, 'What are they
doing with those boys? Let us send some from our assembly to cast them
out.' And they sent, and when they came, they said to us, 'Why have you
entered into those houses? Whence are you? We command you by authority
to depart.' "But we answered, 'You cannot command that by authority. You
are, indeed, in your own eyes, like Anakim, and they who are here like
dwarfs. But still you have no power and right here, unless perchance by
cunning from your three places of diversion here, which, however, will
not avail. Wherefore take back word to your companions, that we were
sent hither from heaven, to ascertain whether there is any religion with
you, or not; and if not, that you should be cast out of this place.
Wherefore propose to them this, in which is the very essential of the
church, and thence of religion, how they understand these words in the
Lord's Prayer: "Our Father who art in the heavens, hallowed be Thy name;
Thy kingdom come; Thy will be done as in heaven so also upon the
earth."' On hearing this, they said at first, 'What is this?' and then
that they would propose it. And they went away, and told these things to
their companions, who answered, 'What is this proposition and its
nature?' Yet they understood the arcanum, that they wished to know,
whether those things confirm the way to God the Father according to our
faith; wherefore they said, 'The words are clear, that one must pray to
God the Father; and because Christ is our Savior, that we must pray to
God the Father for the Son's sake.' And they soon concluded in
indignation, that they would go to us, and declare it orally; saying
also, that they would pull our ears. They also went out of that place,
and entered a grove near the two houses in which these boys were with
their masters; where was a level place elevated like a gymnasium. And
they took hold of each other's hands, and entered into the gymnasium,
where we were, and were waiting for them. "There were there sods cut
from the ground like hillocks; upon them then they reclined; for they
said among themselves, 'Let us not stand before them, but sit.' And then
one of them, who could make himself appear like an angel of light, on
whom it had been enjoined by the rest to speak with us, said, 'You have
proposed to us to open our mind concerning the first words in the Lord's
Prayer, how we understand them. I say to you, therefore, that we
understand them thus; that we must pray to God the Father; and because
Christ is our Savior, and we are saved by His merit, that we must pray
to God the Father from faith in His merit.' \[6\] "But we then said to
them, 'We are from the society of heaven which is called Michael, and we
were sent to visit and inquire, whether you that are gathered together
in this place have any religion or not; and we cannot know this
otherwise than by questioning concerning God; for the idea of God enters
into the whole of religion, and by it conjunction is effected, and by
conjunction salvation. We in heaven read that prayer daily, like men on
earth; and we do not then think of God the Father, because He is
invisible; but we think of Him in His Divine Human, because in this He
is visible; and in this He is called by you Christ, but by us the Lord;
and thus to us the Lord is the Father in heaven. The Lord also taught
that He and the Father are one; that the Father is in Him and He in the
Father; and that he who seeth Him seeth the Father; also that no one
cometh to the Father but by Him; and likewise that it is the will of the
Father, that they should believe in the Son; and that he that believeth
not in the Son, cannot see life; yea, that the anger of God abideth upon
him. From which it is manifest, that the Father is approached through
Him and in Him. And because it is so, He also taught that all authority
is given unto Him in heaven and in earth. It is said in that prayer,
"hallowed be Thy name, and Thy kingdom come"; and we have demonstrated
from the Word that His Divine Human is the Father's name; and that the
Father's kingdom is then come, when the Lord is immediately approached;
and not at all when God the Father is approached immediately; wherefore
also the Lord said to the disciples, that they should preach the kingdom
of God; and this is the kingdom of God.' \[7\] "Moreover we instructed
them from the Word, that the Lord came into the world, that He might
glorify His Human, for the end that the angels of heaven and the men of
the church might be united to God the Father through Him and in Him; for
He taught that they who believe in Him are in Him, and He in them; which
is as the church teaches, that they are in the body of Christ. Finally
we informed them, that at this day a New Church is being established by
the Lord, which is meant by 'the New Jerusalem' in Revelation; in which
will be the worship of the Lord alone, as it is in heaven; and that thus
everything which is contained in the Lord's Prayer from beginning to end
will be fulfilled. All the things which we have said above we confirmed
from the Word in the Evangelists, and from the Word in the Prophets, in
such abundance that they were tired of hearing. \[8\] "First. We
confirmed that 'our Father in the heavens' is the Lord Jesus Christ,
from these passages: Unto us a Boy is born, unto us a Son is given; and
His name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, God, Father of eternity,
Prince of peace (Isa. 9:6). Thou, O Jehovah, art our Father, the
Redeemer from everlasting is Thy name (Isa. 63:16). Jesus said, He that
seeth Me, seeth Him that sent Me (John 12:45). If ye have known Me, ye
have known the Father also; and henceforth ye have known Him, and have
seen Him (John 14:7). Philip said, Lord, show us the Father; Jesus said
unto him, He that seeth Me, seeth the Father; how sayest thou then, show
us the Father (John 14:8, 9)? Jesus said, the Father and I are one (John
10:30). All things whatsoever the Father hath are Mine (John 16:15;
17:10). The Father is in Me, and I in the Father (John 10:38; 14:10, 11,
20). That no one hath seen the Father, except the only Son who is in the
bosom of the Father (John 1:18; 5:37; 6:46). Wherefore He also says
that: No one cometh to the Father, but by Him (John 14:6). And that to
come to the Father is by Him, from Him, and in Him (John 6:56; 14:20;
15:4-6; 17:19, 23). But concerning the unity of God, Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, more may be seen in the relation (n. 962). \[9\] "Second.
That 'hallowed be Thy name,' is to approach the Lord and worship Him, we
confirmed by these passages: Who shall not glorify Thy name, for Thou
alone art holy (Rev. 15:4). This is concerning the Lord: Jesus said,
Father, glorify Thy Name; and there came forth a voice from heaven, I
have both glorified it and will glorify it (John 12:28). The name of the
Father which was glorified is the Divine Human. Jesus said, I am come in
My Father's name (John 5:43). Jesus said, He that receiveth this boy in
My name, receiveth Me; and he that receiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent
Me (Luke 9:48). These things were written, that ye may believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye may have life
in His name (John 20:31). As many as received Him, to them gave He power
to become the sons of God, to them that believe in His name (John 1:12).
Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, this I will do, that the Father may
be glorified in the Son (John 14:13-14). He that believeth not is judged
already, because he hath not believed in the name of the Only-begotten
Son of God (John 3:15-16, 18). Where two or three are gathered together
in My name, there am I in the midst of them (Matt. 18:19-20). Jesus said
to the disciples that they should preach in His name (Luke 24:47).
Besides other places, where 'the name of the Lord' is mentioned, by
which is meant Himself as to His Human (as Matt. 7:22; 10:22; 18:5;
19:29; 24:9, 10; Mark 11:10; 13:13; 16:17; Luke 10:17; 19:38; 21:12, 17;
John 2:23); from which it is manifest that the Father is hallowed in the
Son, and by angels and men through the Son; and that this is meant by
'hallowed be Thy name'; as is further evident in John 17:19, 21-23, 26.
\[10\] "Third. That 'Thy kingdom come' means that the Lord reigns, we
confirmed by these passages: The Law and the Prophets were until John;
since that time the kingdom of God is evangelized (Luke 16:16). John
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, said, The time is fulfilled, the
kingdom of God has approached (Mark 1:14-15; Matt. 3:2). Jesus Himself
preached the gospel of the kingdom, and that the kingdom of God has
approached (Matt. 4:17, 23; 9:35). Jesus commanded the disciples to
preach and evangelize the kingdom of God (Mark 16:15; Luke 8:1; 9:60).
In like manner to the seventy whom He sent forth (Luke 10:9, 11; besides
other places, as Matt 11:5; 16:27-28; Mark 8:35; 9:1, 47; 10:29-30;
11:10; Luke 1:19; 2:10, 11; 4:43; 7:22; 17:20-21; 21:30-31; 22:18). 'The
kingdom of God which was evangelized,' was the kingdom of the Lord, and
thus the kingdom of the Father. That it is so is manifest from these
passages: The Father hath given all things into the hand of the Son
(John 3:35). The Father hath given to the Son power over all flesh (John
17:2). All things are delivered unto Me by the Father (Matt. 11:27). All
power is given unto Me in heaven and on earth (Matt 28:18). Further also
from these: Jehovah of Hosts is His name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One
of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall He be called (Isa. 54:5). I
saw, and behold, one like the Son of man, to whom was given dominion,
and glory, and the kingdom; and all peoples and nations shall worship
Him; His dominion is the dominion of an age which shall not pass away,
and His kingdom that which shall not perish (Dan. 7:13-14). When the
seventh angel sounded, there were voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms
of the world are become our Lord's and His Christ's, and He shall reign
for ages of ages (Rev. 11:15; 12:10). Which kingdom of the Lord is
treated of in Revelation from beginning to end; into which all will come
who will be of the New Church, which is the New Jerusalem. \[11\]
"Fourth. 'Thy will be done as in heaven so also upon the earth,' we
confirmed by these passages: Jesus said, This is the will of the Father,
that everyone that seeth the Son, and believeth on Him, may have
everlasting life (John 6:40). God so loved the world, that He gave His
Only begotten Son, that everyone who believeth in Him may not perish,
but have eternal life (John 3:15-16). He that believeth on the Son hath
eternal life; but he that believeth not the Son shall not see life; but
the anger of God abideth upon him (John 3:36; besides other places). To
believe in Him is to go to Him, and to have confidence that He saves,
because He is the Savior of the world. Besides, it is known in the
church, that the Lord Jesus Christ reigns in heaven. He says also that
His kingdom is there. When, therefore, the Lord reigns in like manner in
the church, 'then the Father's will is done as in heaven so also upon
the earth.' \[12\] "To these things we finally added the following: It
is said in the whole Christian world, that they who are of the church
make the body of Christ, and are in His body. How then can the man of
the church approach God the Father, except through Him in whose body he
is? If otherwise, he must go entirely out of the body, and approach. "On
hearing these and still more things from the Word, the Armageddons
wished now and then to interrupt our discourse, and to adduce such
things as the Lord spoke with the Father in His state of exinanition.
But their tongues then adhered to their palates, as it was not permitted
them to contradict the Word. But the bridles of their tongues being at
length loosened, they cried out, 'You have spoken against the doctrine
of our church, which is that God the Father is to be approached
immediately, and that we must believe in Him. You have thus made
yourselves guilty of a violation of our faith: therefore go out from
here; and if not, you shall be cast out.' And their minds being inflamed
from threats, they endeavored to do it. But, by power then given us, we
smote them with blindness; owing to which, not seeing us, they rushed
forth into the plain, which was a wilderness; and those who appeared to
you like apes upon horses, were the same as were seen by the boys out of
the window like statues and idols, before whom the rest knelt."

<span class="margnote"><span id="840.">840.</span></span>

Revelation 20 1. And I saw an angel coming down from heaven, having the
key of the abyss, and a great chain in his hand. 2. And he laid hold on
the dragon, the old serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him
a thousand years; 3. And cast him into the abyss, and shut him up, and
set a seal upon him, that he should not seduce the nations any more,
until the thousand years were finished; and after this he must be loosed
a little time. 4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and
judgment was given unto them, and the souls of them that were beheaded
for the testimony of Jesus, and for the Word of God, and who had not
adored the beast, nor his image, nor had received his mark upon their
forehead, and upon their hand; and they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years. 5. And the rest of the dead lived not again, until the
thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. 6. Happy
and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection; upon these the
second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of
Christ, and shall reign with Him a thousand years. 7. And when the
thousand years are finished, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, 8.
And shall go forth to seduce the nations which are in the four corners
of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to war; the number
of whom is as the sand of the sea. 9. And they went up upon the breadth
of the earth, and encompassed the camp of the saints and the beloved
city; and fire came down from God out of heaven and consumed them. 10.
And the Devil that seduced them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are; and shall be
tormented day and night for ages of ages. 11. And I saw a great white
throne, and Him that sat upon it, from whose face the earth and the
heaven fled away; and no place was found for them. 12. And I saw the
dead, small and great, standing before God; and the books were opened,
and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works. 13. And the sea gave up the dead which were in
it, and death and hell gave up the dead which were in them; and they
were judged everyone according to their works. 14. And death and hell
were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death. 15. And if
anyone was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the
lake of fire. The Spiritual Sense The Contents of the Whole Chapter
Concerning the removal of those who are meant by "the dragon,"' (verses
1-3), and then concerning the ascent of those from the lower earth, who
worshiped the Lord and shunned evils as sins (verses 4-6). The judgment
upon those in whose worship there was nothing of religion (verses 7-9).
The damnation of the dragon (verse 10). The universal judgment upon the
rest (verses 11-15). The Contents of Each Verse Verse 1. "And I saw an
angel coming down from heaven having the key of the abyss, and a great
chain in his hand," signifies the Lord's Divine operation into lower
things, from His Divine power of shutting and opening, and of binding
and loosing (n. 840). Verse 2. "And he laid hold on the dragon, the old
serpent, which is the Devil and Satan," signifies that they were
withheld who are meant by the dragon, who, because they think sensually
and not spiritually of matters of faith, are called "the old serpent,"
and because they are in evils as to life, are called the Devil, and
because they are in falsities as to doctrine, are called Satan (n. 841).
"And bound him a thousand years," signifies that they who are here meant
by the dragon, were withdrawn and torn away from the rest in the world
of spirits, that for a short time there might be no communication with
them (n. 842). Verse 3. "And cast him into the abyss, and shut him up,
and set a seal upon him, that he should not seduce the nations any
more," signifies that the Lord entirely removed those who were in faith
alone, and took away all communication between them and the rest, lest
they should inspire into those who were to be taken up into heaven
anything of their heresy (n. 843). "Until the thousand years were
finished; and after this he must be loosed a little time," signifies,
this only a little while, or for a short time, until they are taken up
by the Lord into heaven who were in truths from good; after which they
who are meant by "the dragon," were to be loosed for a short time, and a
communication opened between them and the rest (n. 844). Verse 4. "And I
saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them,"
signifies that the truths of the Word, according to which all are
judged, were opened, and that then they were taken up from the lower
earth, who had been concealed by the Lord, that they might not be
seduced by the dragon and his beasts (n. 845). "And the souls of them
that were beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and for the Word of God,"
signifies that they were rejected by those who were in falsities from
their own intelligence, because they worshiped the Lord, and lived
according to the truths of His Word (n. 846, 847). "And who had not
adored the beast, nor his image, nor had received his mark upon their
forehead, and upon their hand," signifies who did not acknowledge and
receive the doctrine of faith alone (n. 848). "And they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years," signifies who have been already
for some time in conjunction with the Lord and in His kingdom (n. 849).
Verse 5. "And the rest of the dead lived not again, until the thousand
years were finished," signifies that besides these, now spoken of, none
were taken up into heaven, till after the dragon was loosed, and that
they were then proved and explored as to their quality (n. 850). "This
is the first resurrection," signifies that salvation and life eternal
primarily consist in worshiping the Lord and living according to His
commandments in the Word, because by them conjunction is effected with
the Lord and consociation with the angels of heaven (n. 851). Verse 6.
"Happy and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection,"
signifies that they who come into heaven have the felicity of life
eternal, and enlightenment, by conjunction with the Lord (n. 852). "Upon
these the second death hath no power," signifies that they have not
damnation (n. 853): "But they shall be priests of God and of Christ,"
signifies, because they are kept by the Lord in the good of love and
thence in the truths of wisdom (n. 854). "And shall reign with Him a
thousand years," signifies that they were already in heaven, when the
rest who had not revived, that is, as yet received heavenly life, were
in the world of spirits (n. 855). Verse 7. "And when the thousand years
are finished, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison," signifies that
after they who had before been concealed and guarded in the lower earth,
were taken up by the Lord into heaven, and the New Heaven increased by
them, all those who had confirmed themselves in falsities of faith, were
to be let loose (n. 856). Ver. 8. "And shall go forth to seduce the
nations, which are in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to
gather them together to war," signifies that they who are here meant by
the dragon, would draw to their party all those who were from the earths
in the whole world of spirits, and lived there only in external natural
worship and in no internal spiritual worship, and would stir them up
against those who worshiped the Lord, and lived according to His
commandments in the Word (n. 858, 859). "The number of whom is as the
sand of the sea," signifies the multitude of such (n. 860). Verse 9.
"And they went up upon the breadth of the earth, and encompassed the
camp of the saints, and the beloved city," signifies that being stirred
up by the dragonists, they spurned every truth of the church, and
endeavored to destroy all things of the New Church, and even its
doctrine concerning the Lord and concerning life (n. 861, 862). "And
fire came down from God out of heaven and consumed them," signifies that
they were destroyed by the lusts of infernal love (n. 863). Verse 10.
"And the Devil that seduced them was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night for ages of ages," signifies that they who were
in evils as to life, and in falsities as to doctrine, were cast into
hell (n. 864). Verse 11. "And I saw a great white throne, and Him that
sat upon it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away," <span
id="fr_78"></span>[840-1](#fn_78) signifies the universal judgment
executed by the Lord upon all the former heavens that were occupied by
such as were in civil and moral good, but in no spiritual good, thus who
simulated Christians in externals, but in internals were devils, which
heavens, with their earth, were totally dissipated, so that nothing of
them appeared any more (n. 865). Verse 12. "And I saw the dead, small
and great, standing before God, signifies all who had died from the
earth, and were now among those who were in the world of spirits, of
whatever condition and quality, gathered together by the Lord for
judgment (n. 866). "And the books were opened; and another book was
opened, which is the book of life," signifies that the interiors of the
minds of them all were laid open, and by the influx of light and heat
from heaven, their quality was seen and perceived as to the affections
which are of the love or the will, and thence as to the thoughts which
are of faith or the understanding, as well the evil as the good (n.
867). "And the dead were judged out of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works," signifies that all were judged
according to their internal life in externals (n. 868). Verse 13. "And
the sea gave up the dead which were in it," signifies the external and
natural men of the church called to judgment (n. 869). "And death and
hell gave up the dead which were in them," signifies the men of the
church who were wicked in heart, who in themselves were devils and
satans, called to judgment (n. 870). "And they were judged everyone
according to their works," signifies here as before (n. 871). Verse 14.
"And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire," signifies that the
wicked in heart, who in themselves were devils and satans, and yet in
externals like men of the church, were cast into hell among those who
were in the love of evil and thence in the love of falsity agreeing with
evil (n. 872). "This is the second death," signifies that with these
there is damnation itself (n. 873). Verse 15. "And if anyone was not
found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire,"
signifies that they who had not lived according to the Lord's
commandments in the Word, and had not believed in the Lord, were
condemned (n. 874). THE EXPLANATION. Verse 1. And I saw an angel coming
down from heaven, having the key of the abyss, and a great chain in his
hand, signifies the Lord's operation into lower things, from His Divine
power of shutting and opening, and of binding and loosing. By "an angel
coming down from heaven," is meant the Lord (see n. 5, 170, 344, 465,
657, 718); also the Lord's operation (n. 415, 631, 633, 649); here into
lower things, because it is said "coming down"; by having "the key of
the abyss" is signified the Divine power of opening and shutting hell
(see n. 62, 174); and "by having a great chain in his hand," is
signified the endeavor and thence the act of binding and loosing. Hence
it follows that there was not any key nor a chain in the Lord's hand;
but it was so seen by John that it might be a representative of the
Lord's Divine power; the opening and shutting of hell is also treated of
two or three times in this chapter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="841.">841.</span></span>

Verse 2. And he laid hold on the dragon, the old serpent, which is the
Devil, and Satan, signifies that they were withheld who were meant by
"the dragon," who, because they think sensually and not spiritually on
things of faith, are called "the old serpent," and because they are in
evils as to life, are called "the Devil," and because they are in
falsities as to doctrine, are called "Satan." Who they are who are meant
by "the dragon," maybe seen above (n. 537). The reason why both here and
there he is called "the old serpent, the Devil, and Satan," is because
"a serpent" signifies those who think sensually and not spiritually (n.
455, 550); "the Devil" signifies those who are in evils as to life; and
"Satan" those who are in falsities as to doctrine (n. 97, 550). For all
those who do not approach the Lord immediately, think sensually of
things relating to the church, and cannot think spiritually, for the
Lord is the light itself (n. 796, 799). Wherefore they who do not
immediately approach the Lord, cannot think from spiritual light, which
is the light of heaven, but from natural light separated from spiritual
light, which is to think sensually; hence it is that they are called
"the old serpent." They who do not immediately approach the Lord, nor
shun evils as sins, remain in sins, thence it is that the dragon is
called "the Devil;" and since the same are in falsities as to doctrine,
therefore the dragon is called "Satan."

<span class="margnote"><span id="842.">842.</span></span>

And bound him a thousand years, signifies that they who are here meant
by "the dragon," were withdrawn and torn away from the rest in the world
of spirits, that for some time there might be no communication with
them. That by "binding" is here signified to withdraw and tear them away
from the rest in the world of spirits, in order to prevent communication
with them, will be seen in the next article. The reason why by "a
thousand years" are not meant a thousand years, but for a while or for
some time, is because "a thousand" without other numbers added to it in
the spiritual world, has that signification; he who believes that "a
thousand years" signify a thousand years, does not know that all numbers
in the Word signify things, and thus may be misled, especially in the
Apocalypse, with respect to the sense of the things, where numbers are
read, as where the numbers, 5, 7, 10, 12, 144, 666, 1200, 1600, 12,000,
144,000, and many others occur; in which latter numbers "a thousand"
only signifies a certain adjunct, and when a thousand is used to
designate times, it signifies somewhat more; but when it is used by
itself, as here, it signifies for a while or for some time; that this is
so has been told me from heaven, where in the Word which is there, no
number is read, but instead of a number the thing, and instead of a
"thousand" for a while; they are surprised there, that, when the men of
the church have seen in the Apocalypse so many numbers, which cannot but
signify things, they should still adhere to the conjectures of the
chiliasts and millennialists, by which their minds are impressed with
vain things concerning the last state of the church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="843.">843.</span></span>

Verse 3. And cast him into the abyss, and shut him up, and set a seal
upon him, that he should not seduce the nations any more, signifies that
the Lord entirely removed those who were in faith alone, and took away
all communication between them and the rest, lest they should inspire
into those who were to be taken up into heaven, anything of their
heresy. By "the dragon" are here meant those who are in falsities of
faith, as above (n. 842). It is said of the dragon that "he was taken,"
"bound," "cast into the abyss," "shut up," and "a seal set upon him,"
whereby is signified that he was entirely removed, and that all
communication was taken away between him and the rest; by "his being
taken," is signified that they who are meant by him were collected and
retained; by "his being bound" is signified that they were withdrawn and
torn away from the rest; by "his being cast into the abyss" is signified
that they were let down towards hell; by "his being shut up" is
signified that they were entirely removed; by "a seal being set upon
him" is signified that communication with the rest was entirely taken
away. \[2\] The reason why the dragon was entirely removed for a time,
was that they might be taken up from the lower earth, who had been
concealed by the Lord, and who are treated of (vers. 4-6), lest when
they were taken up, they should be seduced by the dragonists; therefore
it is also said, "that he should not seduce the nations any more," by
which is signified that he might not inspire into them anything of his
heresy. The reason why this was done in the world of spirits, which is
midway between heaven and hell, is because there the evil have
communication with the good, and the good are prepared in that world for
heaven, and the evil for hell, and there the good are proved by having
some consociation with the evil, and they are explored and tried as to
their quality and constancy. By "the nations" which he should not
seduce, are meant the good; that by "nations" are meant they who are
good as to life, and, in the opposite sense, the evil, may be seen above
(n. 483). From these things it may appear, that by "he cast them into
the abyss, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him" is signified that
the Lord entirely removed those who were in the falsities of faith, and
took away all communication between them and the rest, lest they should
inspire anything of their heresy into those who were to be elevated into
heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="844.">844.</span></span>

Until a thousand years were finished, and after that he must be loosed a
little time, signifies that this is for a while or for some time, until
they are taken up by the Lord into heaven who were in truths from good;
after which they who are meant by "the dragon" were to be loosed for a
short time, and a communication opened between them and the rest. The
reason why "until a thousand years were finished" signifies for awhile
or for some time, is because by "a thousand years" are not signified a
thousand years, but a little while or some time, as above (n.842). "He
must be loosed a little, "signifies that after that they who are here
meant by "the dragon," as above, are to be released from their
confinement, and that then a communication is to be opened between them
and the rest; that this is what is signified, is evident from what has
been said above, thus from the series of things, and from their
connection with what follows, in the spiritual sense. What now follows
(from vers. 4-6) treats of those who were taken up by the Lord into
heaven, on whose account the dragon was removed and shut up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="845.">845.</span></span>

Verse 4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was
given unto them, signifies that the truths of the Word, according to
which all are judged, were opened, and that then they were taken up from
the lower earth, who had been concealed by the Lord, lest they should be
seduced by the dragon and his beasts. The reason why this is the
signification of these words, is because by "the thrones" upon which
they sat, are not signified thrones, but judgment according to the
truths of the Word; that by "the thrones" seen in heaven is represented
judgment, may be seen above (n. 229). That nothing else is signified by
"the thrones," upon which the twenty-four elders sat, and upon which the
twelve apostles are to sit, and that all are judged according to the
truths of the Word, may also be seen above (n. 233); from which it is
plain, that by "judgment was given unto them," is signified that
judgment was given to the truths of the Word. \[2\] The reason why they
are meant who were taken up by the Lord from the lower earth into
heaven, and who in the meanwhile had been concealed there lest they
should be seduced by the dragon and his beasts, is because this is said
of "the souls which had been beheaded," and of "the dead," afterwards
mentioned, not that they were dead to themselves, but to others. The
place where they were concealed is called the lower earth, which is next
above hell, under the world or spirits, and there by communication with
heaven and by conjunction with the Lord, they are in safety. There are
many such places, and there they live cheerfully with one another, and
worship the Lord, nor do they know anything about hell. They who are
there are at times elevated by the Lord into heaven after the Last
Judgment, and when they are elevated those who are meant by the dragon
are removed. It has been frequently granted me to see them taken up and
consociated with the angels in heaven. This is what is meant in the Word
by "the graves were opened," and "the dead were raised up."

<span class="margnote"><span id="846.">846.</span></span>

And the souls of them that were beheaded for the testimony of Jesus and
for the Word of God, signifies that they were rejected by those who are
in falsities from their own intelligence, because they worshiped the
Lord, and lived according to the truths of His Word. By "the souls of
them that were beheaded (smitten with the axe), for the testimony of
Jesus and for the Word of God" are meant men after death, who are then
called spirits, or men clothed with a spiritual body, who were concealed
by the Lord in the lower earth, until the evil were removed by the Last
Judgment. They are said "to be beheaded," because they were rejected by
those who were in falsities from their own intelligence, all of whom are
in evils and thence in falsities, or in falsities and by them in evils,
and yet in externals are in Divine worship. That this kind of falsity is
signified by an axe, will be seen in the next article. By "the testimony
of Jesus and the Word of God," is signified the acknowledgment of the
Lord's Divine in His Human, like as by these passages above: John
testified of the Word of God and of the testimony of Jesus Christ (Rev.
1:2). Michael and his angels overcame the dragon by the blood of the
Lamb and by the Word of their testimony (Rev. 12:11). The dragon went to
make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments, of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ (Rev. 12:17). I am thy
fellow-servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus
Christ; for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy (Rev.
19:10). That by these passages is signified the acknowledgment of the
Divine of the Lord in His Human, and a life according to the truths of
His Word, and in particular according to the commandments of the
Decalogue, may be seen in the explanations given above. These souls are
the same as are spoken of above in these words: I saw under the altar
the souls of them that were slain for the Word of God and for the
testimony which they held; and they cried with a great voice, saying,
How long, O Lord, who art holy and true, dost Thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell upon the earth? And white robes were given
unto everyone of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest
yet for a little time, until their fellow-servants and their brethren,
who should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled (Rev. 6:9-11);
which may be seen explained (n. 325-329).

<span class="margnote"><span id="847.">847.</span></span>

In many parts in the Word it is said that some "were slain," "thrust
through," and "dead," and yet it is not meant that they were slain,
thrust through, and dead, but that they were rejected by those who were
in evils and falsities (see n. 59, 325, 589). The like is signified by
"the dead" in the following verse, where it is said, that "the rest of
the dead lived not again, until the thousand years were finished," from
which it is plain, that by those who are said "to have been beheaded,"
are signified that they were rejected by those who were in falsities
from their own intelligence. That by "an axe" is signified falsity from
their own intelligence, appears from the following passages: The
statutes of the nations are vanity, if one cutteth wood out of the
forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe (Jer. 10:3).
The voice of Egypt shall go like a serpent; they shall come with axes
like hewers of wood (Jer. 46:22). He is known as one lifting up axes in
the thicket of trees. And now they break down the carved work thereof
with axe and hammers; they have profaned the habitation of Thy name to
the earth (Ps. 74:5-7). When thou shalt besiege a city, thou shalt not
destroy the tree thereof by forcing an axe against it (Deut. 20:19). By
"an axe" in these passages is signified falsity from their own
intelligence; the reason is because "iron" signifies truth in ultimates,
which is called sensual truth, which when separated from rational and
spiritual truth, is turned into falsity; the reason why it means falsity
from their own intelligence, is because the sensual is in the proprium
(see n. 424). On account of this signification of "iron" and of "an
axe," it was commanded that: If an altar was built of stone, it should
be built of whole stones, and that iron should not be moved upon the
stones, lest it be profaned (Exod. 20:25; Deut. 27:5). Therefore of the
temple of Jerusalem it is said: The house itself was built of whole
stone; neither hammers nor axe, nor any instrument of iron, were heard
in the house while it was building (1 Kings 6:7); and, on the contrary,
when graven images are treated of, by which is signified falsity from
their own intelligence, these things are said: That he maketh it with
iron, with tongs, or with the axe and hammers (Isa. 44:12). That falsity
from their own intelligence is signified by "a graven image" and "an
idol," may be seen above (n. 459).

<span class="margnote"><span id="848.">848.</span></span>

And who had not adored the beast, nor his image, nor had received his
mark upon their forehead, and upon their hand, signifies who did not
acknowledge and receive the doctrine of faith alone, as is evident from
the explanation above (n. 634), where are similar words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="849.">849.</span></span>

And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years, signifies who
have been already for some time in conjunction with the Lord and in His
kingdom. "Who lived with Christ," signifies who were in conjunction with
the Lord, because these live. "Who reigned with Christ," signifies who
were in His kingdom, of which presently; that by "a thousand years" is
signified some time, may be seen above (n. 842). This is said of those
who doing their life in the world worshiped the Lord, and lived
according to His commandments in the Word, and after death were guarded
lest they should be seduced by the dragonists, thus who had been already
for some time conjoined with the Lord and consociated as to their
interiors with the angels of heaven. That "to reign with the Lord" does
not mean to reign with Him, but to be in His kingdom by conjunction with
Him may be seen above (n. 284). For the Lord alone reigns, and everyone
in heaven, who is in any function, performs his office in his society,
as in the world, but under the auspices of the Lord; they act indeed as
of themselves, but because they regard uses in the first place, they act
from the Lord, from whom is all use.

<span class="margnote"><span id="850.">850.</span></span>

Verse 5. And the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand
years were finished, signifies that besides these now spoken of, none
were taken up into heaven, till after the dragon was loosed, when their
quality was proved and explored. By "the rest of the dead" are signified
they who are also rejected by those who are in faith alone, because they
worshiped the Lord, and lived according to His commandments, but whose
quality was not yet proved and explored. That here by "the dead" these
are signified, may be seen above (n. 847). For all after their departure
out of the world, come first into the world of spirits, which is midway
between heaven and hell, and are there proved and explored, and thus
prepared, the evil for hell, and the good for heaven. It is said of
these that they lived not again, that is, they were not yet so conjoined
with the Lord, and consociated with the angels of heaven, as the former.
That afterwards also many were saved, appears from verses 12 and 15 of
this chapter, where it is said that "the book of life also was opened,
and if anyone was not found written in the book of life, he was cast
into the lake of fire."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[840-1](ar17.htm#fr_78) The original Latin omits
"and no place was found for them."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 851-900](ar18)
