[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120362)  [Next](2120364.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.viii-p2"></span>*To Natalis, Bishop of Salona* <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405.md) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.viii-p4"></span>Gregory to Natalis, &c.

<span id="iii.v.ii.viii-p5"></span>I have learnt, dearest brother, from
many who have come from thy city that, neglecting thy pastoral charge,
thou occupiest thyself wholly in feastings:  which report I should not
have believed had not my own experience of thy conduct confirmed it. 
For that thou in no wise art intent on reading, in no wise givest
attention to exhortation, but art even ignorant of the very use and
purpose of ecclesiastical order, there is this in evidence, that thou
knowest not how to observe reverence to those who are put over thee. 
For, when thou hadst been forbidden in writing by our predecessor of
holy memory to retain in thy heart the soreness of thy long displeasure
against Honoratus thy archdeacon, and when this had been positively
interdicted thee by myself also, thou, disregarding the commands of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>God</span>, and
setting at naught our letters, didst attempt by a cunning device to
degrade the aforesaid Honoratus thy archdeacon under colour of promoting
him to a higher dignity.  Thus it was contrived that, he being removed
from the post of archdeacon, thou mightest call in another who would
have fallen in with thy manner of life, the aforesaid man having, as I
think, displeased thee for no other cause but that he prevented thee
from giving sacred vessels and vestments to thy relations.  Which case
both I now, and my predecessor of holy memory formerly, have wished to
subject to an accurate investigation; but thou, being conscious of what
thou hadst done, <span id="page_104b">p. 104b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.viii-Page_104b"></span>hast put off sending hither a
representative instructed for trial of the case.  Wherefore let thy
Fraternity, even after admonition so often repeated, repent of the error
of thy wrongdoing, and restore the aforesaid Honoratus to his post
immediately on the receipt of my letter.  Which if thou shouldest defer
doing, know that the use of the pallium, granted thee by this See, is
taken from thee.  But if, even when thou hast lost the pallium, thou
still persistest in thy contumacy, know that thou art deprived of
participation of the body and blood of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.viii-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>.  And after this it will be
needful for us to enquire more fully into the charges against thee, and
to consider with the utmost care and investigation whether thou
shouldest retain even thy episcopate.  Him also who, against the rule of
justice, has consented to be promoted to the place of another we depose
from the dignity of the said archdeaconry.  And, should he presume any
longer to minister in this same office, let him know that he is deprived
of participation in holy communion.  Do thou, therefore, dearest
brother, in no wise provoke us further, lest, having set us at naught
when in an attitude of charity towards thee, thou shouldest find us very
hard in our severity.  Having, therefore, restored the archdeacon
Honoratus to his place, send to us with speed a person instructed in the
case, who may be able to shew to me by his allegations how the matter
should be equitably proceeded with.  For we have commanded the said
archdeacon to come to us, that, having heard the assertions of the
parties, we may come to whatever decision may be just and well-pleasing
to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.viii-p5.3"></span>God</span>.  For we defend no one on the
ground of personal love, but, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.viii-p5.4"></span>God</span> helping us, keep the rule of
justice, putting aside respect to any man’s person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[103b:1406](2120363.htm#fr_1405.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.viii-p3"></span> Salona was the metropolis of the
province of Dalmatia in the diocese of Illyricum Occidentale, and
Natalis, in virtue of his occupancy of the See, the Ecclesiastical
Metropolitan of the province.  For Gregory’s subsequent dealings with
this bishop see II. 19, 20, 52; III. 8, 32.  For the occasion of this
Epistle, see I. 19, note 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To all the Bishops of Dalmatia.](2120364.md)
