[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120061)  [Next](2120063.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p1.1"></span>Letter LII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p2.1"></span>From Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, to Leo. (See
vol. iii. of this Series, p. 293.)</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p3"></span>To Leo, bishop of Rome.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p4"></span>I.  *If Paul appealed to Peter how much
more must ordinary folk have recourse to his successor.*

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p5"></span>If Paul, the herald of the Truth, the
trumpet of the Holy Ghost, had recourse to the great Peter, in order to
obtain a decision from him for those at Antioch who were disputing about
living by the Law, much more do we small and humble folk run to the
Apostolic See to get healing from you for the sores of the churches. 
For it is fitting that you should in all things have the pre-eminence,
seeing that your See possesses many peculiar privileges.  For other
cities get a name for size or beauty or population, and some that are
devoid of these advantages are compensated by certain spiritual gifts: 
but your city has the fullest <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="ii.iv.lii-Page_56"></span>abundance of good things from the Giver of
all good.  For she is of all cities the greatest and most famous, the
mistress of the world and teeming with population.  And besides this she
has created an empire which is still predominant and has imposed her own
name upon her subjects.  But her chief decoration is her Faith, to which
the Divine Apostle is a sure witness when he exclaims “your faith is
proclaimed in all the world <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374.md) ;”
and if immediately after receiving the seeds of the saving Gospel she
bore such a weight of wondrous fruit, what words are sufficient to
express the piety which is now found in her?  She has, too, the tombs of
our common fathers and teachers of the Truth, Peter and Paul <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375.md) , to illumine the souls of the
faithful.  And this blessed and divine pair arose indeed in the East,
and shed its rays in all directions, but voluntarily underwent the
sunset of life in the West, from whence now it illumines the whole
world.  These have rendered your See so glorious:  this is the chief of
all your goods.  And their See is still blest by the light of their
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lii-p7.1"></span>God’s</span> presence,
seeing that therein He has placed your Holiness to shed abroad the rays
of the one true Faith.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p8"></span>II.  *He commends Leo’s zeal against the
Manichees, and latterly against Eutychianism, as evidenced especially in
the Tome.*

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p9"></span>Of which thing indeed, though there are
many other proofs to be found, your zeal against the ill-famed
Manichæans is proof enough, that zeal which your holiness has of late
years displayed <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376.md) , thereby
revealing the intensity of your devotion to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p10.1"></span>God</span> in things Divine.  Proof enough,
too, of your Apostolic character is what you have now written.  For we
have met with what your holiness has written about the Incarnation of
our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lii-p10.2"></span>God</span> and
Saviour, and have admired the careful diligence of the work <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377.md) .  For it has proved both points
equally well, viz., the Eternal Godhead of the Only-begotten of the
Eternal Father, and at the same time His manhood of the seed of Abraham
and David, and His assumption of a nature in all things like ours,
except in this one thing, that He remained free from all sin:  for sin
is engendered not of nature, but of free will <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378.md) .  This also was contained in your
letter, that the only-begotten Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p12.1"></span>God</span> is One and His Godhead
impassible, irreversible, unchangeable even as the Father who begat Him
and the All-holy Spirit.  And since the Divine nature could not suffer,
He took the nature that could suffer to this end, that by the suffering
of His own Flesh He might give exemption from suffering to those that
believed on Him.  These points, and all that is akin thereto, the letter
contained.  And we, admiring your spiritual wisdom, extolled the grace
of the Holy Ghost which spoke through you, and ask and pray, and beg and
beseech your holiness to come to the rescue of the churches of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lii-p12.2"></span>God</span> that are now
tempest tossed.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p13"></span>III.  *He complains of Dioscorus’
ill-treatment of himself.*

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p14"></span>For when we expected a stilling of the
waves through those who were sent to Ephesus from your holiness, we have
fallen into yet worse storm.  For the most righteous <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379.md) prelate of Alexandria was not
satisfied with the illegal and most unrighteous deposition of the Lord’s
most holy and God-loving bishop of Constantinople, Flavian, nor was his
wrath appeased by the slaughter of the other bishops likewise.  But me,
too, he murdered with his pen in my absence, without calling me to
judgment, without passing judgment on me in person, without questioning
me on what I hold about the Incarnation of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p15.1"></span>God</span> and Saviour.  But even murderers,
tomb-breakers, and ravishers of other men’s beds, those who sit in
judgment do not condemn until they either themselves corroborate the
accusations by their confessions, or are clearly convicted by others. 
But us, when five and thirty days’ journey distant, he, though brought
up on Divine laws, has condemned at his will.  And not now only has he
done this, but also last year, after that two persons infected with the
Apollinarian disorder had come hither and laid false information against
us, he rose up in church and anathematized us, and that when I had
written to him and expressed what I hold in a letter.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p16"></span>IV.  *This ill-treatment has come after
20 years’ good work in his diocese of Cyrus*.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p17"></span>I bemoan the distress of the Church and
yearn after its peace.  For having ruled through your prayers the church
committed to me by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p17.1"></span>God</span> of the universe for 20 years,
neither in the time of the blessed Theodotus, president of the East, nor
in the time of those <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span
id="ii.iv.lii-Page_57"></span>who have succeeded him in the See of
Antioch, have I received the slightest blame, but, the Divine Grace
working with me, have freed more than 1,000 souls from the disease of
Marcion, and have won over many others from the company of Arius and
Eunomius to the Master, Christ.  And 800 churches have I had to
shepherd:  for that is the number of parishes in Cyrus, in which not a
single tare through your prayers has lingered.  But our flock has been
freed from every heretical error.  He that sees all things knows how I
have been stoned by the ill-famed heretics that have been sent against
me, and what struggles I have had in many cities of the East against
Greeks, Jews, and every heretical error.  And after all these toils and
troubles, I have been condemned without a hearing.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p18"></span>V.  *He appeals to the Apostolic See
with confidence.*

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p19"></span>I however await the verdict of your
Apostolic See, and beg and pray your Holiness to succour me when I
appeal to your upright and just tribunal, and bid me come to you and
show that my teaching follows in the track of the Apostles.  For there
are writings of mine some 20 years ago, some 18, some 15, and some 12,
some again against the Arians and Eunomians, some against the Jews and
Greeks some against the Magi in Persia, some also about the universal
Providence, others about the nature of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p19.1"></span>God</span> and about the Divine
Incarnation.  I have interpreted, through the Divine grace, both the
Apostolic writings and the prophetic utterances, and it is easy
therefrom to gather whether I have kept unswervingly the standard of the
Faith, or have turned aside from its straight path.  And I beg you not
to spurn my petition, nor to overlook the insults heaped on my poor
white hairs.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p20"></span>VI.  *Ought he to acquiesce in his
deposition?*

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p21"></span>First of all, I beg you to tell me,
whether I ought to acquiesce in this unrighteous deposition or not.  For
I await your verdict and, if you bid me abide by my condemnation, I will
abide by it, and will trouble no one hereafter, but await the unerring
verdict of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lii-p21.1"></span>God</span> and Saviour.  I indeed, the
Master <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lii-p21.2"></span>God</span> is
my witness, care nought for honour and glory, but only for the
stumbling-block that is put in men’s way:  because many of the simpler
folk, and especially those who have been rescued by us from divers
heresies, will give credence to those who have condemned us, and
perchance reckon us heretics, not being able to discern the exact truth
of the dogma, and because, after my long episcopate, I have acquired
neither house, nor land, nor obol, nor tomb, only a voluntary poverty,
having straightway distributed even what came to me from my fathers
after their death, as all know who live in the East.

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p22"></span>VII.  *Being prevented himself, he has
sent delegates to plead his cause.*

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p23"></span>And before all things I entreat you,
holy and God-loved brother, render assistance to my prayers.  These
things I have brought to your Holiness’ knowledge, by the most religious
and God-beloved presbyters, Hypatius and Abramius the chorepiscopi <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380.md) , and Alypius, superintendent <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381.md) of the monks in our district:  seeing
that I was hindered from coming to you myself by the Emperor’s
restraining letter, and likewise the others.  And I entreat your
holiness both to look on them with fatherly regard, and to lend them
your ears in sincere kindness, and also to deem my slandered and falsely
attacked position worthy of your protection, and above all to defend
with all your might the Faith that is now plotted against, and to keep
the heritage of the fathers intact for the churches, so shall your
holiness receive from the Bountiful Master a full reward.  (Date about
the end of 449.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_374"></span>[56:375](2120062.htm#fr_374.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p6"></span> [Rom. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.iv.lii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[56:376](2120062.htm#fr_375.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p7"></span> It is sufficient here to quote Eusebius
(*Hist. Eccl.* ii. 25) as one of the earliest (before 340) maintainers
of this tradition.  In this passage he again quotes Gaius of Rome (3rd
cent.) and Dionysius of Corinth (2nd cent.) as corroborative
authorities.  Eusebius’s own words are these:  “Paul is recorded to have
been beheaded in Rome itself, and Peter likewise to have been impaled. 
And this statement is supported by their names, which remain to this day
inscribed in the cemeteries there.”

<span id="fn_376"></span>[56:377](2120062.htm#fr_376.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p10"></span> Viz., in 444:  cf. Letter VII. *supra*,
together with the Emperor’s decree (Lett. VIII.).

<span id="fn_377"></span>[56:378](2120062.htm#fr_377.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p11"></span> This is, of course, the Tome (Lett.
XXVIII.).

<span id="fn_378"></span>[56:379](2120062.htm#fr_378.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p12"></span> Here ‘nature’ must mean ‘man’s original
nature before the Fall,’ when it was still in the image of Him who so
created it, to which nature Christ’s manhood was a triumphant return. 
Otherwise it’s hard to see how Theodoret escapes the pitfall of
Pelagianism.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[56:380](2120062.htm#fr_379.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p15"></span> The epithet is shown by the context to
be bitterly sarcastic.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[57:381](2120062.htm#fr_380.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p24"></span> *Chorepiscopi* (country bishops) were a
kind of suffragan bishop to assist the town bishops in the remoter parts
of their diocese.  They continued in use from the end of the 3rd till
the 9th century, when they were abolished.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[57:382](2120062.htm#fr_381.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lii-p25"></span> *Exarchus*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Fragment of a Letter from Anatolius, Bishop of
Constantinople.](2120063.md)
