[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120208)  [Next](2120210.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p2.1"></span>(On the Passion, XI.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p3"></span>I.  *The mystery of the Passion passes
man’s comprehension.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p4"></span>The Feast of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029.md) that we have longed for and that
the whole world may well desire, has come, and suffers us not to keep
silence in the tumult of our spiritual joys:  because though it is
difficult to speak often on the same thing worthily and appropriately,
yet the priest is not free to withhold from the people’s ears
instruction by sermon on this great mystery of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p5.1"></span>God’s</span> mercy, inasmuch as the subject
itself, being unspeakable, gives him ease of utterance, and what is said
cannot altogether fail where what is said can never be enough.  Let
human frailty, then, succumb to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p5.2"></span>God’s</span> glory, and ever acknowledge
itself unequal to the unfolding of His works of mercy.  Let us toil in
thought, fail in insight, falter in utterance:  it is good that even our
right thoughts about the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p5.3"></span>Lord’s</span> Majesty should be
insufficient.  For, remembering what the prophet says, “Seek ye the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p5.4"></span>Lord</span> and be
strengthened:  seek His face always <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030.md) ,” no one must assume that he has
found all he seeks, lest he fail of coming near, <span id="page_174">p.
174</span> <span id="ii.v.xxxi-Page_174"></span>if he cease his
endeavours.  And amidst all the works of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p6.2"></span>God</span> which weary out man’s wondering
contemplation, what so delights and so baffles our mind’s gaze as the
Saviour’s Passion?  Ponder as we may upon His omnipotence, which is of
one and equal substance with the Father, the humility in <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p6.3"></span>God</span> is more
stupendous than the power, and it is harder to grasp the complete
emptying of the Divine Majesty than the infinite uplifting of the
“slave’s form” in Him.  But we are much aided in our understanding of it
by the remembrance that though the Creator and the creature, the
Inviolable <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p6.4"></span>God</span>
and the passible flesh, are absolutely different, yet the properties of
both substances meet together in Christ’s one Person in such a way that
alike in His acts of weakness and of power the degradation belongs to
the same Person as the glory.

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p7"></span>II.  *The Creed takes up S. Peter’s
confession as the fundamental doctrine of the Church.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p8"></span>In that rule of Faith, dearly-beloved,
which we have received in the very beginning of the Creed, on the
authority of apostolic teaching, we acknowledge our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p8.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ,
whom we call the only Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p8.2"></span>God</span> the Father Almighty, to be also
born of the Virgin Mary by the Holy Ghost.  Nor do we reject His Majesty
when we express our belief in His crucifixion, death, and resurrection
on the third day.  For all that is <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p8.3"></span>God’s</span> and all that is Man’s are
simultaneously fulfilled by His Manhood and His Godhead, so that in
virtue of the union of the Passible with the Impassible, His power
cannot be affected by His weakness, nor His weakness overcome by His
power.  And rightly was the blessed Apostle Peter praised for confessing
this union, who when the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p8.4"></span>Lord</span> was inquiring what the disciples
knew of Him, quickly anticipated the rest and said, “Thou art Christ,
the Son of the living <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p8.5"></span>God <span
id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031.md) </span>.”  And this assuredly he
saw, not by the revelation of flesh or blood, which might have hindered
his inner sight, but by the very Spirit of the Father working in his
believing heart, that in preparation for ruling the whole Church he
might first learn what he would have to teach, and for the
solidification of the Faith, which he was destined to preach, might
receive the assurance, “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
My Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032.md) .”  The strength, therefore, of the
Christian Faith, which, built upon an impregnable rock, fears not the
gates of death, acknowledges the one <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ to be both true
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p10.3"></span>God</span> and true
Man, believing Him likewise to be the Virgin’s Son, Who is His Mother’s
Creator:  born also at the end of the ages, though He is the Creator of
time:  <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p10.4"></span>Lord</span> of
all power, and yet one of mortal stock:  ignorant of sin, and yet
sacrificed for sinners after the likeness of sinful flesh.

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p11"></span>III.  *The Devil’s devices were turned
against himself.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p12"></span>And in order that He might set the human
race free from the bonds of deadly transgression, He hid the power of
His majesty from the raging devil, and opposed him with our frail and
humble nature.  For if the cruel and proud foe could have known the
counsel of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p12.1"></span>God’s</span> mercy, he would have aimed at
soothing the Jews’ minds into gentleness rather than at firing them with
unrighteous hatred, lest he should lose the thraldom of all his captives
in assailing the liberty of One Who owed him nought.  Thus he was foiled
by his malice:  he inflicted a punishment on the Son of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p12.2"></span>God</span>, which was
turned to the healing of all the sons of men.  He shed righteous Blood,
which became the ransom and the drink for the world’s atonement.  The
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p12.3"></span>Lord</span> undertook
that which He chose according to the purpose of His own will.  He
permitted madmen to lay their wicked hands upon Him:  hands which, in
ministering to their own doom, were of service to the Redeemer’s work. 
And yet so great was His loving compassion for even His murderers, that
He prayed to the Father on the cross, and begged not for His own
vengeance but for their forgiveness, saying, “Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do <span id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033.md)
.”  And such was the power of that prayer, that the hearts of many of
those who had said, “His blood be on us and on our sons <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034.md) ,” were turned to penitence by the
Apostle Peter’s preaching, and on one day there were baptized about
3,000 Jews:  and they all were “of one heart and of one soul <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035.md) ,” being ready now to die for Him,
Whose crucifixion they had demanded.

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p16"></span>IV.  *Why Judas could not obtain
forgiveness through Christ.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p17"></span>To this forgiveness the traitor Judas
could not attain:  for he, the son of perdition, at whose right the
devil stood <span id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036.md) , gave himself up
to despair before Christ accomplished the mystery of universal
redemption.  For in that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p18.2"></span>Lord</span> died for sinners, perchance even
he might have found salvation if he had not hastened to hang himself. 
But that evil heart, which was now given up to thievish frauds, and now
busied with treacherous designs, had <span id="page_175">p. 175</span>
<span id="ii.v.xxxi-Page_175"></span>never entertained aught of the
proofs of the Saviour’s mercy.  Those wicked ears had heard the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p18.3"></span>Lord’s</span> words, when
He said, “I came not to call the righteous but sinners <span
id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037.md) ,” and “The Son of man came to seek
and to save that which was lost <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038.md) ,” but they conveyed not to his
understanding the clemency of Christ, which not only healed bodily
infirmities, but also cured the wounds of sick souls, saying to the
paralytic man, “Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039.md) ;” saying also to the adulteress
that was brought to Him, “neither will I condemn thee; go and sin no
more <span id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040.md) ,” to show in all His
works that He had come as the Saviour, not the Judge of the world.  But
the wicked traitor refused to understand this, and took measures against
himself, not in the self-condemnation of repentance, but in the madness
of perdition, and thus he who had sold the Author of life to His
murderers, even in dying increased the amount of sin which condemned
him.

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p23"></span>V.  *The cruelty of Christ’s crucifixion
is lost in its wondrous power.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p24"></span>Accordingly that which false witnesses,
cruel leaders of the people, wicked priests did against the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxi-p24.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ,
through the agency of a coward governor and an ignorant band of
soldiers, has been at once the abhorrence and the rejoicing of all
ages.  For though the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p24.2"></span>Lord’s</span> cross was part of the cruel
purpose of the Jews, yet is it of wondrous power through Him they
crucified.  The people’s fury was directed against One, and the mercy of
Christ is for all mankind.  That which their cruelty inflicts He
voluntarily undergoes, in order that the work of His eternal will may be
carried out through their unhindered crime.  And hence the whole order
of events which is most fully narrated in the Gospels must be received
by the faithful in such a way that by implicit belief in the occurrences
which happened at the time of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p24.3"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion, we should understand
that not only was the remission of sins accomplished by Christ, but also
the standard of justice satisfied.  But that this may be more thoroughly
discussed by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p24.4"></span>Lord’s</span> help, let us reserve this
portion of the subject till the fourth day of the week. <span
id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041.md)   <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p25.1"></span>God’s</span> grace, we hope, will be
vouchsafed at your entreaties to help us to fulfil our promise:  through
Jesus Christ our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p25.2"></span>Lord</span>, &c.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[173:1030](2120209.htm#fr_1029.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p5"></span> *Festivitas dominicæ passionis* is at
first sight a strange phrase, but in reality most suggestive.

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[173:1031](2120209.htm#fr_1030.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p5.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p6"></span> [Ps. cv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[174:1032](2120209.htm#fr_1031.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p8.6"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p9"></span> S. [Matt.
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[174:1033](2120209.htm#fr_1032.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p10"></span> S. [Matt.
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[174:1034](2120209.htm#fr_1033.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p13"></span> S. [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[174:1035](2120209.htm#fr_1034.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p14"></span> S. [Matt. xxvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[174:1036](2120209.htm#fr_1035.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p15"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[174:1037](2120209.htm#fr_1036.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p18"></span> Cf. [Ps. cix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[175:1038](2120209.htm#fr_1037.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p19"></span> S. [Matt. ix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[175:1039](2120209.htm#fr_1038.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p20"></span> S. [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[175:1040](2120209.htm#fr_1039.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p21"></span> S. [Matt. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[175:1041](2120209.htm#fr_1040.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p22"></span> S. [John viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#011.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p22.1"></span>;
this famous section therefore is recognized by S. Leo:  see Bright’s
note 69.

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[175:1042](2120209.htm#fr_1041.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxi-p24.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxi-p25"></span> See Serm. LIV. chap. vi. n. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXIII](2120210.md)
