[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120181)  [Next](2120183) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p1.1"></span>Sermon IX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p2.1"></span>Upon the Collections <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) , IV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p4"></span>I.  *The devil’s wickedness in leading men
astray is now counteracted by the work of redemption in restoring them
to the truth.*

<span id="ii.v.iv-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p5.1"></span>God’s</span> mercy and justice, dearly-beloved,
has in loving-kindness disclosed to us through our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p5.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ’s
teaching, the manner of His retributions, as they have been ordained
from the foundation of the world, that accepting the significance of
facts we might take what we believe will happen, to have, as it were,
already come to pass.  For our Redeemer and Saviour knew what great
errors the devil’s deceit had dispersed throughout the world and by how
many superstitions he had subjected the chief part of mankind to
himself.  But that the creature formed in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p5.3"></span>God’s</span> image might not any longer through
ignorance of the Truth be driven on to the precipice of perpetual death,
He inserted in the Gospel-pages the nature of His judgment that it might
recover every man from the snares of the crafty foe; for now all would
know what rewards the good might hope for and what punishments the evil
must fear.  For the instigator and author of sin in order first to fall
through pride and then to injure us through envy, because “he stood not
in the Truth <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) ” put all his
strength in lying and produced every kind of deceit from this poisoned
source of his cunning, that he might cut off man’s devout hopes from
that happiness which he had lost by his own uplifting, and drag them
into partnership with his condemnation, to whose reconciliation he
himself could not attain.  Whoever therefore among men has wronged <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p6.2"></span>God</span> by his
wickednesses, has been led astray by his guile, and depraved by his
villainy.  For he easily drives into all evil doings those whom he has
deceived in the matter of religion.  But knowing that <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p6.3"></span>God</span> is denied not only
by words but also by deeds, many whom he could not rob of their faith,
he has robbed of their love, and by choking the ground of their heart
with the weeds of avarice, has spoiled them of the fruit of good works,
when he could not spoil them of the confession of their lips.

<span id="ii.v.iv-p7"></span>II.  *<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p7.1"></span>God’s</span> just judgment against sin is
denounced that we may avoid it by deeds of mercy and love.*

<span id="ii.v.iv-p8"></span>On account therefore, dearly-beloved, of
these crafty designs of our ancient foe, the unspeakable goodness of
Christ has wished us to know, what was to be decreed about all mankind
in the day of retribution, that, while in this life healing remedies are
legitimately offered, while restoration is not denied to the contrite,
and those who have been long barren can at length be fruitful, the
verdict on which justice has determined may be fore-stalled and the
picture of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p8.1"></span>God’s</span>
coming to judge the world never depart from the mind’s eye.  For the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p8.2"></span>Lord</span> will come in
His glorious Majesty, as He Himself has foretold, and there will be with
Him an innumerable host of angel-legions radiant in their splendour. 
Before the throne of His power will all the nations of the world be
gathered; and all the men that in all ages and on all the face of the
earth have been born, shall stand in the Judge’s sight.  Then shall be
separated the just from the unjust, the guiltless from the <span
id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span id="ii.v.iv-Page_119"></span>guilty;
and when the sons of piety, their works of mercy reviewed, have received
the Kingdom prepared for them, the unjust shall be upbraided for their
utter barrenness, and those on the left having naught in common with
those on the right, shall by the condemnation of the Almighty Judge be
cast into the fire prepared for the torture of the devil and his angels,
with him to share the punishment, whose will they choose to do.  Who
then would not tremble at this doom of eternal torment?  Who would not
dread evils which are never to be ended?  But since this severity is
only denounced in order that we may seek for mercy, we too in this
present life must show such open-handed mercy that after perilous
neglect returning to works of piety it may be possible for us to be set
free from this doom.  For this is the purpose of the Judge’s might and
of the Saviour’s graciousness, that the unrighteous may forsake his ways
and the sinner give up his wicked habits.  Let those who wish Christ to
spare them, have mercy on the poor; let them give freely to feed the
wretched, who desire to attain to the society of the blessed.  Let no
man consider his fellow vile, nor despise in any one that nature which
the Creator of the world made His own.  For who that labours can deny
that Christ claims that labour as done unto Himself?  Your fellow-slave
is helped thereby, but it is the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p8.3"></span>Lord</span> who will repay.  The feeding of the
needy is the purchase money of the heavenly kingdom and the free
dispenser of things temporal is made the heir of things eternal.  But
how has such small expenditure deserved to be valued so highly except
because our works are weighed in the balance of love, and when a man
loves what <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p8.4"></span>God</span>
loves, he is deservedly raised into His kingdom, whose attribute of love
has in part become his?

<span id="ii.v.iv-p9"></span>III.  *We minister to Christ Himself in the
person of his poor.*

<span id="ii.v.iv-p10"></span>To this pious duty of good works,
therefore dearly beloved, the day of Apostolic institution <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670) invites us, on which the first
collection of our holy offerings has been prudently and profitably
ordained by the Fathers; in order that, because at this season formerly
the Gentiles used superstitiously to serve demons, we might celebrate
the most holy offering of our alms in protest against the unholy victims
of the wicked.  And because this has been most profitable to the growth
of the Church, it has been resolved to make it perpetual.  We exhort
you, therefore, holy brethren throughout the churches of your several
regions <span id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671) on Wednesday next <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) to contribute of your goods, according
to your means and willingness, to purposes of charity, that ye may be
able to win that blessedness in which he shall rejoice without end, who
“considereth the needy and poor <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673)
.”  And if we are to “consider” him, dearly beloved, we must use loving
care and watchfulness, in order that we may find him whom modesty
conceals and shamefastness keeps back.  For there are those who blush
openly to ask for what they want and prefer to suffer privation without
speaking rather than to be put to shame by a public appeal.  These are
they whom we ought to “consider” and relieve from their hidden straits
in order that they may the more rejoice from the very fact that their
modesty as well as poverty has been consulted.  And rightly in the needy
and poor do we recognize the person of Jesus Christ our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p14.2"></span>Lord</span> Himself, “Who
though He was rich,” as says the blessed Apostle, “became poor, that He
might enrich us by His poverty <span id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674)
.”  And that His presence might never seem to be wanting to us, He so
effected the mystic union of His humility and His glory that while we
adore Him as King and <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p15.2"></span>Lord</span> in the Majesty of the Father, we
might also feed Him in His poor, for which we shall be set free in an
evil day from perpetual damnation, and for our considerate care of the
poor shall be joined with the whole company of heaven.

<span id="ii.v.iv-p16"></span>IV.  *To complete their acceptance by
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p16.1"></span>God</span>, they must
not neglect to lay all information against the Manichees who are in the
city.*

<span id="ii.v.iv-p17"></span>But in order that your devotion, dearly
beloved, may in all things be pleasing to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p17.1"></span>God</span>, we exhort you also to show due
zeal in informing your presbyters of Manichees where <span
id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span id="ii.v.iv-Page_120"></span>ever they
be hidden <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675) .  For it is naught
but piety to disclose the hiding-places of the wicked, and in them to
overthrow the devil whom they serve.  For against them, dearly beloved,
it becomes indeed the whole world and the whole Church everywhere to put
on the armour of Faith:  but your devotion ought to be foremost in this
work, who in your progenitors learnt the Gospel of the Cross of Christ
from the very mouth of the most blessed Apostles Peter and Paul.  Men
must not be allowed to lie hid who do not believe that the law given
through Moses, in which <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p18.1"></span>God</span> is shown to be the Creator of the
Universe, ought to be received:  who speak against the Prophets and the
Holy Ghost, dare in their damnable profanity to reject the Psalms of
David which are sung through the universal Church with all reverence,
deny the birth of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p18.2"></span>Lord</span> Christ, according to the flesh,
say that His Passion and Resurrection was fictitious, not true, and
deprive the baptism of regeneration of all its power as a means of
grace.  Nothing with them is holy, nothing entire, nothing true.  They
are to be shunned, lest they harm any one:  they are to be given up,
lest they should settle in any part of our city.  Yours, dearly beloved,
will be the gain before the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p18.3"></span>Lord’s</span> judgment-seat of what we bid, of
what we ask.  For it is but right that the triumph of this deed also
should be joined to the oblation of our alms, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.iv-p18.4"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ in all things aiding
us, Who lives and reigns for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_668"></span>[118:669](2120182.htm#fr_668) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p3"></span> The Ballerinii in an excellent note have
shown that the series of six Sermons *de Collectis* were delivered in
connexion with the annual Collections then in vogue at Rome for the sick
and poor of the seven city regions.  These collections seem to have been
continued for several consecutive days (cf. Serm. VI. *primus
collectarum dies*, and Serm. X. chap. 4), and probably began on the 6th
of July (the octave of SS. Peter and Paul), the day on which in pagan
times the *Ludi Apollinares* had also begun:  this date being designedly
chosen, as Leo himself says (Serm. VIII.), *ad destruendas antiqui
hostis insidias in die quo impii sub idolorum suorum nomine diabolo
serviebant*:  cf. what he says also in the first and third chapter of
this Sermon (IX.).

<span id="fn_669"></span>[118:670](2120182.htm#fr_669) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p6"></span> S. [John viii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044)<span id="ii.v.iv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[119:671](2120182.htm#fr_670) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p11"></span> *Dies apostolicæ institutionis*:  this
was, as note 6 explains, the octave of SS. Peter and Paul, but how far
Leo actually attributes its institution to the Apostles themselves, is a
little doubtful.  In the next clause here he speaks of the Collection as
a *patribus ordinata* (so too in Serm. VII. *dies saluberime a sanctis
patribus institutus*, and Serm. XI. chap. 2:  cf. Serm. X. chap. 1,
*auctoritatem patrum*); whereas in Sermon VIII. the day is said to be
*apostolicis traditionibus institutis*, and in Serm. XI. chap. 1,
*apostolicis didicimus institutis*, and strongest of all the opening
words of Serm. X. chap. 1, *apostolicæ traditionis instituta servantes
ut diem quem illi ab impiorum consuetudine purgatum misericordiæ
operibus consecrarunt celebremus*.  *Patres* however often includes
*apostoli*, e.g. Serm. LXXIII. chap. 1, *gratias agamus.…sanctorum
patrum necessariæ tarditati*, where *patrum* = *apostoli aliique
discipuli*.  The fact is, as Bright points out upon a similar matter
(the origin of Lent), Leo “would be prone to make that claim for any
institute of his own church (see Bingham xxi. 1, 8.)” (n. 103.).  On
Serm. LXXIX. 1 the Ball. appropriately quote a dictum of S. Augustine’s
that what the universal Church had always held is correctly credited
with the authority of the Apostles.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[119:672](2120182.htm#fr_671) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p12"></span> *Regionum*, viz. the seven regions into
which Rome was then divided:  see n. 6, above.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[119:673](2120182.htm#fr_672) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p13"></span> The Ball. wish to alter this to Thursday
(against <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.iv-p13.1"></span>mss.</span>)
to suit their calculations, by which as the detection of Manichæism at
Rome, mentioned in chap. iv., occurred after the 6th of July, 443, this
sermon must have been delivered in 444.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[119:674](2120182.htm#fr_673) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p14"></span> [Ps. xli.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.iv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[119:675](2120182.htm#fr_674) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p15"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[120:676](2120182.htm#fr_675) <span
id="ii.v.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iv-p18"></span> Cf. Lett. VII. and VIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon X](2120183)
