[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120242)  [Next](2120244.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.x-p2"></span>That the mind of those who wish for
pre-eminence for the most part flatters itself with a feigned promise of
good works.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.x-p3"></span>But for the most part those who covet
pastoral authority mentally propose to themselves some good works
besides, and, though desiring it with a motive of pride, still muse how
they will effect great things:  and so it comes to pass that the motive
suppressed in the depths of the heart is one thing, another what the
surface of thought presents to the muser’s mind.  For the mind itself
lies to itself about itself, and feigns with respect to good work to
love what it does not love, and with respect to the world’s glory not to
love what it does love.  Eager for domination, it becomes timid with
regard to it while in pursuit, audacious after attainment.  For, while
advancing towards it, it is in trepidation lest it should not attain it;
but all at once, on having attained, thinks what it has attained to be
its just due.  And, when it has once begun to enjoy the office of its
acquired dominion in a worldly way, it willingly forgets what it has
cogitated in a religious way.  Hence it is necessary that, when such
cogitation is extended beyond wont, the mind’s eye should be recalled to
works already accomplished, and that every one should consider what he
has done as a subordinate; and so may he at once discover whether as a
prelate he will be able to do the good things he has proposed to do. 
For one can by no means learn humility in a high place who has not
ceased to be proud while occupying a low one:  one knows not how to fly
from praise when it abounds, who has learnt to pant for it when it was
wanting:  one can by no means overcome avarice, when advanced to the
sustentation of many, whom his own means could not suffice for himself
alone.  Wherefore from his past life let every one discover what he is,
lest in his craving for eminence the phantom of his cogitation illude
him.  Nevertheless it is generally the case that the very practice of
good deeds which was maintained in tranquillity is lost in the
occupation of government; since even an unskilful person guides a ship
along a straight course in a calm sea; but in one disturbed by the waves
of tempest even the skilled sailor is confounded.  For what is eminent
dominion but a tempest of the mind, in which the ship of the heart is
ever shaken by hurricanes of thought, is incessantly driven hither and
thither, so as to be shattered by sudden excesses of word and deed, as
if by opposing rocks?  In the midst of all these dangers, then, what
course is to be followed, what is to be held to, except that one who
abounds in virtues should accede to government under compulsion, and
that one who is void of virtues should not, even under compulsion,
approach it?  As to the former, let him beware lest, if he refuses
altogether, he be as one who binds up in a napkin the money which he has
received, and be judged for hiding it ([Matth. xxv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.x-p3.1"></span>).  For, indeed, to bind up in a napkin is
to hide gifts received under the listlessness of sluggish torpor.  But,
on the other hand, let the latter, when he craves government, take care
lest, by his example of evil deeds, he become an obstacle to such as are
journeying to the entrance of the kingdom, <span id="page_7b">p.
7b</span> <span id="iii.iv.ii.x-Page_7b"></span>after the manner of the
Pharisees, who, according to the Master’s voice ([Matth. xxiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.x-p3.2"></span>), neither go in themselves nor suffer
others to go in.  And he should also consider how, when an elected
prelate undertakes the cause of the people, he goes, as it were, as a
physician to one that is sick.  If, then, ailments still live in his
body, what presumption is his, to make haste to heal the smitten, while
in his own face carrying a sore!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What manner of man ought to come to rule.](2120244.md)
