[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120025)  [Next](2120027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Letter XVI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>To the Bishops of Sicily.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p3"></span>Leo the bishop to all the bishops
throughout Sicily greeting in the Lord.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p4"></span>I.  *Introductory.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p5"></span>By <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>God’s</span> precepts and the Apostle’s
admonitions we are incited to keep a careful watch over the state of all
the churches:  and, if anywhere ought is found that needs rebuke, to
recall men with speedy care either from the stupidity of ignorance or
from forwardness and presumption.  For inasmuch as we are warned by the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p5.2"></span>Lord’s</span> own
command whereby the blessed Apostle Peter had the thrice repeated
mystical injunction pressed upon him, that he who loves Christ should
feed Christ’s sheep, we are compelled by reverence for that see which,
by the abundance of the Divine Grace, we hold, to shun the danger of
sloth as much as possible:  lest the confession of the chief Apostle
whereby he testified that he loved <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p5.3"></span>God</span> be not found in us:  because if he
(through us) carelessly <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-Page_27"></span>feed the flock so often commended to him
he is proved not to love the chief Shepherd.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p6"></span>II.  *Baptism is to be administered at
Easter-tide and not on the Epiphany.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p7"></span>Accordingly when it reached my ears on
reliable testimony (and I already felt a brother’s affectionate anxiety
about your acts, beloved) that in what is one of the chief sacraments of
the Church you depart from the practice of the Apostles’
constitution <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) by administering
the sacrament of baptism to greater numbers on the feast of the Epiphany
than at Easter-tide, I was surprised that you or your predecessors could
have introduced so unreasonable an innovation as to confound the
mysteries of the two festivals and believe there was no difference
between the day on which Christ was worshipped by the wise men and that
on which He rose again from the dead.  You could never have fallen into
this fault, if you had taken the whole of your observances from the
source whence you derive your consecration to the episcopate; and if the
see of the blessed Apostle Peter, which is the mother of your priestly
dignity, were the recognized teacher of church-method.  We could indeed
have endured your departure from its rules with less equanimity, if you
had received any previous rebuke by way of warning from us.  But now as
we do not despair of correcting you, we must show gentleness.  And
although an excuse which affects ignorance is scarce tolerable in
priests, yet we prefer to moderate our needful rebuke and to instruct
you plainly in the true method of the Church.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p9"></span>III.  *One must distinguish one festival
from another in respect of dignity and occasion.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p10"></span>The restoration of mankind has indeed
ever remained immutably fore-ordained in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p10.1"></span>God’s</span> eternal counsel:  but the
series of events which had to be accomplished in time through Jesus
Christ our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> was begun at the Incarnation of
the Word.  Hence there is one time when at the angel’s announcement the
blessed Virgin Mary believed she was to be with child through the Holy
Ghost and conceived:  another, when without loss of her virgin purity
the Boy was born and shown to the shepherds by the exulting joy of the
heavenly attendants:  another, when the Babe was circumcised:  another,
when the victim required by the Law is offered for him:  another, when
the three wise men attracted by the brightness of the new star <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) arrive at Bethlehem from the East and
worship the Infant with the mystic offering of Gifts.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p12"></span>And again the days are not the same on
which by the divinely appointed passage into Egypt He was withdrawn from
wicked Herod, and on which He was recalled from Egypt into Galilee on
His pursuer’s death.  Among these varieties of circumstance must be
included His growth of body:  the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p12.1"></span>Lord</span> increases, as the evangelist
bears witness, with the progress of age and grace:  at the time of the
Passover He comes to the temple at Jerusalem with His parents, and when
He was absent from the returning company, He is found sitting with the
elders and disputing among the wondering masters and rendering an
account of His remaining behind:  “why is it,” He says, “that ye sought
Me? did ye not know that I must be in that which is My Father’s <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) ,” signifying that He was the Son of
Him whose temple He was in.  Once more when in later years He was to be
declared more openly and sought out the baptism of His forerunner John,
was there any doubt of His being <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p13.4"></span>God</span> remaining when after the baptism
of the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p13.5"></span>Lord</span>
Jesus the Holy Spirit in form of a dove descended and rested upon Him,
and the Father’s voice was heard from the skies, “Thou art My beloved
Son:  in Thee I am well pleased <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)
?”  All these things we have alluded to with as much brevity as possible
for this reason, that you may know, beloved, that though all the days of
Christ’s life were hallowed by many mighty works of His <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) , and though in all His actions
mysterious sacraments <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) shone
forth, yet at one time intimations of events were given by signs, and at
one time fulfilment realized:  and that all the Saviour’s works that are
recorded are not suitable to the time of baptism.  For if we were to
commemorate with indiscriminate honour these things also which we know
to have been done by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p16.1"></span>Lord</span> after His baptism by the blessed
John, His whole lifetime <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-Page_28"></span>would have to be observed in a continuous
succession of festivals, because all His acts were full of miracles. 
But because the Spirit of wisdom and knowledge so instructed the
Apostles and teachers of the whole Church as to allow nothing disordered
or confused to exist in our Christian observances, we must discern the
relative importance of the various solemnities and observe a reasonable
distinction in all the institutions of our fathers and rulers:  for we
cannot otherwise “be one flock and one shepherd <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) ,” except as the Apostle teaches us,
“that we all speak the same thing:  and that we be perfected in the same
mind and in the same judgment <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) .”

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p19"></span>IV.  *The reason explained why Easter
and Whitsuntide are the proper seasons for baptism.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p20"></span>Although, therefore, both these things
which are connected with Christ’s humiliation and those which are
connected with His exaltation meet in one and the same Person, and all
that is in Him of Divine power and human weakness conduces to the
accomplishment of our restoration:  yet it is appropriate that the power
of baptism should change the old into the new creature on the death-day
of the Crucified and the Resurrection-day of the Dead:  that Christ’s
death and His resurrection may operate in the re-born <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) , as the blessed Apostle says:  “Are
ye ignorant that all we who were baptized in Christ Jesus, were baptized
in His death?  We were buried with Him through baptism into death; that
as Christ rose from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life.  For if we have become united with the
likeness of His death, we shall be also (with the likeness) of His
resurrection <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) ,” and the rest
which the Teacher of the Gentiles discusses further in recommending the
sacrament of baptism:  that it might be seen from the spirit of this
doctrine that that is the day, and that the time chosen for regenerating
the sons of men and adopting them among the sons of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p22.2"></span>God</span>, on which by a
mystical symbolism and form <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) ,
what is done in the limbs coincides with what was done in the Head
Himself, for in the baptismal office death ensues through the slaying of
sin, and threefold immersion imitates the lying in the tomb three days,
and the raising out of the water is like Him that rose again from the
tomb <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) .  The very nature,
therefore of the act teaches us that that is the recognized day for the
general reception of the grace <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) ,
on which the power of the gift and the character of the action
originated.  And this is strongly corroborated by the consideration that
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p25.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus
Christ Himself, after He rose from the dead, handed on both the form and
power of baptizing to His disciples, in whose person all the chiefs of
the churches received their instructions with these words, “Go ye and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) .”  On
which of course He might have instructed them even before His passion,
had He not especially wished it to be understood that the grace of
regeneration began with His resurrection.  It must be added, indeed,
that the solemn season of Pentecost, hallowed by the coming of the Holy
Ghost is also allowed, being as it were, the sequel and completion of
the Paschal feast.  And while other festivals are held on other days of
the week, this festival (of Pentecost) always occurs on that day, which
is marked by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p26.2"></span>Lord’s</span> resurrection:  holding out, so
to say, the hand of assisting grace and inviting those, who have been
cut off from the Easter feast by disabling sickness or length of journey
or difficulties of sailing, to gain the purpose that they long for
through the gift of the Holy Spirit.  For the Only-begotten of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p26.3"></span>God</span> Himself wished
no difference to be felt between Himself and the Holy Spirit in the
Faith of believers and in the efficacy of His works:  because there is
no diversity in their nature, as He says, “I will ask the Father and He
shall give you another Comforter that He may be with you for ever, even
the Spirit of Truth <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) ;” and
again:  “But the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in My name, He shall teach you all things and bring to your
remembrance all that I said unto you <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) ;” and again:  “When He, the Spirit of
Truth, is come, He shall guide you into all the Truth <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) .”  And thus, since Christ is the
Truth, and the Holy Spirit the Spirit of Truth, and the name of
“Comforter” appropriate to both, the two festivals are not dissimilar,
where the sacrament is the same <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)
.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p31"></span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-Page_29"></span>V.  *S. Peter’s example as an authority
for Whitsuntide baptisms.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p32"></span>And that we do not contend for this on
our own conviction but retain it on Apostolic authority, we prove by a
sufficiently apt example, following the blessed Apostle Peter, who, on
the very day on which the promised coming of the Holy Ghost filled up
the number of those that believed, dedicated to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p32.1"></span>God</span> in the baptismal font three
thousand of the people who had been converted by his preaching.  The
Holy Scripture, which contains the Acts of Apostles <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) , teaches this in its faithful
narrative, saying, “Now when they heard this they were pricked in the
heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, what shall
we do, brethren?  But Peter said unto them, Repent ye and be baptized
every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, unto the remission of your
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.  For to you is
the promise, and to your children and to all that are afar off, even as
many as the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p33.1"></span>Lord</span> our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p33.2"></span>God</span> shall call unto Him.  With many
other words also he testified and exhorted them saying, Save yourselves
from this crooked generation.  They then that received his word were
baptized, and there were added in that day about three thousand <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) .”

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p35"></span>VI.  *In cases of urgency other times
are allowable for baptism.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p36"></span>Wherefore, as it is quite clear that
these two seasons of which we have been speaking are the rightful ones
for baptizing the chosen in Church, we admonish you, beloved, not to add
other days to this observance.  Because, although there are other
festivals also to which much reverence is due in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p36.1"></span>God’s</span> honour, yet we must rationally
guard this principal and greatest sacrament as a deep mystery and not
part of the ordinary routine <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) : 
not, however, prohibiting the licence to succour those who are in danger
by administering baptism to them at any time.  For whilst we put off the
vows of those who are not pressed by ill health and live in peaceful
security to those two closely connected and cognate festivals, we do not
at any time refuse this which is the only safeguard of true salvation to
any one in peril of death, in the crisis of a siege, in the distress of
persecution, in the terror of shipwreck.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p38"></span>VII.  *Our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p38.1"></span>Lord’s</span> baptism by John very different
to the baptism of believers.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p39"></span>But if any one thinks the feast of the
Epiphany, which in proper degree is certainly to be held in due honour,
claims the privilege of baptism because, according to some the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p39.1"></span>Lord</span> came to St.
John’s baptism on the same day, let him know that the grace of that
baptism and the reason of it were quite different, and is not on an
equal footing with the power by which they are re-born of the Holy
Ghost, of whom it is said, “which were born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p39.2"></span>God <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188)
</span>.”  For the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p40.2"></span>Lord</span> who needed no remission of sin
and sought not the remedy of being born again, desired to be baptized
just as He desired to be circumcised, and to have a victim offered for
His purification:  that He, who had been “made of a woman <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) ,” as the Apostle says, might become
also “under the law” which He had come, “not to destroy but to
fulfil <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) ,” and by fulfilling to
end, as the blessed Apostle proclaims, saying:  “but Christ is the end
of the law unto righteousness to every one that believeth <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) .”  But the sacrament of baptism He
founded in His own person <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) ,
because “in all things having the pre-eminence <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) ,” He taught that He Himself was the
Beginning.  And He ratified the power of re-birth on that occasion, when
from His side flowed out the blood of ransom and the water of
baptism <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) .  As, therefore, the
Old Testament was the witness to the new, and “the law was given by
Moses:  but grace and truth came through Jesus Christ <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) ;” as the divers sacrifices prefigured
the one Victim, and the slaughter of many lambs was ended by the
offering up of Him, of whom it is said, “Behold the Lamb of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p47.2"></span>God</span>; behold Him that
taketh away the sin of the world <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196)
;” so too John, not Christ, but Christ’s forerunner, not the bridegroom,
but the friend of the bridegroom, was so faithful in seeking, “not His
own, but the things which are Jesus Christ’s <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) ,” as to profess himself unworthy to
undo the shoes of His feet:  seeing that He Himself indeed baptized “in
water unto repentance,” but He who with twofold power should both
restore life and destroy sins, was about to “baptize in the Holy Ghost
and fire <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) .”  As <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="ii.iv.xvi-Page_30"></span>then,
beloved brethren, all these distinct proofs come before you, whereby to
the removal of all doubt you recognize that in baptizing the elect who,
according to the Apostolic rule have to be purged by exorcisms,
sanctified by fastings and instructed by frequent sermons, two seasons
only are to be observed, viz. Easter and Whitsuntide:  we charge you,
brother, to make no further departure from the Apostolic institutions. 
Because hereafter no one who thinks the Apostolic rules can be set at
defiance will go unpunished.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p51"></span>VIII.  *The Sicilian bishops are to send
three of their number to each of the half-yearly meetings of bishops at
Rome.*

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p52"></span>Wherefore we require this first and
foremost for the keeping of perfect harmony, that, according to the
wholesome rule of the holy Fathers that there should be two meetings of
bishops every year <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) , three of
you should appear without fail each time, on the 29th of September, to
join in the council of the brethren:  for thus, by the aid of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p53.1"></span>God’s</span> grace, we
shall the easier guard against the rise of offences and errors in
Christ’s Church:  and this council must always meet and deliberate in
the presence of the blessed Apostle Peter, that all his constitutions
and canonical decrees may remain inviolate with all the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p53.2"></span>Lord’s</span> priests.

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p54"></span>These matters, upon which we thought it
necessary to instruct you by the inspiration of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p54.1"></span>Lord</span>, we wish
brought to your knowledge by our brothers and fellow-bishops, Bacillus
and Paschasinus.  May we learn by their report that the institutions of
the Apostolic See are reverently observed by you.  Dated 21 Oct., in the
consulship of the illustrious Alipius and Ardaburis (447).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[27:168](2120026.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p8"></span> From this letter it might be gathered
that it was a universal practice of the early Church based on the
precepts of the apostles, to restrict Baptism to the feasts of Easter
and Whitsuntide, and exclude Epiphany.  Whereas as a matter of fact the
restriction was almost exclusively Roman; all the Eastern Churches and a
good many of the Western recognizing the Epiphany as a suitable occasion
for the rite.  Leo is too fond of claiming Apostolic authority for his
dictates, and none such exists here, as far as we know.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[27:169](2120026.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p11"></span> It will be noticed that Leo’s order of
events, though probably correct, is not that of the modern Kalendar,
which places the Epiphany (Jan. 6) soon after the Circumcision (Jan. 1),
and not after the Purification (Feb. 2):  unless it was some little time
after, Herod’s cruelty was unnecessarily great in including children of
*two years* old in his massacre (S. [Matt. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p11.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_169"></span>[27:170](2120026.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p13"></span> S. [Luke ii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p13.1"></span>,
*in his quæ Patris mei sunt* (Vulgate):  this version leaves the
expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p13.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p13.3"></span>ν τοῖς τοῦ Πατρός μου</span> in its original
ambiguity, but Leo’s commentary immediately following gives his decision
in favour of “in My Father’s house.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[27:171](2120026.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p13.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p14"></span> S. [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[27:172](2120026.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p15"></span> *Innumeris consecratos fuisse
virtutibus,* where *virtutes*, as often, corresponds to the Gk. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xvi-p15.1"></span>δυνάμεις</span>.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[27:173](2120026.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p16"></span> *Sacramentorum mysteria coruscasse*: 
it is instructive to find the two words here conjoined, Leo so often
using them apparently as equivalents.  No one, moreover, after reading
this sentence, can doubt what in early times Western Christians meant by
*sacramentum* , see Letter XII. chap. 3, &c.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[28:174](2120026.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p17"></span> S. [John x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[28:175](2120026.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p18"></span> [1 Cor. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[28:176](2120026.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p21"></span> *Renascentibus* (pres. part.) here, not
*renatis* (past).

<span id="fn_176"></span>[28:177](2120026.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p22"></span> [Rom. vi.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)<span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p22.1"></span>.  Notice the support here given to the
marginal alternative of the R.V., “united with,” instead of “united in”
( Lat. *complantati similitudini*, &c.).

<span id="fn_177"></span>[28:178](2120026.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p23"></span> *Per similitudinem et formam mysterii.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[28:179](2120026.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p24"></span> This was a favourite interpretation of
the symbolism with the fathers.  Cf. Serm. LXX., chap. 4, and Bright’s
n. 97 thereon.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[28:180](2120026.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p25"></span> *Celebrandæ generaliter gratiæ*, where
*generaliter*has much the same sense as the Eng. “generally” has in the
definition of a sacrament in the Eng. Ch. Catechism as “*generally*
necessary to salvation.”

<span id="fn_180"></span>[28:181](2120026.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p26"></span> S. [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[28:182](2120026.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p26.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p27"></span> S. [John xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[28:183](2120026.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p28"></span> [John
14.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[28:184](2120026.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p29"></span> [John
16.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[28:185](2120026.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p30"></span> It need hardly be pointed out that
these words, “where the sacrament is the same,” refer to the
*sacramentum* (in its Leonine sense), that has just been explained,
viz,, that *Christus est veritas et spiritus sanctus est spiritus
veritatus.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[29:186](2120026.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p33"></span> Leo does not often quote from the Acts,
and here he expressly includes it in the Canon, and alludes to its
authenticity (*fideli historia docet)*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[29:187](2120026.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p34"></span> [Acts ii.
37-41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[29:188](2120026.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p37"></span> *Principalis et maximi sacramenti
custodienda nobis est mystica et rationalis exceptio* (another reading
being *exemplatio* (symbolism), which Quesnel prefers, thinking that the
words have reference to the appropriateness of this symbolic rite of
Baptism being performed at Easter-tide).

<span id="fn_188"></span>[29:189](2120026.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p39.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p40"></span> S. [John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[29:190](2120026.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p40.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p41"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[29:191](2120026.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p42"></span> S. [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[29:192](2120026.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p43"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[29:193](2120026.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p44"></span> *Baptismi sui in se condidit
sacramentum*:  the baptism of Christ has very generally been associated
with the Epiphany:  the record of it, for instance, in S. [Luke iii.
15-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p44.1"></span>, is the 2nd morning lesson for the Festival
in the English Church.  It is, however, not clear who the “some” were
whom Leo mentions above as putting Christ’s baptism on the same day as
the Epiphany; perhaps he means the Eastern Church.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[29:194](2120026.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p45"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[29:195](2120026.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p46"></span> Cf. Lett. XXVIII. (The Tome), chap.
vi., where the same explanation of the sacred incident in the Lord’s
passion is given.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[29:196](2120026.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p47"></span> [John
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017), [Rev.
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p47.1"></span>, “for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit
of prophesy.”

<span id="fn_196"></span>[29:197](2120026.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p47.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p48"></span> S. [John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[29:198](2120026.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p49"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[29:199](2120026.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p50"></span> [Matt.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011), [Luke
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[30:200](2120026.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ii.iv.xvi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvi-p53"></span> Cf. Lett. XIV., chap. 8, where the same
rule is laid down.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To All the Bishops of Sicily.](2120027)
