[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120529)  [Next](2120531.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p2"></span>To Mauricius, Emperor.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p3"></span>Gregory to Mauricius Augustus.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p4"></span>Amidst the cares of warfare and
innumerable anxieties which you sustain in your unwearied zeal for the
government of the Christian republic, it is a great cause of joy to me
along with the whole world that your Piety ever watches over custody of
the faith whereby the empire of our lords is resplendent.  Whence I
fully trust that, as you guard the causes of God with the love of a
religious mind, so <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p4.1"></span>God</span> guards and aids yours with the
grace of His Majesty.  Now after what manner the serenity of your Piety,
out of regard to righteousness and zeal for the purest religion, has
been moved against the most flagitious pravity of the Donatists, the
tenor of the commands which you have sent most clearly shews.  But the
most reverend bishops who have come from the African province assert
that these have been so disregarded through ill-advised connivance that
neither is the judgment of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p4.2"></span>God</span> held in fear there, nor are
the imperial commands so far carried into effect; adding also this: 
that in the aforesaid province, through the bribes of the Donatists
prevailing, the Catholic faith is publicly let to sale.  But on the
other hand the glorious Gennadius <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680.md) has likewise complained of one of
those who made such complaints:  and two others also have borne like
testimony with him on the subject.  But, inasmuch as in this case a
secular judge was concerned, I have thought it right to send these
bishops to the footsteps of your Piety, that they may represent in
person to your most serene ears what they declare themselves to have
endured for the catholic faith.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p6"></span>For these reasons I beseech the
Christianity of my lords, for the weal of their souls and life of their
most pious offspring, to give orders by a strict mandate for the
punishment of such as you find to be such as have been described, and to
arrest with the hand of rescue the ruin of those who are perishing, and
to apply the medicine of correction to insane minds, and cure them of
the poisonous bite of error; that so, the darkness of pestiferous
pravity having been driven away by the remedy of your provision, and the
true faith having shed abroad in those parts the rays of its serenity,
heavenly triumph may await you before the eyes of our Redeemer, because
whomsoever you defend outwardly from the enemy, them you also set free
inwardly from the poison of diabolical fraud; which is a still more
glorious thing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[208b:1681](2120530.htm#fr_1680.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliv-p5"></span> Gennadius was the Exarch of Africa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Athanasius, Presbyter.](2120531.md)
