[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120533)  [Next](2120535) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Epistle IV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p2"></span>To Cyriacus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p3"></span>Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of
Constantinople.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4"></span>We have received with becoming charity
our common sons, George the presbyter and Theodore your deacon; and we
rejoice that you have passed from the care of ecclesiastical business to
the government of souls, since, according to the voice of the Truth, *He
that is faithful in a little will be faithful also in much* ([Luke xvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#010)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.1"></span>).  And to the servant who administers
well it is said, *Because thou hast been faithful over a few things, I
will make thee ruler over many things* ([Matth. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.2"></span>); to whom also it is presently said
further with respect to eternal retribution, *Enter thou into the joy of
thy <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.3"></span>Lord</span>.* 
Now you say in your letter that you had exceedingly wished for rest. 
But in this you shew that you have fitly assumed pastoral
responsibility, since, as a place of rule should be denied to those who
covet it, so it should be offered to those who fly from it.  *And no man
taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.4"></span>God</span>, as was Aaron*
([Hebr. v. 4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.5"></span>).  And again the same excellent preacher
says, *If one died far all, then all died; and Christ died for all.  It
remaineth that they which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again* ([2 Cor.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.6"></span>).  And to the shepherd of holy Church it
is said, *Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me?  Feed My sheep* ([John
xxi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.7"></span>).  From which words it appears that, if
one who is able refuses to feed the sheep of Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.8"></span>God</span>, he shews that
he does not love the chief Shepherd.  For if the Only-begotten of the
Father, for accomplishing the good of all, came forth from the secrecy
of the Father into the midst of us, what shall we say, if we prefer our
secrecy to the good of our <span id="page_211b">p. 211b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-Page_211b"></span>neighbours?  Thus rest is to be
desired by us with all our heart; and yet for the advantage of many it
should sometimes be laid aside.  For, as we ought with full desire to
fly from occupation, so, if there should be a want of some one to
preach, we must needs put a willing shoulder under the burden of
occupation.  And this we are taught by the conduct of two prophets <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683) , one of whom attempted to shun the
office of preaching, while the other desired it.  For to the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> who sent him
Jeremias replied saying, *Ah, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p5.2"></span>Lord</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p5.3"></span>God</span>, I cannot speak; for I am a
child* ([Jer. i. 6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p5.4"></span>).  And when Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p5.5"></span>God</span> sought for
some one to preach, saying, *Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?*
Isaias offered himself of his own accord, saying, *Here am I, send me*
([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p5.6"></span>).  Lo, different voices proceeded
outwardly from the two, but they flowed from the same fountain of love.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p6"></span>For indeed there are two precepts of
charity; to wit, the love of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p6.1"></span>God</span> and of one’s neighbour. 
Wherefore Isaias, wishing to profit his neighbours by an active life,
desires the office of preaching; but Jeremias, longing to cling
assiduously to the love of his Maker by a contemplative life, protests
against being sent to preach.  What, then, one laudably desired the
other laudably shrunk from:  the latter lest by speaking he should lose
the gains of silent contemplation; the former lest by keeping silence he
should feel the loss of diligent work.  But this is nicely to be
observed in both, that he who refused did not resist finally, and he who
wished to be sent saw himself previously purged by a coal from the
altar; that so no one who has not been purged should dare to approach
sacred ministries, nor any one whom heavenly grace chooses refuse
proudly under a show of humility.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p7"></span>Moreover I find you in your epistles
seeking with great longing after serenity of mind, and panting for
tranquillity of thought apart from perturbation.  But I know not in what
manner your Fraternity can attain to this.  For one who has undertaken
the pilotage of a ship must needs watch all the more as he further
recedes from shore, so as sometimes to foresee from signs the coming
storms; sometimes, when they come, either, if they are small, to ride
over them in a straight course, or, if they swell violently, to avoid
them as they rush on by steering sideways; and often to watch alone when
all who are without charge of the ship are at rest.  How, moreover,
having undertaken the burden of pastoral charge, can you have serenity
of thought, seeing that it is written, *Behold giants groan under the
waters* ([Job xxvi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p7.1"></span>)?  For, according to the words of John,
*The waters are peoples* ([Rev. xvii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p7.2"></span>).  And the groaning of giants under the
waters means that whoso in this world has increased in degree of power,
as though in a sort of massive size of body, feels the load of greater
tribulation by so much the more as he has taken on himself the care of
ruling peoples.  But, if the power of the Holy Spirit breathes upon the
afflicted mind, forthwith what was done bodily for the people of Israel
takes place with us spiritually.  For it is written, *But the children
of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea* ([Exod. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p7.3"></span>).  And through the prophet the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p7.4"></span>Lord</span> promises
saying, *When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
the rivers shall not overflow thee* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p7.5"></span>).  For the rivers overflow those whom the
active business of this world confounds with perturbation of mind.  But
he who is sustained in mind by the grace of the Holy Spirit passes
through the waters, and yet is not overflowed by the rivers, because in
the midst of crowds of peoples he so proceeds along his way as not to
sink the head of his mind beneath the active business of the world.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p8"></span>I also, who, unworthy as I am, have
come to a place of rule, had sometimes determined to seek some place of
retirement:  but, seeing the Divine counsels to be opposed to me, I
submitted the neck of my heart to my Maker’s yoke; especially reflecting
on this, that no hidden places whatever can save the soul without the
grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p8.1"></span>God</span>; and this we observe sometimes,
when even saints go astray.  For Lot was righteous in the depraved city
itself, and sinned on the mountain ([Gen.
xix](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#000)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p8.2"></span>.).  But why speak of these instances,
when we know of greater ones?  For what is pleasanter than Paradise? 
What safer than Heaven?  And yet man out of Paradise, and the angel from
heaven, by sinning fell.  His power, then, should be sought, His grace
implored, without whom we are nowhere without fault, with whom we are
nowhere without righteousness.  We should, then, take care that
perturbation of thought get not the better of our minds; for it can by
no means be entirely got rid of.  For whosoever is in a place of rule
must needs have to think sometimes even of earthly things, and to have a
care also of external things, that the flock committed to him may be
able to subsist for accomplishing what it has to do.  But it should be
most carefully seen to, that this same care pass not due measure, and
that, when lawfully admitted into the heart, it be not allowed to become
excessive.  Whence <span id="page_212b">p. 212b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-Page_212b"></span>it is rightly said through
Ezekiel <span id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684) , *Let not the
priests shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long; but
polling let them poll their heads* ([Ezek. xliv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#020)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>).  For what are hairs in the head by
signification but thoughts in the mind?  For, rising above the brain
insensibly, they denote cares of the present life, which from negligent
perception, since they come on sometimes importunely, advance as it were
without our feeling them.  Since, then, all who are over others ought
indeed to have outward anxieties, and yet not to devote themselves to
them exceedingly, the priests are rightly forbidden either to shave the
head or to let their locks grow long, so that they may neither entirely
cut off from themselves carnal thoughts for the life of their subjects,
nor again allow them to grow too much.  And it is also there well said,
*Polling let them poll their heads;* meaning that the anxieties of a
temporal charge should both proceed as far as is needful, and yet should
be soon cut short, lest they grow to an immoderate length.  While
therefore both, through external provision administered, the life of
bodies is protected, and again intentness of heart is not hindered
through the same being immoderate, the hairs on the head of the priest
are kept to cover the skin, and cut short so as not to veil the eyes.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p10"></span>Furthermore, we have received in full
faith your letters addressed to us, and give thanks to Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>God</span>, who, by the
mutual confession of the faithful, guards the coat that is without seam
woven from the top throughout, that is to say His Church, in the unity
of grace, from all rent of error; and against the deluge (so to speak)
of so many sins of the perishing world constructs an ark of many planks
in which the elect of Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p10.2"></span>God</span> may be preserved unto life. 
For, when we in our turn send the confession of our faith to you, and
you shew your charity towards us, what are we doing in holy Church but
smearing the ark with pitch; lest any wave of error enter, and kill all
the spiritual as being men, and the carnal as being beasts.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11"></span>But, when you have wisely professed a
right faith, it remains doubtless that you should keep the more warily
the peace of hearts, because of what the Truth says, *Have salt in
yourselves, and have peace one with another* ([Mark ix.
50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>).  And Paul the apostle admonishes,
saying, *Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace* ([Ephes. iv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.2"></span>).  And again he says, *Follow peace with
all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.3"></span>God</span>* ([Hebr. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.4"></span>).  Which peace indeed you will then
truly have with us, if you turn away from the pride of a profane name,
according to what the same teacher of the Gentiles says, *O Timothy,
keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane novelties of
words* ([1 Tim. vi. 20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.5"></span>).  For indeed it is too bad, if these
who have been made preachers of humility should glory in the elation of
a vain name, when the true preacher says, *But <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.6"></span>God</span> forbid that I should glory,
save in the cross of our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.7"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ* ([Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.8"></span>.).  He then is truly glorious who
glories not in temporal power, but, for the name of Christ, glories in
His passion.  Herein therefore we embrace you from the bottom of our
heart, herein we recognize you as priests, if, rejecting the vanity of
words, you occupy the place of holiness with holy humility.  For behold,
we have been scandalized by this impious appellation, and retain in our
mind and express in words by no means slight complaints.  But your
Fraternity knows how the Truth says, *If thou offerest thy gift before
the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against
thee, leave there thy gift, and go thy way to be first reconciled to thy
brother, and then thou shalt come and offer thy gift* ([Matt.
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)<span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.9"></span>).  Herein is to be considered, that,
while every fault is done away by the offering of sacrifice, so great is
the evil of offence engendered in another’s heart that from one who has
so sinned the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.10"></span>Lord</span> accepts not the sacrifice
itself which is wont to do away sin.  Take heed then with speed to wipe
off cause of offence from your heart, that Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p11.11"></span>God</span> may be able
to regard as acceptable the sacrifice of your offering.

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p12"></span>Furthermore, while you have truly and
accurately professed the right faith, we find that among those whom you
have held to be condemned by the most holy general synods you have
condemned a certain Eudoxius; whose name we have not found mentioned in
the Latin language either in synods or in the books of the bishops of
blessed memory, Epiphanius, Augustin, or Philaster, whom we know to have
been the chief disputants against heretics <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685) .  Now if any one of the catholic
<span id="page_213b">p. 213b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-Page_213b"></span>Fathers really condemns him, we
undoubtedly follow their opinion.  If, however, in your synodical
epistle you have wished to condemn by name those also who, apart from
the holy synods, are condemned in the writings of the Fathers, your
Fraternity has mentioned too few by many; but if those whom the general
synods reject, then too many by this one.  But in the midst of all these
things it is to be remembered, that in order that we may be free to
profess the true faith and to order whatever has to be done in peace and
concord, we ought to pray incessantly for the life of our most serene
lords and of their offspring, that Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>God</span> would subdue barbarous nations
under their feet, and grant them long and happy lives, to the end that
through a Christian empire the faith which is in Christ may reign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[211b:1684](2120534.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p4.9"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p5"></span> What follows about Isaiah and
Jeremiah occurs also in the *Pastoralis Cura*, I. 7.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[212b:1685](2120534.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p9"></span> The following fanciful interpretation
of Ezekiel’s direction to priests is found also, almost word for word,
in the *Pastoralis Cura*, II. 7.  See note there.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[212b:1686](2120534.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="iii.v.vii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.ii-p13"></span> It is a sign of Gregory’s scanty
knowledge of the history of controversies that so far he seems never to
have heard of so noted an Arian leader as Eudoxius, whose followers,
under the name of Eudoxians, had been specifically condemned in the 1st
Canon of the first general Council of Constantinople.  But it appears
from a subsequent letter (VII. 34), that there was no copy at Rome of
the canons of that Council, which had not in fact been accepted there,
probably because of the 3rd Canon, which assigned a primacy of honour
after Rome to the See of Constantinople as being new Rome.  When he
wrote this subsequent letter, he had become aware that the Eudoxians had
been so condemned, but still had no idea who Eudoxius had been.  The
fact was that he was not well versed in past ecclesiastical history and,
being totally ignorant of Greek, could only consult such Latin writings
as were within his reach; and in these he had failed to find Eudoxius
mentioned.  He applied, however, to the patriarchs of Alexandria and
Antioch for further information on the subject (see VII. 34, and VIII.
30), and was at length satisfied that Eudoxius had been a veritable
heretic, having been condemned by many Greek Fathers of repute, and
concluded that he was “manifestly slain, against whom our heroes have
cast so many darts” (VIII. 30).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Cyriacus, Bishop.](2120535)
