[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120351)  [Next](2120353.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.l"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.l-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.l-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.l-p2"></span>To Leo, Bishop in Corsica.

<span id="iii.v.i.l-p3"></span>Gregory to Leo, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.l-p4"></span>Our pastoral charge constrains us to come
with anxious consideration to the succour of a church that is destitute
of the control of a priest <span id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390.md) . 
And, inasmuch as we have learnt <span id="page_100b">p. 100b</span>
<span id="iii.v.i.l-Page_100b"></span>that the church of Saona for many
years, since the death of its pontiff, has been thus entirely destitute,
we have thought it needful to enjoin on thy Fraternity the work of
visiting it, to the end that through thy ordering its welfare may be
promoted.  In this church also and in its parishes we grant thee licence
to ordain deacons and presbyters; concerning whom, however, let it be
thy care to make diligent enquiry, that they be not personally in any
respect such as are rejected by the sacred canons.  But whomsoever thy
Fraternity has perceived to be worthy of so great a ministry, having
ascertained that their manners and actions fit them for ordination,
them, by permission of our authority, thou mayest freely promote to the
aforesaid office.  We desire thee, therefore, to make use of all the
property of the above named church as though thou wert its proper
pontiff, until we write to thee again.  Be, then, so diligent and
careful in all these matters that through thy ordering all things may,
with the help of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.l-p5.1"></span>God</span>, be salubriously arranged to the
Church’s profit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[99b:1391](2120352.htm#fr_1390.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.l-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.l-p5"></span> *Sacerdotis*.  The term includes bishops
as well as presbyters, and is used in this and the two following
Epistles, as usually elsewhere by Gregory, to denote the former in
distinction from the latter.  The occasion of this and the two following
Epistles will be seen to be as follows.  The See of Saona in Corsica had
been for some time vacant.  It rested with the clergy and nobles of the
island (see above, Ep. LXXX.), to elect a new bishop; but they had
failed to do so; and consequently Gregory remedied their neglect by
himself filling up the vacancy.  His right to do so would not be
questioned there, Corsica as well as Sicily being among the
Suburbicarian provinces which were under the acknowledged patriarchal
jurisdiction of the See of Rome.  Meanwhile he also commissioned Leo,
the bishop of a neighbouring See (to whom this letter is addressed), to
make a visitation of the Church of Saona, and exercise episcopal
authority there, till the new bishop should take possession.  There are
several other Epistles, not included in this translation, appointing
visitors of various churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Martinus, Bishop in Corsica.](2120353.md)
