[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120255)  [Next](2120257) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p2"></span>What the ruler’s discrimination should
be between correction and connivance, between fervour and gentleness.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p3"></span>It should be known too that the vices
of subjects ought sometimes to be prudently connived at, but indicated
in that they are connived at; that things, even though openly known,
ought sometimes to be seasonably tolerated, but sometimes, though
hidden, be closely investigated; that they ought sometimes to be gently
reproved, but sometimes vehemently censured.  For, indeed, some things,
as we have said, ought to be prudently connived at, but indicated in
that they are connived at, so that, when the delinquent is aware that he
is discovered and borne with, he may blush to augment those faults which
he considers in himself are tolerated in silence, and may punish himself
in his own judgment as being one whom the patience of his ruler in his
own mind mercifully excuses.  By such connivance the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p3.1"></span>Lord</span> well reproves
Judah, when He says through the prophet, *Thou hast lied, and hast not
remembered Me, nor laid it to thy heart, because I have held My peace
and been as one that saw not* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
57:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p3.2"></span>).  Thus He both connived at faults and
made them known, <span id="page_21b">p. 21b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-Page_21b"></span>since He both held His peace against
the sinner, and nevertheless declared this very thing, that He had held
His peace.  But some things, even though openly known, ought to be
seasonably tolerated; that is, when circumstances afford no suitable
opportunity for openly correcting them.  For sores by being unseasonably
cut are the worse enflamed and, if medicaments suit not the time, it is
undoubtedly evident that they lose their medicinal function.  But, while
a fitting time for the correction of subordinates is being sought, the
patience of the prelate is exercised under the very weight of their
offences.  Whence it is well said by the Psalmist, *Sinners have built
upon my back* ([Ps. cxxviii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p3.3"></span>).  For on the back we support burdens;
and therefore he complains that sinners had built upon his back, as if
to say plainly, Those whom I am unable to correct I carry as a burden
laid upon me.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p4"></span>Some hidden things, however, ought to
be closely investigated, that, by the breaking out of certain symptoms,
the ruler may discover all that lies closely hidden in the minds of his
subordinates, and, by reproof intervening at the nick of time, from very
small things become aware of greater ones.  Whence it is rightly said to
Ezekiel, *Son of man, dig in the wall* ([Ezek. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p4.1"></span>); where the said prophet presently adds,
*And when I had digged in the wall, there appeared one door.  And he
said unto me, Go in, and see the wicked abominations that they do here. 
So I went in and saw; and behold every similitude of creeping things,
and abomination of beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel,
were pourtrayed upon the wall* ([Ezek.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p4.2"></span>).  Now by Ezekiel are personified men in
authority; by the wall is signified the hardness of their subordinates. 
And what is digging in a wall but opening the hardness of the heart by
sharp inquisitions?  Which wall when he had dug into, there appeared a
door, because when hardness of heart is pierced either by careful
questionings or by seasonable reproofs, there is shewn as it were a kind
of door, through which may appear the interior of the thoughts in him
who is reproved.  Whence also it follows well in that place, *Go in and
see the wicked abominations that they do here* ([Ezek.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p4.3"></span>.).  He goes in, as it were, to see the
abominations, who, by examination of certain symptoms outwardly
appearing, so penetrates the hearts of his subordinates as to become
cognizant of all their illicit thoughts.  Whence also he added, *And I
went in and saw; and behold every similitude of creeping things, and
abomination of beasts* ([Ezek. 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p4.4"></span>.).  By creeping things thoughts
altogether earthly are signified; but by beasts such as are indeed a
little lifted above the earth, but still crave the rewards of earthly
recompense.  For creeping things cleave to the earth with the whole
body; but beasts are in a large part of the body lifted above the earth,
yet are ever inclined to the earth by gulosity.  Therefore there are
creeping things within the wall, when thoughts are revolved in the mind
which never rise above earthly cravings.  There are also beasts within
the wall, when, though some just and some honourable thoughts are
entertained, they are still subservient to appetite for temporal gains
and honour, and, though in themselves indeed lifted, as one may say,
above the earth, still through desire to curry favour, as through the
throat’s craving, demean themselves to what is lowest.  Whence also it
is well added, *And all the idols of the house of Israel were pourtrayed
upon the wall* ([Ezek. viii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p4.5"></span>), inasmuch as it is written, *And
covetousness, which is idolatry* ([Colos. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p4.6"></span>).  Rightly therefore after beasts idols
are spoken of, because some, though lifting themselves as it were above
the earth by honourable action, still lower themselves to the earth by
dishonourable ambition.  And it is well said, *Were pourtrayed;* since,
when the shows of external things are drawn into one’s inner self,
whatever is meditated on under imagined images is, as it were,
pourtrayed on the heart.  It is to be observed, therefore, that first a
hole in the wall, and afterwards a door, is perceived, and that then at
length the hidden abomination is made apparent; because, in fact, of
every single sin signs are first seen outwardly, and afterwards a door
is pointed out for opening the iniquity to view; and then at length
every evil that lies hidden within is disclosed.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p5"></span>Some things, however, ought to be
gently reproved:  for, when fault is committed, not of malice, but only
from ignorance or infirmity, it is certainly necessary that the very
censure of it be tempered with great moderation.  For it is true that
all of us, so long as we subsist in this mortal flesh, are subject to
the infirmities of our corruption.  Every one, therefore, ought to
gather from himself how it behoves him to pity another’s weakness, lest,
if he be too fervently hurried to words of reprehension against a
neighbour’s infirmity, he should seem to be forgetful of his own. 
Whence Paul admonishes well, when he says, *If a man be overtaken in any
fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted* ([Galat. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p5.1"></span>); as if to say plainly, When what thou
seest of the infirmity of another displeases thee, consider what thou
art; that so the spirit may moderate itself in the zeal of reprehension,
while for itself also it fears what it reprehends.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p6"></span> <span id="page_22b">p. 22b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-Page_22b"></span>Some things, however, ought to
be vehemently reproved, that, when a fault is not recognized by him who
has committed it, he may be made sensible of its gravity from the mouth
of the reprover; and that, when any one smooths over to himself the evil
that he has perpetrated, he may be led by the asperity of his censurer
to entertain grave fears of its effects against himself.  For indeed it
is the duty of a ruler to shew by the voice of preaching the glory of
the supernal country, to disclose what great temptations of the old
enemy are lurking in this life’s journey, and to correct with great
asperity of zeal such evils among those who are under his sway as ought
not to be gently borne with; lest, in being too little incensed against
faults, of all faults he be himself held guilty.  Whence it is well said
to Ezekiel, *Take unto thee a tile, and thou shalt lay it before thee,
and pourtray upon it the city Jerusalem* ([Ezek. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p6.1"></span>).  And immediately it is subjoined, *And
thou shalt lay siege against it, and build forts, and cast a mount, and
set camps against it, and set battering rams against it round about. 
And to him, for his own defence it is forthwith subjoined, And do thou
take unto thee an iron frying-pan, and thou shalt set it for a wall of
iron between thee and the city.*  For of what does the prophet Ezekiel
bear the semblance but of teachers, in that it is said to him, *Take
unto thee a tile, and thou shalt lay it before thee, and pourtray upon
it the city Jerusalem?*

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p7"></span>For indeed holy teachers take unto
themselves a tile, when they lay hold of the earthly heart of hearers in
order to teach them:  which tile in truth they lay before themselves,
because they keep watch over it with the entire bent of their mind:  on
which tile also they are commanded to pourtray the city Jerusalem,
because they are at the utmost pains to represent to earthy hearts by
preaching a vision of supernal peace.  But, because the glory of the
heavenly country is perceived in vain, unless it be known also what
great temptations of the crafty enemy assail us here, it is fitly
subjoined, *And thou shalt lay siege against it, and build forts.*  For
indeed holy preachers lay siege about the tile on which the city
Jerusalem is delineated, when to a mind that is earthy but already
seeking after the supernal country they shew how great an opposition of
vices in the time of this life is arrayed against it.  For, when it is
shewn how each several sin besets us in our onward course, it is as
though a siege were laid round the city Jerusalem by the voice of the
preacher.  But, because preachers ought not only to make known how vices
assail us, but also how well-guarded virtues strengthen us, it is
rightly subjoined, *And thou shalt build forts.*  For indeed the holy
preacher builds forts, when he shews what virtues resist what vices. 
And because, as virtue increases, the wars of temptation are for the
most part augmented, it is rightly further added, *And thou shalt cast a
mount, and set camps against it, and set battering rams round about.* 
For, when any preacher sets forth the mass of increasing temptation, he
casts a mount.  And he sets camps against Jerusalem when to the right
intention of his hearers he foretells the unsurveyed, and as it were
incomprehensible, ambuscades of the cunning enemy.  And he sets
battering-rams round about, when he makes known the darts of temptation
encompassing us on every side in this life, and piercing through our
wall of virtues.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p8"></span>But although the ruler may nicely
insinuate all these things, he procures not for himself lasting
absolution, unless he glow with a spirit of jealousy against the
delinquencies of all and each.  Whence in that place it is further
rightly subjoined, *And do thou take to thee an iron frying-pan, and
thou shalt set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city.*  For by
the frying-pan is denoted a frying of the mind, and by iron the hardness
of reproof.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p9"></span>But what more fiercely fries and
excruciates the teacher’s mind than zeal for <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p9.1"></span>God</span>?  Hence Paul was being burnt
with the frying of this frying-pan when he said, *Who is made weak, and
I am not made weak?  Who is offended, and I burn not?*  ([2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p9.2"></span>).  And, because whosoever is inflamed
with zeal for <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p9.3"></span>God</span> is protected by a guard
continually, lest he should deserve to be condemned for negligence, it
is rightly said, Thou shalt set it for a wall of iron between thee and
the city.  For an iron frying-pan is set for a wall of iron between the
prophet and the city, because, when rulers already exhibit strong zeal,
they keep the same zeal as a strong defence afterwards between
themselves and their hearers, lest they should be destitute then of the
power to punish from having been previously remiss in reproving.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.x-p10"></span>But meanwhile it is to be borne in
mind that, while the mind of the teacher exasperates itself for rebuke,
it is very difficult for him to avoid breaking out into saying something
that he ought not to say.  And for the most part it happens that, when
the faults of subordinates are reprehended with severe invective, the
tongue of the master is betrayed into excess of language.  And, when
rebuke is immoderately hot, the hearts of the delinquents are depressed
to despair.  Wherefore it is necessary for the exasperated ruler, when
he considers that he has wounded more than he <span id="page_23b">p.
23b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iii.x-Page_23b"></span>should have done the
feelings of his subordinates, to have recourse in his own mind to
penitence, so as by lamentations to obtain pardon in the sight of the
Truth; and even for this cause, that it is through the ardour of his
zeal for it that he sins.  This is what the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> in a figure enjoins through
Moses, saying, *If a man go in simplicity of heart with his friend into
the wood to hew wood, and the wood of the axe fly from his hand, and the
iron slip from the helve and smite his friend and slay him, he shall
flee unto one of the aforesaid cities and live; lest haply the next of
kin to him whose blood has been shed, while his heart is hot, pursue
him, and overtake him, and smite him mortally* ([Deut.
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.x-p10.2"></span>).  For indeed we go with a friend into
the wood as often as we betake ourselves to look into the delinquencies
of subordinates.  And we hew wood in simplicity of heart, when with
pious intention we cut off the vices of delinquents.  But the axe flies
from the hand, when rebuke is drawn on to asperity more than need
requires.  And the iron leaps from the helve, when out of reproof issues
speech too hard.  And he smites and slays his friend, because
overstrained contumely cuts him off from the spirit of love.  For the
mind of one who is reproved suddenly breaks out into hatred, if
immoderate reproof charges it beyond its due.  But he who smites wood
incautiously and destroys his neighbour must needs fly to three cities,
that in one of them he may live protected; since if, betaking himself to
the laments of penitence, he is hidden under hope and charity in
sacramental unity, he is not held guilty of the perpetrated homicide. 
And him the next of kin to the slain man does not kill, even when he
finds him; because, when the strict judge comes, who has joined himself
to us by sharing in our nature, without doubt He requires not the
penalty of his fault from him whom faith, hope and charity hide under
the shelter of his pardon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How intent the ruler ought to be on meditations in the Sacred
Law.](2120257)
