[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120410)  [Next](2120412) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLIX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p2"></span>To Adeodatus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p3"></span>Gregory to Adeodatus, Primate bishop
of the province of Numidia.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p4"></span>After what manner the charity of
affection has bound your Fraternity to usward the tenour of your letters
has evidently shewn; and they have afforded us great matter of
rejoicing, in that we have found them to be composed in a spirit of
loving-kindness, and to glow with affection well-pleasing to <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>God</span>.  As, then,
we have briefly said, the epistle which you have addressed to us has so
laid open your mind that its author might be supposed not to be absent
from us at all.  For, indeed, persons are not to be accounted absent
whose feelings are not at variance with mutual charity.  And though, as
you say in your letter, neither your strength nor your age allow you to
come to us, that we might be gratified by the bodily presence of your
Fraternity, yet, seeing that we are one with you and you with us in
feeling, we are entirely present one to the other, while we see each
other in a mind made one through love.  Furthermore, greeting your
Fraternity with the suitable affection of charity, we exhort you that
you study with all your heart so to acquit yourself wisely in the office
of primacy which under <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p4.2"></span>God</span> you hold, that it may both
profit your soul to have attained to this rank, and that you may stand
out as a good example for imitation to others in the future.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p5"></span>Be, then, especially careful with
regard to ordination; and by no means admit any to aspire to sacred
orders but such as are somewhat advanced in age and pure in deeds, lest
perchance they cease for ever to be what they immaturely haste to be. 
For you must first examine the life and manners of those who are to be
placed in any sacred order; and, that you may be able to admit such as
are worthy to this office, let not the influence or the entreaty of any
persons whatever inveigle <span id="page_135b">p. 135b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxv-Page_135b"></span>you.  But before all things it
behoves you to be cautious that no venality may have place in
ordination, lest (which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>God</span> forbid) the greater danger
hang over both the ordained and the ordainers.  If ever, then, there is
need for such things to be taken in hand, call grave and experienced men
into your counsels, and consider the matter in common deliberation with
them.  And before all others it is fit that you should in all cases call
in Columbus our brother and fellow-bishop.  For we believe that, if you
shall have done what is to be done with his advice, no one will find
anything in any way to find fault with in you; and know ye that it will
be as acceptable to us as if it had been done with our advice; inasmuch
as his life and manners have in all respects so approved themselves to
us that it is clearly apparent to all that what is done with his consent
will be darkened by no blot of faultiness.  But the bearer of these
presents, Victorinus, deacon of our fellow-bishop above-named, has been
such a herald of your merits as exceedingly to refresh our spirits with
regard to your behaviour.  And we pray the Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p5.2"></span>Lord</span> to cause the
good that has been reported of you to shine forth more fully in
operation as well-pleasing to Him.  When, therefore, the council which
you are taking measures to assemble has, with the succor of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxv-p5.3"></span>God</span>, been brought
to a conclusion, rejoice us by telling of its unity and concord, and
give us information on all points.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LI](2120412)
