[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120384)  [Next](2120386.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Epistle LIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p2"></span>*Here follows the Epistle of Saint
Licinianus, bishop, concerning the Book of Rules, addressed to Saint
Gregory, pope of the city of Rome* <span
id="fr_1463"></span>[1464](#fn_1463.md) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p4"></span>To the most blessed <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> pope Gregory,
Licinianus, bishop.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p5"></span>The Book of Rules issued by Thy
Holiness, and by the aid of divine grace conveyed to us, we have read
with all the more pleasure for the spiritual rules which we find
contained in it.  Who can fail to read that with pleasure wherein by
constant meditation he may find medicine for his soul; wherein,
despising the fleeting things of this world which vary in their
mutability, he may open the eyes of his soul to the settled estate of
eternal life?  This <span id="page_120b">p. 120b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxx-Page_120b"></span>book of thine is a palace of all
virtues.  In it prudence fixes the boundary line between good and evil;
justice gives each one his own, while it subjects the soul to <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p5.1"></span>God</span>, and the body
to the soul.  In it fortitude also is found ever the same in adversity
and in prosperity, being neither broken by opposition nor lifted up by
success.  In it temperance subdues the rage of lust, and discriminately
imposes a limit upon pleasures.  In it thou comprehendest all things
that pertain to the partaking of eternal life:  and not only for pastors
layest down a rule of life, but also to those who have no office of
government thou suppliest a rule of life.  For pastors may learn in thy
fourfold division what they should be in coming to this office; what
life they should lead after coming to it; how and what they should
teach, and what they should do to avoid being lifted up in so high a
position as that of priesthood.  This excellent teaching of thine is
attested by the holy ancient fathers, doctors, and defenders of the
Church; Hilary, Ambrose Augustin, Gregory Nazianzen:  these all bear
testimony to thee as did the prophets to the apostles.  Saint Hilary
says, in expounding the words of the Apostle who was the teacher of the
Gentiles, “For so he signifies that the things belonging to discipline
and morals serve to the good desert of the priesthood, if those things
also which are necessary for the science of teaching and guarding the
faith shall not be wanting among the rest; since it does not all at once
constitute a good and useful priest only to act innocently, or only to
preach knowingly, seeing that, though a man be innocent, he profits
himself only unless he be learned, and that he that is learned is
without the authority of a teacher unless he be innocent <span
id="fr_1464"></span>[1465](#fn_1464.md) .”  Saint Ambrose gives attestation
to this book of thine in the books which he wrote about Duties (*de
officiis*).  Saint Augustin gives attestation, saying, “In action
dignity should not be loved in this life, neither power; since all
things under the sun are vain.”  But the work itself which is done by
means of this dignity or power, if it is rightly and profitably done,
this is what avails for that weal of subjects which is according to
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p6.1"></span>God</span>. 
Wherefore the Apostle says, “He that desireth the office of a bishop
desireth a good work.”  He wished to explain what *episcopus* means;
that it is a title denoting work, not dignity.  For it is a Greek word
derived hence;—that he who is put over others overlooks those whom he is
put over, to wit, as taking care of them; for episcopacy is
overlooking.  Therefore, if we choose, we may say in Latin that to
exercise the office of a bishop is to overlook; so that one who delights
to be over others and not to profit them may understand that he is no
bishop.  For so it is that no one is prohibited from longing to become
acquainted with truth, for which purpose leisure is to be commended; but
as to a position of superiority, without which the people cannot be
governed, though it may be held and administered becomingly, it is
unbecoming to covet it.  Wherefore charity seeks holy leisure, so as to
have time for perceiving and defending the truth.  But if \[the burden
of government\] be imposed, it is to be undertaken on account of the
obligation of charity.  But not even so should delight in the truth be
altogether forsaken, lest the former sweetness should be withdrawn, and
the present obligation be oppressive (*Lib.* viii. de *Trinit, num.* 1).

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p7"></span>Saint Gregory attests, whose style
thou followest, and after whose example thou didst desire to hide
thyself in order to avoid the weight of priesthood; which weight, of
what sort it is, is clearly declared in the whole of thy book:  and yet
thou bearest what thou wast afraid of.  For thy burden is borne upwards,
not downwards; not so as to sink thee to the depths, but to lift thee to
the stars; whilst by the grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p7.1"></span>God</span>, and the merit of obedience,
and the efficiency of good work, that is made sweet which seemed to have
heaviness through human weakness.  For thou sayest the things that are
in agreement with the apostles and with apostolic men.  For, being fair,
thou hast said things fair, and in them hast shewn thyself fair.  I
would not have thee liken thyself to an ill-favoured painter painting
fair things, seeing that spiritual teaching issues from a spiritual
soul.  The human painter is by most men esteemed more highly than the
inanimate picture.  But put not this down to flattery or adulation, but
to truth:  for it neither becomes me to lie, nor thee to commend what is
false.  I then, though plainly sincere, have seen thee and all that is
thine to be fair, and have seen myself as ill-favoured enough in
comparison with thee.  Wherefore I thee pray by the grace of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p7.2"></span>God</span> which abounds
in thee that thou reject not my prayer, but willingly teach me what I
confess myself ignorant of.  For we are compelled of necessity to do
what thou teachest.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p8"></span>For, when there is no skilled person
found for the sacerdotal office, what is to be done but that an
unskilled one such as I am, should be ordained?  Thou orderest that no
unskilled one should be ordained.  But let thy prudence <span
id="page_121b">p. 121b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxx-Page_121b"></span>consider whether it may not suffice
him for skill to know Jesus Christ and Him crucified:  for, if this does
not suffice, there will, according to this book, be no one who can be
called skilled:  and so no one will be a priest, if none, unless he be
skilled, should be one.  For with open front we resist bigamists, lest
the sacrament should be thus corrupted.  What if the husband of one wife
should have touched a woman before his wife?  What if he should not have
had a wife, and yet should not have been without touch of a woman? 
Comfort us with thy pen, that we may not be punished either for our own
sin or that of others.  For we are exceedingly afraid lest we should be
forced to do what we ought not to do.  Lo, obedience must be paid to thy
precepts, that such a one may be made a priest as apostolical authority
approves; and such a one as is sought is not found.  Thus faith will
cease which cometh of hearing; baptism will cease, if there should be no
one to baptize; those most holy mysteries will cease which are effected
through priests and ministers.  In either case danger remains:  either
such a one must be ordained as ought not to be, or there must be no one
to celebrate or administer sacred mysteries.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p9"></span>A few years ago Leander, Bishop of
Hispalis, on his return from the royal city, saw us in passing, and told
us that he had some homilies issued by your Blessedness on the Book of
Job.  And, as he passed by in haste, he did not shew them to us as we
requested.  But thou wrotest afterwards to him about trine immersion,
and saidest in thy letter, as I am told, that thou wast dissatisfied
with that work, and hadst determined on maturer consideration to change
those homilies into the form of a treatise <span
id="fr_1465"></span>[1466](#fn_1465.md) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p11"></span>We have indeed six books of Saint
Hilary, Bishop of Pictavia, which he turned into Latin from the Greek of
Origen:  but he has not expounded the whole of the book of holy Job in
order.  And I am not a little surprised that a man so very learned and
so holy should translate the silly tales of Origen about the stars.  I,
most holy father, can in no wise be persuaded to believe that the
heavenly luminaries are rational spirits, Holy Scripture not declaring
them to have been made either along with angels or along with men.  Let
then your Blessedness deign to transmit to my littleness not only this
work, but also the other books on morals which in this Book of Rules
thou speakest of having composed.  For we are thine, and are delighted
to read what is thine.  For to me it is a desirable and glorious thing,
as thy Gregory says, to learn even to extreme old age.  May <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p11.1"></span>God</span> the Holy
Trinity vouchsafe to preserve your crown unharmed for instructing His
Church, as we hope, most blessed father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[119b:1464](2120385.htm#fr_1463.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p3"></span> Licinianus was bishop of Carthagena
in Spain, a Latin ecclesiastical writer.  Isidore (*Lib. de illustribus
Ecclesiæ scriptoribus*, c. 29) says of him, “In scripturis doctus, cujus
quidem nonnullas epistolas legimus.  De sacramento denique baptismatis
unam, et ad Eutropium abbatem postea Valentiæ episcopum plurimas;
reliqua vero industriæ et laboris ejus ad nostram notitiam minime
pervenerunt.  Claruit temporibus Mauricii Augusti; occubuit
Constantinopoli veneno ut ferunt, extinctus ab æmulis Sed, ut scriptum
est, *Justus quacunque morte præoccupatus fuerit, anima ejus in
refrigerio est*.”  The “Book of Rules” which he had received, was
Gregory’s *Regula Pastoralis*.

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[120b:1465](2120385.htm#fr_1464.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p6"></span> This and the succeeding quotations
from the works of the Fathers are inaccurately given, and in places
hardly intelligible.  Where this is so, the original passages have been
followed in the translations.

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[121b:1466](2120385.htm#fr_1465.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxx-p10"></span> See I. 43.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](2120386.md)
