[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120231)  [Next](2120233.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_xxxib">p. xxxib</span>
<span id="iii.iv.i-Page_xxxib"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>The Book of Pastoral Rule.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> title, *Liber Regulæ Pastoralis*,
is the one adopted by the Benedictine Edition from several ancient <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.i-p4.2"></span>mss</span>., being Gregory’s
own designation of his work when he sent it to his friend, Leander of
Seville;—“Ut librum Regulæ Pastoralis, quem in episcopatus mei exordio
scripsi…sanctitati tuæ transmitterem” (*Epp*. *Lib*. v., *Ep*. 49).  The
previously more usual one, *Liber Pastoralis Curæ*, may have been taken
from the opening words of the book itself, “Pastoralis curæ me pondera
fugere, etc.”  The book was issued (as appears from the passage above
quoted in the Epistle to Leander) at the commencement of Gregory’s
episcopacy, and (as appears from its opening words) addressed to John,
bishop of Ravenna, in reply to a letter received from him.  But, though
put into form for a special purpose on this occasion, it must have been
the issue of long previous thought, as is further evident from the fact
that in his *Magna Moralia*, or Commentary on the Book of Job, begun and
in a great measure written during his residence in Constantinople, he
had already sketched the plan of such a treatise, and expressed the hope
of some day putting it into form.  For we there find the prologue to the
third book of the Regula already written, together with most of the
headings contained in the first chapter of that book, followed by the
words, “And indeed we ought to have denoted particularly what should be
the order of admonition with respect to each of these points; but fear
of prolixity deters us.  Yet, with God’s help, we hope to complete this
task in another work, should some little time of this laborious life
still remain to us” (*Moral. Lib*. xxx. c. 12 and 13).

<span id="iii.iv.i-p5"></span>The book appears to have been estimated as
it deserved during the writer’s life.  It was sent by him, as we have
seen, to Leander of Seville, apparently at the request of the latter,
for the benefit of the Church in Spain; and there will be found among
the Epistles one addressed to Gregory from Licinianus, a learned bishop
of Carthagena in that country, in which it is highly praised, though a
fear is expressed lest the standard required in it of fitness for the
episcopal office might prove too high for ordinary attainment (*Epp.
Lib*. II., *Ep*. 54).  The Emperor Maurice, having requested and
obtained a copy of it from Anatolius, Gregory’s deacon at
Constantinople, had it translated into Greek by Anastasius the patriarch
of Antioch, who himself highly approved of it (*Epp. Lib*. XII., *Ep*.
24).  It appears to have been taken to England by the Monk Augustine. 
This is asserted by Alfred the Great, who, nearly three hundred years
afterwards, with the assistance of his divines, made a translation, or
rather paraphrase, of it in the West Saxon tongue, intending, as he
says, to send a copy to every bishop in his Kingdom <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260.md) .

<span id="iii.iv.i-p7"></span>Previously to this, there is evidence of
the high repute in which the book was held in Gaul.  In a series of
councils held by command of Charlemagne, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 813,—viz. at Mayence, <span
id="page_xxxiib">p. xxxiib</span> <span
id="iii.iv.i-Page_xxxiib"></span>Rheims, Tours, and Châlon-sur-Seine—the
study of it was specially enjoined on all bishops, together with the New
Testament Scriptures and the Canons of the Fathers <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261.md) .  Similarly at a Council held at
Aix-la-Chapelle, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 836 <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262.md) .  Further, it appears from a
letter of Hincmar <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263.md) ,
Archbishop of Rheims (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 845–882), that a copy of it
together with the Book of Canons was given into the hands of bishops
before the altar at their consecration, and that they were admonished to
frame their lives accordingly.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p11"></span>The work is well worthy of its old
repute, being the best of its kind, and profitable for all ages.  Two
similar works had preceded it.  First, that of Gregory Nazianzen (c.
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.i-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 362),
known as his second oration, and called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p11.2"></span>τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἀπολογητικός</span> , which was
written, like that of the later Gregory, to excuse the writer’s
reluctance to accept the episcopate, and to set forth the
responsibilities of the office.  It is obvious, from comparing the two
treatises, that the earlier had suggested the later one; and indeed Pope
Gregory acknowledges his indebtedness in his prologue to the second book
of the *Regula*.  The second somewhat similar treatise had been that of
Chrysostom, ‘De Sacerdotio,’ in six books, c. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.i-p11.3"></span>a.d.</span> 382.  It also sets forth the
awful responsibilities of the episcopal office; but there are no signs
of pope Gregory having drawn from it.

<span id="iii.iv.i-p12"></span>It is to be observed that the subject of
all these treatises is the office of episcopacy; not the pastoral or
priestly office in its wider sense, as now commonly understood:  and it
is noteworthy how prominent in Gregory’s view of it are the duties of
preaching and spiritual guidance of souls.  It is regarded, indeed, in
the first place as an office of government—*­locus regiminis, culmen
regiminis*, denote it frequently—and hence the exercise of discipline
comes prominently in; and the chief pastor is viewed also as an
intercessor between his flock and God—See e.g. I. 10;—but it is
especially as a teacher, and a physician of souls, that he is spoken of
throughout the treatise; as one whose peculiar duty it is to be
conversant with all forms of spiritual disease, and so be able to suit
his treatment to all cases, to “preach the word, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine,” and both by precept and
example guide souls in the way of salvation.  Gregory had not studied in
vain the Pastoral Epistles of St. Paul.  Remarkable indeed is his own
discriminating insight, displayed throughout, into human characters and
motives, and his perception of the temptations to which circumstances or
temperament render various people—pastors as well as members of their
flocks—peculiarly liable.  No less striking, in this as in other works
of his, is his intimate acquaintance with the whole of Holy Scripture. 
He knew it indeed through the Latin version only; his critical knowledge
is frequently at fault; and far-fetched mystical interpretations, such
as he delighted in, abound.  But as a true expounder of its general
moral and religious teaching he well deserves his name as one of the
great Doctors of the Church.  And, further, notwithstanding all his
reverence for Councils and Fathers, as paramount authorities in matters
of faith, it is to Scripture that he ever appeals as the final authority
for conduct and belief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[xxxib:1261](2120232.htm#fr_1260.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p6"></span> Edited, with an English version, by Henry
Sweet of Balliol College, and published for the Early English Text
Society, 1871, Part I., p. 7.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[xxxiib:1262](2120232.htm#fr_1261.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p8"></span> *Concil. Mogunt. Præfat*.;—*Concil.
Rhemens. II*., Canon x.;—*Concil. Turon. III*., Canon iii.;—*Concil.
Cabilon. II*., Canon i.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[xxxiib:1263](2120232.htm#fr_1262.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p9"></span> *Concil. Aquisgran*., cap. i., *De Vita
Episcoporum*, can. 7, 9, 10; cap. 2, *De doctrina episcoporum*.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[xxxiib:1264](2120232.htm#fr_1263.md) <span
id="iii.iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.i-p10"></span> *Hincmar. Opp*. tom. ii. p. 389, *Ed.
Paris*, 1645.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](2120233.md)
