[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120398)  [Next](2120400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p2"></span>*To the Presbyters and Clergy of
Mediolanum (Milan)* <span id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p4"></span>Gregory to the presbyters, deacons,
and clergy of the church of Mediolanum.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p5"></span> <span id="page_129b">p. 129b</span>
<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-Page_129b"></span>We have received your Love’s
epistle, which, though it bore no subscription, was accredited by the
persons of the bearers, the presbyter Magnus and the cleric Hippolytus. 
Having read it, we find that you are all agreed in favour of our son
Constantius, deacon of your church, who has been well known to me for
long.  And, when I represented the Apostolical See in the royal city, he
stuck close to me for a long time; but I never found anything in him
that could at all be found fault with.  Nevertheless, since it has been
for long my deliberate determination to interfere in no man’s favour
with a view to his undertaking the burden of pastoral care, I can but
follow up your election with my prayers that Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>God</span>, who is ever
prescient of our future doings, may supply you with a pastor such that
in his tongue and manners you may be able to find pastures of divine
exhortation; one in whose disposition humility may shine forth together
with rectitude, and severity with loving-kindness; one who may be able
to shew you the way of life not in his speaking only but also in his
living; that so from his example your love may learn to sigh with
longing for the eternal country.  Wherefore, most dear sons, we, warned
by our sense of the censorship of our office, urge you in this matter of
getting yourselves a bishop that none of you look to your own gain
without regard to the common advantage, lest, if any one is eager after
his own individual interest, he should be deceived by a frivolous
estimate:  for the mind that is bound by cupidity does not examine with
a free judgment a person’s claims to preference.  Considering,
therefore, what things are profitable for all, pay ye ever in all things
most complete obedience to him whom Divine grace may put over you.  For,
when once put over you, he must not be further judged by you; though now
he ought to be the more thoroughly judged as he may not be judged
hereafter.  But, when with <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p5.2"></span>God’s</span> leave a pastor has been
consecrated for you, commit ye yourselves to him with all your heart,
and in him serve the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p5.3"></span>Lord</span> the Almighty, who has put
him over you.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p6"></span>But, inasmuch as supernal judgment
is wont to provide pastors for peoples according to their deservings, do
you seek spiritual things, love heavenly things, despise things temporal
and fugitive; and hold it for most certain that you will have a pastor
who shall please <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p6.1"></span>God</span>, if you in your own doings
please <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p6.2"></span>God</span>.  Lo, all the things of this
world, which we used to hear from the sacred page were doomed to perish,
we see already ruined.  Cities are overthrown, camps uprooted, churches
destroyed; and no tiller of the ground inhabits our land.  Among
ourselves who are left, very few in number, the sword of man incessantly
rages along with calamities wherewith we are smitten from above.  Thus
we see before our eyes the evils which we long ago heard should come
upon the world, and the very regions of the earth have become as pages
of books to us.  In the passing away, then, of all things, we ought to
take thought how that all that we have loved was nothing.  View,
therefore, with anxious heart the approaching day of the eternal judge,
and by repenting anticipate its terrors.  Wash away with tears the
status of all your transgressions.  Allay by temporal lamentation the
wrath that hangs over you eternally.  For our loving Creator, when He
shall come for judgment, will comfort us with all the greater favour as
He sees now that we are punishing ourselves for our own transgressions.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p7"></span>We are now sending to you, by the
favour of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p7.1"></span>God</span>, John our subdeacon, the
bearer of these presents, to this end;—that, with the help of Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p7.2"></span>God</span>, he
may see to your bishop-elect being consecrated after the manner of his
predecessor.  For, as we demand our rights from others, so we conserve
their several rights to all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[128b:1485](2120399.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xiii-p3"></span> As to the great Metropolitan See of
Milan having been anciently independent of the See of Rome, cf. Bingham.
Bk. IX., Ch. I., Sect. 10, 11.  As to Pope Gregory’s attitude with
regard to it, as shewn in this and the two following Epistles, we may
remark as follows.  (1)  The electors addressed (*Ep*. 29) are the
clergy only, not (as is usual in other cases) including the laity of the
Church.  This may be due to the ancient custom of that Church.  (2)  The
electors, having already made their choice, seem to have sent messengers
to announce it to the pope (*Ep*. 29).  (3)  Gregory disclaims all
desire of interfering either in the election or in the consecration of
the new Metropolitan, according to ancient custom by his own suffragans,
or in any way infringing the prescriptive rights of the Church of
Milan.  But he sends his own subdeacon, both to assure himself of the
unanimity of the election and to see to the consecration being effected
according to precedent.  He also intimates (*Epp*. 30, 31) the necessity
of his own assent to the consecration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Subdeacon.](2120400)
