[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120288)  [Next](2120290) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
abstain not from the sins which they bewail, and those who, abstaining
from them, bewail them not.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 31.)  Differently to
be admonished are those who lament their transgressions, and yet forsake
them not, and those who forsake them, and yet lament them not.  For
those who lament their transgressions and yet forsake them not are to be
admonished to learn to consider anxiously that they cleanse themselves
in vain by their weeping, if they wickedly defile themselves in their
living, <span id="page_62b">p. 62b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-Page_62b"></span>seeing that the end for which they
wash themselves in tears is that, when clean, they may return to filth. 
For hence it is written, *The dog is returned to his own vomit again,
and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire* ([2 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p3.1"></span>).  For the dog, when he vomits,
certainly casts forth the food which weighed upon his stomach; but, when
he returns to his vomit, he is again loaded with what he had been
relieved from.  And they who mourn their transgressions certainly cast
forth by confession the wickedness with which they have been evilly
satiated, and which oppressed the inmost parts of their soul; and yet,
in recurring to it after confession, they take it in again.  But the
sow, by wallowing in the mire when washed, is made more filthy.  And one
who mourns past transgressions, yet forsakes them not, subjects himself
to the penalty of more grievous sin, since he both despises the very
pardon which he might have won by his weeping, and as it were rolls
himself in miry water; because in withholding purity of life from his
weeping he makes even his very tears filthy before the eyes of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p3.2"></span>God</span>.  Hence
again it is written, *Repeat not a word in thy prayer* ([Ecclesiasticus
7.14](../../../bib/apo/sir007.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p3.3"></span>).  For to repeat a word in prayer is,
after bewailing, to commit what again requires bewailing.  Hence it is
said through Isaiah, *Wash you, be ye clean* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p3.4"></span>).  For he neglects being clean after
washing, whosoever after tears keeps not innocency of life.  And they
therefore are washed, but are in no wise clean, who cease not to bewail
the things they have committed, but commit again things to be bewailed. 
Hence through a certain wise man it is said, *He that is baptized from
the touch of a dead body and toucheth it again, what availeth his
washing* ([Ecclesiasticus 34.25](../../../bib/apo/sir034.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p3.5"></span> <span
id="fr_1289"></span>[1290](#fn_1289) )?  For indeed he is baptized from
the touch of a dead body who is cleansed from sin by weeping:  but he
touches a dead body after his baptism, who after tears repeats his sin.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p5"></span>Those who bewail transgressions, yet
forsake them not, are to be admonished to acknowledge themselves to be
before the eyes of the strict judge like those who, when they come
before the face of certain men, fawn upon them with great submission,
but, when they depart, atrociously bring upon them all the enmity and
hurt they can.  For what is weeping for sin but exhibiting the humility
of one’s devotion to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p5.1"></span>God</span>?  And what is doing wickedly
after weeping but putting in practice arrogant enmity against Him to
whom entreaty has been made?  This James attests, who says, *Whosoever
will be a friend of this world becomes the enemy of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p5.2"></span>God</span>* ([James iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p5.3"></span>).  Those who lament their
transgressions, yet forsake them not, are to be admonished to consider
anxiously that, for the most part, bad men are unprofitably drawn by
compunction to righteousness, even as, for the most part, good men are
without harm tempted to sin.  Here indeed is found a wonderful measure
of inward disposition in accordance with the requirements of desert, in
that the bad, while doing something good, but still without perfecting
it, are proudly confident in the midst of the very evil which even to
the full they perpetrate; while the good, when tempted of evil to which
they in no wise consent, plant the steps of their heart towards
righteousness through humility all the more surely from their tottering
through infirmity.  Thus Balaam, looking on the tents of the righteous,
said, *May my soul die the death of the righteous, and may my last end
be like theirs* ([Num. xxiii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p5.4"></span>).  But, when the time of compunction
had passed, he gave counsel against the life of those whom he had
requested for himself to be like even in dying:  and, when he found an
occasion for the gratification of his avarice, he straightway forgot all
that he had wished for himself of innocence.  Hence it is that Paul, the
teacher and preacher of the Gentiles, says, *I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members* ([Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p5.5"></span>).  He is of a truth tempted for this
very purpose, that he may be the more stedfastly confirmed in good from
the knowledge of his own infirmity.  Why is it, then, that the one is
touched with compunction, and yet draws not near unto righteousness,
while the other is tempted, and yet sin defiles him not, but for this
evident reason, that neither do good things not perfected help the bad,
nor bad things not consummated condemn the good?

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p6"></span>But, on the other hand, those who
forsake their transgressions, and yet mourn them not, are to be
admonished not to suppose the sins to be already remitted which, though
they multiply them not by action, they still cleanse away by no
bewailings.  For neither has a writer, when he has ceased from writing,
obliterated what he had written by reason of his having added no more: 
neither has one who offers insults made satisfaction by merely holding
his peace, it being certainly necessary for him to impugn his former
words of pride by words of subsequent humility:  nor is a debtor
absolved by not increasing his debt, unless he also pays what he has
incurred.  Thus also, when we offend against <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p6.1"></span>God</span>, we by no means make
satisfaction by ceasing <span id="page_63b">p. 63b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-Page_63b"></span>from iniquity, unless we also follow
up the pleasures which we have loved by lamentations set against them. 
For, if no sin of deed had polluted us in this life, our very innocence
would by no means suffice for our security as long as we live here,
since many unlawful things would still assail our heart.  With what
conscience, then, can he feel safe, who, having perpetrated iniquities,
is himself witness to himself that he is not innocent?

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p7"></span>For it is not as if <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p7.1"></span>God</span> were fed by
our torments:  but He heals the diseases of our transgressions by
medicines opposed to them that we, who have departed from Him delighted
by pleasures, may return to Him embittered by tears; and that, having
fallen by running loose in unlawful things, we may rise by restraining
ourselves even in lawful ones; and that the heart which mad joy had
flooded may be burnt clean by wholesome sadness:  and that what the
elation of pride had wounded may be cured by the dejection of a humble
life.  *For hence it is written, I said unto the wicked, Deal not
wickedly; and to the transgressors, lift not up the horn* ([Psa.
75.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p7.2"></span> <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290) ).  For transgressors lift up the
horn, if they in no wise humble themselves to penitence after knowledge
of their iniquity.  Hence again it is said, *A bruised and humbled heart
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p8.1"></span>God</span> doth
not despise* ([Psa. 51.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p8.2"></span> <span
id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291) ).  For whosoever mourns his sins
yet forsakes them not bruises indeed his heart, but scorns to humble
it.  But he who forsakes his sins yet mourns them not does indeed
already humble his heart, but refuses to bruise it.  Hence Paul says,
*And such indeed were ye; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified* ([1
Cor. vi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p9.1"></span>); because, in truth, amended life
sanctifies those whom the ablution of the affliction of tears cleanses
through penitence.  Hence Peter, when he saw some affrighted by
consideration of their evil deeds, admonished them, saying, *Repent, and
be baptized every one of you* ([Acts ii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p9.2"></span>).  For, being about to speak of
baptism, he spoke first of the lamentations of penitence; that they
should first bathe themselves in the water of their own affliction, and
afterwards wash themselves in the sacrament of baptism.  With what
conscience, then, can those who neglect to weep for their past misdeeds
live secure of pardon, when the chief pastor of the Church himself
believed that penitence must be added even to this Sacrament which
chiefly extinguishes sins?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[62b:1290](2120289.htm#fr_1289) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p3.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p4"></span> In *Engl. Bib.*, xxxiv. 25.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[63b:1291](2120289.htm#fr_1290) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p8"></span> In *English Bible*, lxxv. 4.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[63b:1292](2120289.htm#fr_1291) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxi-p9"></span> Ibid. li. 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How those are to be admonished who praise the unlawful things of
which they are conscious, and those who while condemning them, in no
wise guard against them.](2120290)
