[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120489)  [Next](2120491.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Epistle V.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p2"></span>To Queen Brunichild.

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p3"></span>Gregory to Brunichild, Queen of the
Franks <span id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630.md) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p6"></span>The laudable and God-pleasing goodness
of your Excellence is manifested both by your government of your kingdom
and by your education of your son <span
id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631.md) .  To him you have not only with
provident solicitude conserved intact the glory of temporal things, but
have also seen to the rewards of eternal life, having planted his mind
in the root of the true faith with maternal, as became you, and laudable
care of his education.  Whence not undeservedly it ensues that he should
surpass all the kingdoms of the nations <span
id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632.md) , in that he both worships purely
and confesses truly the Creator of these nations.  But that faith may
shine forth in him the more laudably in his works, let the words of your
exhortation kindle him, to the end that, as royal power shews him lofty
among men, so goodness of conduct may make him great before <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p8.2"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p9"></span>Now inasmuch as past experience in many
instances gives us confidence in the Christianity of your Excellence, we
beg of you, for the love of Peter, Prince of the apostles, whom we know
that you love with your whole heart, that you would cherish with the aid
of your patronage our most beloved son the presbyter Candidus <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633.md) , who is the bearer of these
presents, together with the little patrimony for the government of which
we have sent him, to the end that, strengthened by the favour of your
support, he may be able both to manage profitably this little patrimony,
which is evidently beneficial towards the expenses of the poor, and also
to recover into the possession of this little patrimony anything that
may have been taken away from it.  For it is not without increase of
your praise that after so long a time a man belonging to Church has been
sent for the management of this patrimony.  Let your Excellency, then,
deign so willingly to give your attention to what we request of you that
the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, to whom the power of binding
and loosing has been given by the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.iv-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, may both grant
to your Excellence to rejoice here in your offspring, and after courses
of many years <span id="page_190b">p. 190b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.iv-Page_190b"></span>cause you to be found, absolved from
all ills before the face of the eternal Judge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[189b:1631](2120490.htm#fr_1630.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p4"></span> This is the first of the ten letters
of Gregory to the notorious Brunechild.  A daughter of Athanagild, king
of the Visigoths in Spain, she had married Sigebert I., one of the
grandsons of Clovis, who reigned over that part of the dominion of the
Franks which was called Austrasia, having on her marriage renounced
Arianism for Catholicity.  Sigebert having been assassinated <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 575, his son
Childebert II., then only five years old, was proclaimed King of
Austrasia; whereupon Brunechild herself became the virtual ruler of the
kingdom.  So she was again after the death of Childebert, <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 596, as
guardian of Theodebert II., his illegitimate son, who succeeded him at
the age of ten years.  See *Pedigree of Kings of Gaul*, p. xxx.

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p5"></span>The praises lavished on her by Gregory
in this and his other epistles to her appear strangely inconsistent with
the character given her by the historians of the time.  It has been
suggested in explanation; 1. That the historians may have maligned her,
attributing to her crimes that were not her own; 2. That, whatever her
misdemeanours, Gregory might not have heard of them, knowing of her only
as a faithful Catholic, and a supporter of the Church; 3. That no such
misdemeanours had become notorious when Gregory wrote to her in such
flattering terms, the worst doings imputed to her having in fact been
after his death.  She survived him some nine years.  Still, when we
consider Gregory’s diplomatic turn, together with his habitual deference
to potentates apparent elsewhere, we cannot think it unlikely that he
might ignore purposely in his addresses to them even their known moral
delinquencies, so long as he could enlist their support of religion and
orthodoxy, or their loyalty to the see of Rome.  And, after all,
Brunechild may not have been much worse than some other Frank royalties,
all of whom he would be naturally and properly desirous of conciliating,
and making the best of them he could.  A less defensible instance of
apparently politic flattery is found in his letters to the Emperor
Phocas and his Empress Leontia after the deposition and murder of
Mauricius.  See XIII. 31, 38, 39, and *Proleg*., p. xxvii.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[189b:1632](2120490.htm#fr_1631.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p7"></span> Childebert II. (see last note), who
had been a minor when he came to the throne.  He would now, if the
epistle was written, as supposed, in the 14th Indiction (595–6), be
about 25 years old.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[189b:1633](2120490.htm#fr_1632.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p8"></span> Since the death of his uncle Guntramn,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 593, he
had become King of Burgundy as well as of Austrasia.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[189b:1634](2120490.htm#fr_1633.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.iv-p10"></span> It was the sending of Candidus, a
presbyter from Rome, to take charge of the patrimony in Gaul in place of
Dynamius, a patrician, who had previously managed it (see *Ep*. 6), that
offered occasion for this and the following letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To King Childebert.](2120491.md)
