[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120294)  [Next](2120296.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvii-p2"></span>Concerning the exhortation to be
addressed many at once, that It may so aid the virtues of each among
them that vices contrary to such virtues may not grow up through it.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxvii-p3"></span>These are the things that a Bishop
of souls should observe in the diversity of his preaching, that he may
solicitously oppose suitable medicines to the diseases of his several
hearers.  But, whereas it is a matter of great anxiety, in exhorting
individuals, to be of service to them according to their individual
needs, since it is a very difficult thing to instruct each person in
what concerns himself, dealing out due consideration to each case, it is
yet far more difficult to admonish innumerable hearers labouring under
various passions at one and the same time with one common exhortation. 
For in this case the speech is to be tempered with such art that, the
vices of the hearers being diverse, it may be found suitable to them
severally, and yet be not diverse from itself; that it pass indeed with
one stroke through the midst of passions, but, after the manner of a
two-edged sword, cut the swellings of carnal thoughts on either side; so
that humility be so preached to the proud that yet fear be not increased
in the timid; that confidence be so infused into the timid that yet the
unbridled licence of the proud grow not; that solicitude in well doing
be so preached to the listless and torpid that yet licence of immoderate
action be not increased in the unquiet; that bounds be so set on the
unquiet that yet careless torpor be not produced in the listless; that
wrath be so extinguished in the impatient that yet negligence grow not
in the easy and soft-hearted; that the soft-hearted be so inflamed to
zeal that yet fire be not added to the wrathful; that liberality in
giving be so infused into the niggardly that yet the reins of profusion
be in no wise loosened to the prodigal; that frugality be so preached to
the prodigal that yet care to keep perishable things be not increased in
the niggardly; that marriage be so praised to the incontinent that yet
those who are already continent be not called back to voluptuousness;
that virginity of body be so praised to the continent that yet fecundity
of the flesh come not to be despised by the married.  Good things are so
to be preached that ill things be not assisted sideways.  The highest
good is so to be praised that the lowest be not despaired of.  The
lowest is so to be cherished that there be no cessation of striving for
the highest from the lowest being thought sufficient.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the exhortation to be applied to one person, who labours under
contrary passions.](2120296.md)
