[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120142)  [Next](2120144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p2.1"></span>To Juvenal, Bishop of Jerusalem.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p3"></span>Leo, bishop of the city of Rome, to
Juvenal, bishop of Jerusalem.

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p4"></span>I.  *He rejoices over Juvenal’s
return to orthodoxy, though chiding him for having gone astray.*

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p5"></span>When I received your letter, beloved,
which our sons Andrew the presbyter and Peter the deacon brought me, I
rejoiced indeed that you had been allowed to return to the seat of your
bishopric; but when all the reasons came to my remembrance, which
brought you into such excessive troubles, I grieved to think you had
been yourself the source of your adversities by failing in persistency
of opposition to the heretics:  for men can but think you were not bold
enough to refute those with whom when in error you professed yourself
satisfied.  For the condemnation of Flavian of blessed memory, and the
acceptance of the most unholy Eutyches, what was it but the denial of
our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p5.1"></span>Lord</span>
Jesus Christ according to the flesh? which He Himself of His great mercy
caused to be overthrown, when by the authority of the holy Council of
Chalcedon He brought to nought that accursed judgment of the Synod of
Ephesus without debarring any of the attainted from being healed by
correction.  And therefore, because in the time of long-suffering, you
have chosen return to wisdom rather than persistency in folly, I rejoice
that you have so sought the heavenly remedies as at last to have become
a defender of the Faith which is assailed by heretics.  For, though no
priest ought to be ignorant of that which he preaches <span
id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) , yet any Christian living at
Jerusalem is more inexcusable than all the <span id="page_98">p.
98</span> <span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-Page_98"></span>ignorant, seeing that
he is taught to understand the power of the Gospel, not only by the
written word but by the witness of the places themselves, and what
elsewhere may not be disbelieved, cannot there remain unseen.  Why is
the understanding in difficulty, where the eyes are its instructors? 
And why are things read or heard doubtful, where all the mysteries of
man’s salvation obtrude themselves upon the sight and touch?  As if to
each individual doubter the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p6.3"></span>Lord</span> still used His human voice
and said, why are “ye disturbed and why do thoughts arise into your
hearts? see My hands and My feet that it is I myself.  Handle Me and see
because (or that) a spirit hath not bones and flesh, as ye see Me
have <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566) .”

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p8"></span>II.  *Let him be strengthened in his
faith by the holy associations of the place where he lives.*

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p9"></span>Make use, therefore, beloved brother,
of these incontrovertible proofs of the catholic Faith and support the
preaching of the Evangelists by the testimony of the holy places in
which you live.  In your country is Bethlehem, in which the Light of
Salvation sprang from the womb of the Virgin of the house of David <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) , whom wrapped in swaddling clothes
the manger of the crowded inn received.  In your country was the
Saviour’s infancy announced by angels, adored by magi, sought by Herod
through the death of many infants.  In your country was it that His
boyhood grew, His youth ripened, and His true man’s nature reached to
perfect manhood by the increase of the body, not without food for
hunger, not without sleep for rest, not without tears of pity, not
without fear and dread:  for He is one and the same Person, who in the
form of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p10.1"></span>God</span> wrought great miracles of
power, and in the form of a slave underwent the cruelty of the passion. 
This the very cross unceasingly says to you:  this the stone of the
sepulchre cries out, under which the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> in human condition lay, and
from which by Divine power He rose.  And when you approach the mount of
Olivet, to venerate the place of the Ascension, does not the angel’s
voice ring in your ears, which says to those who were dumb-founded at
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p10.3"></span>Lord’s</span>
uplifting, “ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing into heaven? this
Jesus, Who was taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as ye saw
Him going into heaven <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) .”

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p12"></span>III.  *The facts of the Gospel
attest the Incarnation.*

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p13"></span>The true birth of Christ, therefore,
is confirmed by the true cross; since He is Himself born in our flesh,
Who is crucified in our flesh, which, as no sin entered into it, could
not have been mortal, unless it had been that of our race.  But in order
that He might restore life to all, He undertook the cause of all and
rendered void the force of the old bond, by paying it for all, because
He alone of us all did not owe it:  that, as by one man’s guilt all had
become sinners, so by one man’s innocence all might become innocent,
righteousness being bestowed upon men by Him Who had undertaken man’s
nature.  For in no way is He outside our true bodily nature, of Whom the
Evangelist in beginning his story says, “the book of the generation of
Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) ,” with which the blessed Apostle
Paul’s teaching agrees, when he says “whose are the fathers and of whom
is Christ according to the flesh, Who is above all <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p14.2"></span>God</span> blessed for
ever <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) ,” and so to Timothy
“remember,” he says, “that Jesus Christ has risen from the dead, of the
seed of David <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) .”

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p17"></span>IV.  *Those who are still in error
must be thoroughly instructed in the historic Faith.*

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p18"></span>But how many are the authorities,
both in the New and Old Testaments, by which this truth is declared, as
befits the antiquity of your See, you clearly understand, seeing that
the belief of the Fathers and my letter written to Flavian, of holy
memory, of which you yourself made mention, confirmed, as they have
been, by the universal synod, are sufficient for you.  And therefore it
behoves you, beloved, to take heed that no one raise a murmur against
the unspeakable mystery of our Redemption and Hope.  But if there are
any who are still in the darkness of ignorance or the discord of
perversity, let them be instructed by the authority of those whose
doctrine in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p18.1"></span>God’s</span> Church was apostolical and
clear, that they may recognize that on the Incarnation of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p18.2"></span>God’s</span> Word we
believe what they did, and may not by their obstinacy place themselves
outside the Body of Christ, in which we died and rose with Him:  because
neither loyalty to the Faith nor the plan of the mystery admits that
either the Godhead should be possible in its own essence, or the reality
be falsified in His taking on Him of our flesh.  Dated 4th September, in
the consulship of the illustrious Aetius and Studius (454).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_565"></span>[97:566](2120143.htm#fr_565) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p6"></span> *Quod prædicat*, some <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> *quid
prædicat* (what to preach):  some also add *quoniam qui ignorat,
ignorabitur* (from [1 Cor. xiv.
38](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#038)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p6.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_566"></span>[98:567](2120143.htm#fr_566) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p7"></span> S. [Luke
24:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[98:568](2120143.htm#fr_567) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p10"></span> *Salutifer Davidicæ Virginis partus
illuxit*.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[98:569](2120143.htm#fr_568) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p11"></span> [Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[98:570](2120143.htm#fr_569) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p14"></span> S. [Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[98:571](2120143.htm#fr_570) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p15"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[98:572](2120143.htm#fr_571) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p16"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxxiii-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Julian, Bishop of Cos.](2120144)
