[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120070)  [Next](2120072.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lxi-p1.1"></span>Letter LXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lxi-p2.1"></span>Leo’s Reply to Letter LXV.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p3"></span>Leo, the pope, to the dearly-beloved
brethren Constantinus, Armentarius, Audientius, Severianus, Valerianus,
Ursus, Stephanus, Nectarius, Constantius, Maximus, Asclepius, Theodorus,
Justus Ingenuus, Augustalis, Superventor, Ynantius, Fonteius, and
Palladius.

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p4"></span>I.  *The Bishop of Vienne has anticipated
their appeal.  He proposes to arbitrate with impartiality.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p5"></span>When we read your letter, beloved, which
was brought to us by our sons Petronius the presbyter and Regulus the
deacon, we recognized how affectionate is the regard in which you hold
our brother and fellow-bishop, Ravennius:  for your request is that what
his predecessor <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399.md) deservedly lost
for his excessive presumption may be restored to him.  But your
petition, brothers, was forestalled by the bishop of Vienne, who sent a
letter and legates with the complaint that the bishop of Arles had
unlawfully claimed the ordination of the bishop of Vasa.  Accordingly,
as we had to show such respect both for the canons of the fathers and
for your good opinion of us, that in the matter of the churches’
privileges we should allow no infringement or deprivation, it were
incumbent on us to preserve the peace within the province of Vienne by
employing such righteous moderation as should disregard neither ancient
usage nor your desires.

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p7"></span>II.  *The bishop of Vienne is to retain
jurisdiction over four neighbouring cities:  the rest to belong to
Arles.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p8"></span>For after considering the arguments
advanced by the clergy present on either side, we find that the cities
of Vienne and Arles within your province have always been so famous,
that in certain matters of ecclesiastical privilege, now one, now the
other, has alternately taken precedence, though the national tradition
is that formerly they had community of rights.  And hence we suffer not
the city of Vienne to be altogether without honour, so far as concerns
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, especially as it already possesses the
authority of our decree for the enjoyment of its privilege:  to wit the
power which, when taken away from Hilary, we thought proper to confer on
the bishop of Vienne.  And that he seem not suddenly and unduly lowered,
he shall hold rule over the four neighbouring towns, that is, Valentia,
Tarantasia, Genava and Gratianopolis, with Vienne herself for the fifth,
to the bishop of which shall belong the care of all the said churches. 
But the other churches of the same province shall be placed under the
authority and management of the bishop of Arles, who from his temperate
moderation we believe will be so anxious for love and peace as by no
means to consider himself deprived of that which he sees conceded to his
brother.  Dated 5th of May, in the consulship of Valentinianus Augustus
(7th time), and the most famous Avienus (450.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_399"></span>[61:400](2120071.htm#fr_399.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxi-p6"></span> This, it will be remembered, was
Hillary:  see Letter X. above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Ravennius, Bishop of Arles.](2120072.md)
