[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120092)  [Next](2120094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p2.1"></span>To Paschasinus, Bishop of
Lilybæum.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Paschasinus,
bishop of Lilybæum.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p4"></span>I.  *He sends a copy of the Tome and
still further explains the heterodoxy of Eutyches.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p5"></span>Although I doubt not all the sources
of scandal are fully known to you, brother, which have arisen in the
churches of the East about the Incarnation of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, yet, lest
anything might have chanced to escape your care, I have despatched for
your attentive perusal and study our letter <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) , which deals with this matter in the
fullest way, which we sent to Flavian of holy memory, and which the
universal Church has accepted; in order that, understanding how
completely this whole blasphemous error has with <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p6.1"></span>God’s</span> aid been destroyed, you
yourself also in your love towards <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p6.2"></span>God</span> may show the same spirit, and
know that they are utterly to be abhorred, who, following the blasphemy
and madness of Eutyches, have dared to say there are not two natures,
i.e. perfect Godhead and perfect manhood, in our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p6.3"></span>Lord</span>, the only-begotten Son of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p6.4"></span>God</span>, who
took upon Himself to restore mankind; and think they can deceive our
wariness by saying they believe the one nature of the Word to be
Incarnate, whereas the Word of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p6.5"></span>God</span> in the Godhead of the Father,
and of Himself, and of the Holy Spirit has indeed one nature; but when
He took on Him the reality of our flesh, our nature also was united to
His unchangeable substance:  for even Incarnation could not be spoken
of, unless the Word took on Him the flesh.  And this taking on of <span
id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-Page_69"></span>flesh
forms so complete a union, that not only in the blessed Virgin’s
child-bearing, but also in her conception, no division must be imagined
between the Godhead and the life-endowed flesh <span
id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) , since in the unity of person the
Godhead and the manhood came together both in the conception and in the
childbearing of the Virgin.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p8"></span>II.  *Eutyches might have been warned
by the fate of former heretics.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p9"></span>A like blasphemy, therefore, is to be
abhorred in Eutyches, as was once condemned and overthrown by the
Fathers in former heretics:  and their example ought to have benefited
this foolish fellow, in putting him on his guard against that which he
could not grasp by his own sense, lest he should render void the
peerless mystery of our salvation by denying the reality of human flesh
in our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span>
Jesus Christ.  For, if there is not in Him true and perfect human
nature, there is no taking of us upon Him, and the whole of our belief
and teaching according to his heresy is emptiness and lying.  But
because the Truth does not lie and the Godhead is not passible, there
abides in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p9.2"></span>God</span> the Word both substances in
one Person, and the Church confesses her Saviour in such a way as to
acknowledge Him both impassible in Godhead and passible in flesh, as
says the Apostle, “although He was crucified through (our) weakness, yet
He lives by the power of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p9.3"></span>God <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) </span>.”

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p11"></span>III.  *He sends quotations from the
Fathers, and announces that the churches of the East have accepted the
Tome.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p12"></span>And in order that you may be the
fuller instructed in all things, beloved, I have sent you certain
quotations from our holy Fathers, that you may clearly gather what they
felt and what they preached to the churches about the mystery of the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p12.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
Incarnation, which quotations our deputies produced at Constantinople
also together with our epistle.  And you must understand that the whole
church of Constantinople, with all the monasteries and many bishops,
have given their assent to it, and by their subscription have
anathematized Nestorius and Eutyches with their dogmas.  You must also
understand that I have recently received the bishop of Constantinople’s
letter, which states that the bishop of Antioch has sent instructions to
all the bishops throughout his provinces, and gained their assent to my
epistle, and their condemnation of Nestorius and Eutyches in like
manner.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p13"></span>IV.  *He asks him to settle the
discrepancy between the Alexandrine and the Roman calculation of Easter
for* 455*, by consulting the proper authority.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p14"></span>This also we think necessary to
enjoin upon your care that you should diligently inquire in those
quarters where you are sure of information concerning that point in the
reckoning of Easter, which we have found in the table <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424) of Theophilus, and which greatly
exercises us, and that you should discuss with those who are learned in
such calculations, as to the date, when the day of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p15.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
resurrection should be held four years hence.  For, whereas the next
Easter is to be held by <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p15.2"></span>God’s</span> goodness on March 23rd, the
year after on April 12th, the year after that on April 4th, Theophilus
of holy memory has fixed April 24th to be observed in 455, which we find
to be quite contrary to the rule of the Church; but in our Easter
cycles <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) as you know very well,
Easter that year is set down to be kept on April 17th.  And therefore,
that all our doubts may be removed, we beg you carefully to discuss this
point with the best authorities, that for the future we may avoid this
kind of mistake.  Dated June 24th in the consulship of the illustrious
Adelfius (451).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_421"></span>[68:422](2120093.htm#fr_421) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p6"></span> Sc. Letter XXVIII. (Tome).

<span id="fn_422"></span>[69:423](2120093.htm#fr_422) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p6.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p7"></span> *Caro animata*.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[69:424](2120093.htm#fr_423) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p10"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[69:425](2120093.htm#fr_424) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p15"></span> His *Laterculum Pashale* is meant,
in which he calculated Easter for 100 years from 375.  A similar dispute
had ocurred in 444, in which we have S. Cyril’s and Paschasinus’ Letters
(II and III. of series) to Leo, but not Leo’s answers.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[69:426](2120093.htm#fr_425) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxiii-p16"></span> The Latin Easter cycles were
calculated for 84 years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Marcian Augustus.](2120094)
