[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120348)  [Next](2120350.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xlvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p2"></span>To Gennadius, Patrician and Exarch of
Africa.

<span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Gennadius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p4"></span>As the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> hath made your Excellency to
shine with the light of victories in the military wars of this life, so
ought you to pose the enemies of the Church with all activity of mind
and body, to the end that from both kinds of triumph your reputation may
shine forth more and more, when in forensic wars, too, you firmly resist
the adversaries of the Catholic Church in behalf of the Christian
people, and bravely fight ecclesiastical battles as warriors of the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p4.2"></span>Lord</span>.  For
it is known that men heretical in religion, if they have liberty allowed
them to do harm (which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p4.3"></span>God</span> forbid), rise strenuously
against the catholic faith, to the end that they may transfuse, if they
can, the poison of their heresy to the corrupting of the members of the
Christian body.  For we have learnt that they are lifting up their necks
against the Catholic Church, the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p4.4"></span>Lord</span> being opposed to them, and
desire to pervert the faith of the Christian profession.  But let your
Eminence suppress their attempts, and subdue their proud necks to the
yoke of rectitude <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385.md) . 
Moreover, order the council of catholic bishops to be admonished not to
appoint their primate on the ground of his standing, without regard to
the merits of his life, since before <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p5.2"></span>God</span> it is not the more
distinguished rank, but the action of a better life, that is
approved <span id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386.md) .  But let the
primate himself live, not, as is customary, here and there in the
country, but in one city according to their selection, to the end that
he may be better able to bring to bear the influence of the dignity that
has fallen to him in resisting the Donatists.  Moreover, if any from the
Council of Numidia should desire to come to the Apostolic See, permit
them to do so; and stop any who may be disposed to bring charges against
their character.  Great increase of glory will accrue to your Excellency
with the Creator, if through you the union of the divided churches could
be restored.  For when He beholds the gifts granted by Him given back to
His glory, He bestows gifts so much the more abundantly as He sees the
dignity of His religion to be thereby enlarged.  Furthermore, bestowing
on you, as is due, the affection of our paternal charity, we beseech the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> to
make your arm strong for subduing your enemies, and to sharpen your soul
with zeal for the faith like the edge of a quivering sword.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[98b:1386](2120349.htm#fr_1385.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p5"></span> The heretics (so called, though they
were really rather schismatics than heretics) were the Donatists, who
still lingered in Africa in spite of imperial edicts for their
suppression.  What Gregory here urges the Exarch to do is to put in
force the existing laws against them.  A series of imperial laws against
the Donatists will be found in *Cod. Theod*. Bk. xvi. *tit*. 5, that of
Honorius, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 414, being especially severe.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[98b:1387](2120349.htm#fr_1386.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xlvii-p6"></span> It was the immemorial custom in the
provinces of Africa generally for the senior bishop of the province
according to the date of his consecration to be appointed primate,
instead of the bishop of the civil metropolis being such in virtue of
his See, as was the rule elsewhere.  (The province of Africa proper, or
Africa Proconsularis, was however an exception; for in it the bishop of
Carthage was always the primate.)  Hence in Africa the designation
Metropolitan was not used, but that of Primate or Senior (*senex*). 
Gregory here, though allowing the old custom of movable primacies,
forbids the necessary election of the senior bishop: and this in order
to guard against the appointment of unfit persons.  His main motive, as
appears from Epistle LXXVI., addressed to the bishops of the province of
Numidia, was to preclude the elevation to the primacy of any bishop who
had once been a Donatist.  For in it he allows the retention of the old
African custom in all respects, save only that no bishop who had been a
Donatist was ever to be appointed primate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Gennadius, Patrician, and Exarch throughout Africa.](2120350.md)
