[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120252)  [Next](2120254.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span id="page_17b">p. 17b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-Page_17b"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p2"></span>That the ruler relax not his care
for the things that are within in his occupation among the things that
are without, nor neglect to provide for the things that are without in
his solicitude for the things that are within.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3"></span>The ruler should not relax his care
for the things that are within in his occupation among the things that
are without, nor neglect to provide for the things that are without in
his solicitude for the things that are within; lest either, given up to
the things that are without, he fall away from his inmost concerns, or,
occupied only with the things that are within bestow not on his
neighbours outside himself what he owes them.  For it is often the case
that some, as if forgetting that they have been put over their brethren
for their souls’ sake, devote themselves with the whole effort of their
heart to secular concerns; these, when they are at hand, they exult in
transacting, and, even when there is a lack of them, pant after them
night and day with seethings of turbid thought; and when, haply for lack
of opportunity, they have quiet from them, by their very quiet they are
wearied all the more.  For they count it pleasure to be tired by
action:  they esteem it labour not to labour in earthly businesses.  And
so it comes to pass that, while they delight in being hustled by worldly
tumults, they are ignorant of the things that are within, which they
ought to have taught to others.  And from this cause undoubtedly, the
life also of their subjects is benumbed; because, while desirous of
advancing spiritually, it meets a stumbling-block on the way in the
example of him who is set over it.  For when the head languishes, the
members fail to thrive; and it is in vain for an army to follow swiftly
in pursuit of enemies if the very leader of the march goes wrong.  No
exhortation sustains the minds of the subjects, and no reproof chastises
their faults, because, while the office of an earthly judge is executed
by the guardian of souls, the attention of the shepherd is diverted from
custody of the flock; and the subjects are unable to apprehend the light
of truth, because, while earthly pursuits occupy the pastor’s mind,
dust, driven by the wind of temptation, blinds the Church’s eyes.  To
guard against this, the Redeemer of the human race, when He would
restrain us from gluttony, saying, *Take heed to yourselves that your
hearts be not overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness* ([Luke xxi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>), forthwith added, *Or with cares of
this life:*  and in the same place also, with design to add fearfulness
to the warning, He straightway said, *Lest perchance that day come upon
you unawares* ([Luke 21.34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.2"></span>.):  and He even declares the manner of
that coming, saying, *For as a snare shall it come on all them that
dwell on the face of the whole earth* ([Luke
21.35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.3"></span>).  Hence He says again, *No man can
serve two masters* ([Luke xvi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.4"></span>).  Hence Paul withdraws the minds of
the religious from consort with the world by summoning, nay rather
enlisting them, when he says, *No man that warreth for <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.5"></span>God</span> entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him to whom he
has approved himself* ([2 Tim. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.6"></span>).  Hence to the rulers of the Church he
both commends the studies of leisure and points out the remedies of
counsel, saying, *If then ye should have secular judgments, set them to
judge who are contemptible in the church* ([1 Cor. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.7"></span>); that is, that those very persons whom
no spiritual gifts adorn should devote themselves to earthly charges. 
It is as if he had said more plainly, Since they are incapable of
penetrating the inmost things, let them at any rate employ themselves
externally in necessary things.  Hence Moses, who speaks with <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.8"></span>God</span> ([Exod.
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p3.9"></span>), is judged by the reproof of Jethro,
who was of alien race, because with ill-advised labour he devotes
himself to the people’s earthly affairs:  and counsel too is presently
given him, that he should appoint others in his stead for settling
earthly strifes, and he himself should be more free to learn spiritual
secrets for the instruction of the people.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p4"></span>By the subjects, then, inferior
matters are to be transacted, by the rulers the highest thought of; so
that no annoyance of dust may darken the eye which is placed aloft for
looking forward to the onward steps.  For all who preside are the head
of their subjects; and, that the feet may be able to take a straight
course, the head ought undoubtedly to look forward to it from above,
lest the feet linger on their onward journey, the body being bent from
its uprightness and the head bowed down to the earth.  But with what
conscience can the overseer of souls avail himself among other men of
his pastoral dignity, while engaged himself in the earthly cares which
it was his duty to reprehend in others?  And this indeed is what the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span>, in
the wrath of just retribution, menaced through the prophet, saying, *And
there shall be like people, like priest* ([Hos. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p4.2"></span>).  For the priest is as the people,
when one who bears a spiritual office acts as do others who are still
under judgment with regard to their carnal pursuits.  And this indeed
the prophet Jeremiah, in the great sorrow of his charity, deplores under
the image of the destruction of the <span id="page_18b">p. 18b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-Page_18b"></span>temple, saying, *How is the
gold become dim!  The most excellent colour is changed; the stones of
the sanctuary are poured out in the top of all the streets* ([Lam. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p4.3"></span>).  For what is expressed by gold, which
surpasses all other metals, but the excellency of holiness?  What by the
most excellent colour but the reverence that is about religion, to all
men lovely?  What are signified by the stones of the sanctuary but
persons in sacred orders?  What is figured under the name of streets but
the latitude of this present life?  For, because in Greek speech the
word for latitude is <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p4.4"></span>πλάτος</span>, streets (*plateæ*) have
been so called from their breadth, or latitude.  But the Truth in person
says, *Broad and spacious is the way that leadeth to destruction*
([Matth. vii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p4.5"></span>).  Gold, therefore, becomes dim when a
life of holiness is polluted by earthly doings; the most excellent
colour is changed, when the previous reputation of persons who were
believed to be living religiously is diminished.  For, when any one
after a habit of holiness mixes himself up with earthly doings, it is as
though his colour were changed, and the reverence that surrounded him
grew pale and disregarded before the eyes of men.  The stones of the
sanctuary also are poured out into the streets, when those who, for the
ornament of the Church, should have been free to penetrate internal
mysteries as it were in the secret places of the tabernacle seek out the
broadways of secular causes outside.  For indeed to this end they were
made stones of the sanctuary, that they might appear in the vestment of
the high-priest within the holy of holies.  But when ministers of
religion exact not the Redeemer’s honour from those that are under them
by the merit of their life, they are not stones of the sanctuary in the
ornament of the pontiff.  And truly these stones of the sanctuary lie
scattered through the streets, when persons in sacred orders, given up
to the latitude of their own pleasures, cleave to earthly businesses. 
And it is to be observed that they are said to be scattered, not in the
streets, but in the top of the streets; because, even when they are
engaged in earthly matters, they desire to appear topmost; so as to
occupy the broad ways in their enjoyment of delight, and yet to be at
the top of the streets in the dignity of holiness.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p5"></span>Further, there is nothing to hinder
us from taking the stones of the sanctuary to be those of which the
sanctuary was itself constructed; which lie scattered in the top of the
streets when men in sacred orders, in whose office the glory of holiness
had previously seemed to stand, devote themselves out of preference to
earthly doings.  Secular employments, therefore, though they may
sometimes be endured out of compassion, should never be sought after out
of affection for the things themselves; lest, while they weigh down the
mind of him who loves them, they sink it, overcome by its own burden,
from heavenly places to the lowest.  But, on the other hand, there are
some who undertake the care of the flock, but desire to be so at leisure
for their own spiritual concerns as to be in no wise occupied with
external things.  Such persons, in neglecting all care for what pertains
to the body, by no means meet the needs of those who are put under
them.  And certainly their preaching is for the most part despised;
because, while they find fault with the deeds of sinners, but
nevertheless afford them not the necessaries of the present life, they
are not at all willingly listened to.  For the word of doctrine
penetrates not the mind of one that is in need, if the hand of
compassion commends it not to his heart.  But the seed of the word
readily germinates, when the loving-kindness of the preacher waters it
in the hearer’s breast.  Whence, for a ruler to be able to infuse what
may profit inwardly, it is necessary for him, with blameless
consideration, to provide also for outward things.  Let pastors, then,
so glow with ardour in regard to the inward affections of those they
have the charge of as not to relinquish provision also for their outward
life.  For, as we have said, the heart of the flock is, even as it were
of right, set against preaching, if the care of external succour be
neglected by the pastor.  Whence also the first pastor anxiously
admonishes, saying, *The elders which are among you I beseech, who am
also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a
partaker of the glory that shall be revealed, feed the flock of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>God</span> which is
among you* ([1 Pet. v. 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p5.2"></span>):  in which place he shewed whether it
was the feeding of the heart or of the body that he was commending, when
he forthwith added, *Providing for it, not by constraint, but willingly,
according to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p5.3"></span>God</span>, not for filthy lucre, but of
a ready mind.*  In these words, indeed, pastors are kindly forewarned,
lest, while they satisfy the want of those who are under them, they slay
themselves with the sword of ambition; lest, while through them their
neighbours are refreshed with succours of the flesh, they themselves
remain fasting from the bread of righteousness.  This solicitude of
pastors Paul stirs up when he says, *If any provide not for his own, and
especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel* ([1 Tim. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p5.4"></span>).  In the midst of all this, then, they
should fear, and watchfully take heed, lest, while occupied with outward
care, they be whelmed away from <span id="page_19b">p. 19b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-Page_19b"></span>inward intentness.  For usually, as
we have already said, the hearts of rulers, while unwarily devoting
themselves to temporal solicitude, cool in inmost love; and, being
carried hither and thither abroad, fear not to forget that they have
undertaken the government of souls.  It is necessary, then, that the
solicitude expended on those who are put under us should be kept within
a certain measure.  Hence it is well said to Ezekiel, *The priests shall
not shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to grow long, but polling
let them poll their heads* ([Ezek. xliv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p5.5"></span>).  For they are rightly called priests
who are set over the faithful for affording them sacred guidance.  But
the hairs outside the head are thoughts in the mind; which, as they
spring up insensibly above the brain, denote the cares of the present
life, which, owing to negligent perception, since they sometimes come
forth unseasonably, advance, as it were, without our feeling them. 
Since, then, all who are over others ought indeed to have external
anxieties, and yet should not be vehemently bent upon them, the priests
are rightly forbidden either to shave their heads or to let their hair
grow long; that so they may neither cut off from themselves entirely
thoughts of the flesh for the life of those who are under them, nor
again allow them to grow too much.  Thus in this passage it is well
said, *Polling let them poll their heads;* to wit, that the cares of
temporal anxiety should both extend themselves as far as need requires,
and yet be cut short soon, lest they grow to an immoderate extent. 
When, therefore, through provident care for bodies applied externally
life is protected \[or, through provident care applied externally the
life of bodies is protected\], and again, through moderate intentness of
heart, is not impeded <span id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270.md) , the
hairs on the priest’s head are both preserved to cover the skin, and cut
short so as not to veil the eyes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[19b:1271](2120253.htm#fr_1270.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p6"></span> The wording of this passage is
obscure and may be corrupt.  In a corresponding one in Gregory’s
Epistles (*Lib*. VII. *Ep*. 4), in other respects the same as this, we
find, instead of “et rursus per moderatam cordis intentionem non
impeditur,” “et rursus per *immoderatam* cordis *intentio* non
impeditur.”  Here, though *non* before *impeditur* is absent from many
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>mss.</span>, and
consequently rejected by the Benedictine editors, it seems necessary for
the sense.  The whole passage is thus capable of being intelligibly
rendered thus:  “When, therefore through provident care (*providentiam*)
externally applied the life of bodies is protected, and again intentness
of heart is not impeded through immoderate (*providentiam*).”  In both
passages the general drift is clear enough, as follows:  When, through
adequate taking thought on the part of the priest for people’s bodily
needs, their life is protected from harm, and yet his attention to such
external matters is not so excessive as to hinder the devotion of his
heart to spiritual things, then the meaning of Ezekiel’s words is
fulfilled.  For the hairs of the head, denoting thoughts of the brain
for temporal concerns, are allowed to advance so far as to afford
needful protection, but not to such an immoderate extent as to obscure
the sight of the eyes, i.e. spiritual vision.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the ruler should not set his heart on pleasing men, and yet
should give heed to what ought to please them.](2120254.md)
