[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120580)  [Next](2120582) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xx-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p2"></span>*To John Bishop of Scyllacium* <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756) .

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p4"></span>Gregory to John, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p5"></span>It is evidently a very serious thing,
and contrary to what a priest should aim at, to <span id="page_242b">p.
242b</span> <span id="iii.v.viii.xx-Page_242b"></span>wish to disturb
privileges formerly granted to any monastery, and to endeavour to bring
to naught what has been arranged for quiet.  Now the monks of the
Castilliensian monastery in your Fraternity’s city have complained to us
that you are taking steps to impose upon the said monastery certain
things contrary to what had been allowed by your predecessors and
sanctioned by long custom, and to disturb ancient arrangements by a
certain injurious novelty.  Wherefore we hereby exhort your Fraternity
that, if this is so, you refrain from troubling this monastery under any
excuse, and that you try not, through any opportunity of usurpation, to
upset what has been long secured to it, but that you study, without any
gainsaying, to preserve all its privileges inviolate, and know that no
more is lawful to you with regard to the said monastery than was lawful
to your predecessors.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p6"></span>Further, inasmuch as they have
likewise complained that thy Fraternity has taken certain things from
the monastery under the guise of their being, as it were, an
offering <span id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757) , it is necessary
that, if thou recollectest having received anything unbecomingly, thou
restore it without delay, lest the sin of avarice seriously convict
thee, whom priestly munificence ought to have shewn liberal towards
monasteries.  Therefore, while thou preservest all things which, as we
have said, have been allowed and preserved by thy predecessors, let it
be thy care to keep careful watch over the acts and lives of the monks
residing there, and, if thou shouldest find any one living amiss, or
(which <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p7.1"></span>God</span>
forbid) guilty of any sin of uncleanness, to correct such by strict and
regular emendation.  For, as we desire your Fraternity to abstain from
incongruous usurpations, so we admonish you to be in all ways solicitous
in what pertains to rectitude of discipline and the guardianship of
souls.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p8"></span>The monks of the aforesaid monastery
have also informed us that the camp which is called Scillacium is built
on ground belonging to their monastery, and that on this account those
who live there pledged themselves in writing <span
id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758) to pay a *solatium* <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) every year; but that they
afterwards thought scorn of it, and idly withheld their stipulated
payment.  Let then your Fraternity take care to learn the truth
accurately; and, if you should find it so, urgently see to their not
delaying to give what they promised, and what also reason requires; that
so both they may possess quietly what they hold, and the rights of the
monastery may incur no damage.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p11"></span>Furthermore, the monks of the
aforesaid monastery have complained to us that their abbot has granted
to thy Fraternity by title of gift land within the camp of Scillacium,
to the extent of six hundred feet, under pretext of building a church: 
and accordingly it is our will that as much land as the walls of the
church, when built, can surround shall be claimed as belonging to the
church.  But let whatever may be outside the walls of the said church
revert without dispute to the possession of the monastery.  For the
ordinances neither of worldly laws nor of the sacred canons permit the
property of a monastery to be segregated by any title from its
ownership.  On this account restore thou this gift of land which has
been granted against reason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[241b:1757](2120581.htm#fr_1756) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p3"></span> The address in the text is “Episcopo
Scillitano.”  That the see was that of Scyllacium in Brutia appears from
the contents of the epistle.  Syllacium itself appears to have been a
*Castrum*, which had been erected on land belonging to a monastery.  The
epistle is illustrative of Gregory’s anxiety to protect the property and
privileges of monasteries against bishops.  See *Prolegom*., p. xx., and
references in Index under *Monasteries*.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[242b:1758](2120581.htm#fr_1757) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p7"></span> *Sub xenii quasi specie*.  For the
meaning of the word *xenium*, see II. 23, note 8.

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[242b:1759](2120581.htm#fr_1758) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p9"></span> *Libellis factis*; meaning
apparently that there had been written memoranda of agreement.

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[242b:1760](2120581.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xx-p10"></span> The word *solatium* is variously
used, sometimes for any kind of aid or succour; sometimes for
remuneration for services done, or grants in aid; here apparently for
payment in the way of rent for the land occupied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Leontius, Ex-Consul.](2120582)
