[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120286)  [Next](2120288) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
have had experience of the sins of the flesh, and those who have not.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 29.)  Differently to
be admonished are those who are conscious of sins of the flesh, and
those who know them not.  For those who have had experience of the sins
of the flesh are to be admonished that, at any rate after shipwreck,
they should fear the sea, and feel horror at their risk of perdition at
least when it has become known to them; lest, having been mercifully
preserved after evil deeds committed, by wickedly repeating the same
they die.  Whence to the soul that sins and never ceases from sin it is
said, *There is come unto thee a whore’s forehead; thou refuseth to be
ashamed* ([Jer. iii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p3.1"></span>).  They are therefore to be admonished
to take heed, to the end that, if they have refused to keep whole the
good things of nature which they have received, they at least mend them
after they have been rent asunder.  And they are surely bound to
consider, how many in so great a number of the faithful both keep
themselves undefiled and also convert others from the error of their
way.  What, then, will they be able to say, if, while others are
standing in integrity, they themselves, even after loss, come not to a
better mind?  What will they be able to say, if, when many bring others
also with themselves to the kingdom, they bring not back even themselves
to the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p3.2"></span>Lord</span> who is waiting for them? 
They are to be admonished to consider past transgressions, and to shun
such as are impending.  Whence, under the figure of Judæa, the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p3.3"></span>Lord</span> through the
prophet recalls past sins to the memory of souls corrupted in this
world, to the end that they may be ashamed to be polluted in sins to
come, saying, *They committed whoredoms in Egypt; they committed
whoredoms in their youth:  then were their breasts pressed, and the
teats of their virginity were bruised* ([Ezek. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p3.4"></span>).  For indeed breasts are pressed in
Egypt, when the will of the human soul is prostituted to the base desire
of this world.  Teats of virginity are bruised in Egypt, when the
natural senses, still whole in themselves, are vitiated by the
corruption of assailing concupiscence.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4"></span>Those who have had experience of the
sins of the flesh are to be admonished to observe vigilantly with how
great benevolence <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.1"></span>God</span> opens the bosom of His pity
to us, if after transgressions we return to Him, when He says through
the prophet, *If a man put away his wife, and she go from him and become
another man’s, shall he return to her again?  Shall not that woman be
polluted and contaminated?  But thou hast played the harlot with many
lovers; yet return again to me, saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.2"></span>Lord</span>* ([Jer. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.3"></span>).  So, concerning the wife who has
played the harlot and is deserted, the argument of justice is put
forward:  and yet to us returning after fall not justice, but pity is
displayed.  Whence we are surely meant to gather how great is our
wickedness, if we return not, even after transgression, seeing that,
when transgressing, we are spared with so great pity:  or what pardon
for the wicked there will be from Him who, after our sin, ceases not to
call us.  And indeed this mercifulness, in calling after transgression,
is <span id="page_59b">p. 59b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-Page_59b"></span>well expressed through the Prophet,
when to man turned away from <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.4"></span>God</span> it is said, *Thine eyes shall
see thy teacher, and thine ears shall hear the word of one behind thy
back admonishing thee* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000),
[Isa. 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020), [Isa.
21:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.5"></span>).  For indeed the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.6"></span>Lord</span> admonished
the human race to their face, when to man, created in Paradise, and
standing in free will, He declared what He ought to do or not to do. 
But man turned his back on the face of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.7"></span>God</span>, when in his pride he
despised His commands.  Yet still <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.8"></span>God</span> deserted him not in his
pride, in that He gave the Law for the purpose of recalling man, and
sent exhorting angels, and Himself appeared in the flesh of our
mortality.  Therefore, standing behind our back, He admonished us, in
that, even though despised, He called us to the recovery of grace. 
What, therefore could be said generally of all alike must needs be felt
specially with regard to each.  For every man hears the words of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.9"></span>God’s</span> admonition
set as it were before him, when, before he commits sin, he knows the
precepts of His will.  For still to stand before His face is not yet to
despise Him by sinning.  But, when a man forsakes the good of innocence,
and of choice desires iniquity, he then turns his back on the face of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.10"></span>God</span>.  But
lo, even behind his back <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.11"></span>God</span> follows and admonishes him,
in that even after sin He persuades him to return to Himself.  He
recalls him that is turned away, He regards not past transgressions, He
opens the bosom of pity to the returning one.  We hearken, then, to the
voice of one behind our back admonishing us, if at least after sins we
return to the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p4.12"></span>Lord</span> inviting us.  We ought
therefore to feel ashamed for the pity of Him Who calls us, if we will
not fear His justice:  since there is the more grievous wickedness in
despising Him in that, though despised, He disdains not to call us
still.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p5"></span>But, on the other hand, those that
are unacquainted with the sins of the flesh are to be admonished to fear
headlong ruin the more anxiously, as they stand upon a higher eminence. 
They are to be admonished to be aware that the more prominent be the
place they stand on, so much the more frequent are the arrows of the
lier-in-wait by which they are assailed.  For he is wont to rouse
himself the more ardently, the more stoutly he sees himself to be
vanquished:  and so much the more he scorns and feels it intolerable to
be vanquished, as he perceives the unbroken camp of weak flesh to be set
in array against him.  They are to be admonished to look up incessantly
to the rewards, and then undoubtedly they will gladly tread under foot
the labours of temptation which they endure.  For, if attention be fixed
on the attained felicity apart from the passage to it, the toil of the
passage becomes light.  Let them hear what is said through the Prophet;
*Thus saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> unto the eunuchs, Whoso
shall have kept my sabbaths, and chosen the things that l would, and
kept my covenant, I will give unto them in mine house and within my
walls a place and a name better than of sons and of daughters* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#004), [Isa.
5:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p5.2"></span>).  For they indeed are eunuchs, who,
suppressing the motions of the flesh, cut off within themselves
affection for wrong-doing.  Moreover, in what place they are held with
the Father is shewn, forasmuch as in the Father’s house, that is in His
eternal mansion, they are preferred even before sons.  Let them hear
what is said through John; *These are they which have not been defiled
with women; for they are virgins, and follow the Lamb whithersoever He
goeth* ([Rev. xiv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p5.3"></span>); and how they sing a song which no one
can utter but those hundred and forty four thousand.  For indeed to sing
a song to the Lamb singularly is to rejoice with Him for ever beyond all
the faithful, even for incorruption of the flesh.  Yet the rest of the
elect can hear this song, although they cannot utter it, because,
through charity, they are joyful in the exaltation of those others,
though they rise not to their rewards.  Let those who are unacquainted
with the sins of the flesh hear what the Truth in person says concerning
this purity; *Not all receive this word* ([Matth. xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p5.4"></span>).  Which thing He denoted as the
highest, in that He spoke of it as not belonging to all:  and, in
foretelling that it would be difficult to receive it, He signifies to
his hearers with what caution it should be kept when received.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p6"></span>Those who are unacquainted with the
sins of the flesh are therefore to be admonished both to know that
virginity surpasses wedlock, and yet not to exalt themselves above the
wedded:  to the end that, while they put virginity first, and themselves
last, they may both keep to that which they esteem as best, and also
keep guard over themselves in not vainly exalting themselves.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p7"></span>They are to be admonished to
consider that commonly the life of the continent is put to shame by the
action of secular persons, when the latter take on themselves works
beyond their condition, and the former do not stir up their hearts to
the mark of their own order.  Whence it is well said through the
Prophet, *Be thou ashamed, O Sidon, saith the sea* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p7.1"></span>).  For Sidon is as it were brought to
shame by the voice of the sea, when the life of him who is fortified,
and as it were stedfast, is reproved by comparison with the life at
those who are secular and fluctuating in this <span id="page_60b">p.
60b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-Page_60b"></span>world.  For often
there are some who, returning to the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p7.2"></span>Lord</span> after sins of the flesh,
shew themselves the more ardent in good works as they see themselves the
more liable to condemnation for bad ones:  and often certain of those
who persevere in purity of the flesh seeing that they have less in the
past to deplore, think that the innocency of their life is fully
sufficient for them, and inflame themselves with no incitements of
ardour to fervour of spirit.  And for the most part a life burning with
love after sin becomes more pleasing to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p7.3"></span>God</span> than innocence growing torpid
in security.  Whence also it is said by the voice of the Judge, *Her
sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved much* ([Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p7.4"></span>); and, *Joy shall be in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth more than over ninety and nine just persons which
need no repentance* ([Luke 15.7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxix-p7.5"></span>).  Which thing we the sooner gather
from experience itself, if we weigh the judgments of our own mind.  For
we love the land which produces abundant fruit after thorns have been
ploughed out of it more than that which has had no thorns, but which,
when cultivated, yields a barren harvest.  Those who know not the sins
of the flesh are to be admonished not to prefer themselves to others for
the loftiness of their superior order, while they know not how great
things are done by their inferiors better than by themselves.  For in
the inquisition of the righteous judge the quality of actions changes
the merits of orders.  For who, considering the very outward appearance
of things, can be ignorant that in the nature of gems the carbuncle is
preferred to the jacinth?  But still a jacinth of cerulean colour is
preferred to a pale carbuncle; because to the former its show of beauty
supplies what the order of nature denied it, and the latter, which
natural order had preferred, is debased by the quality of its colour. 
Thus, then, in the human race both some in the better order are the
worse, and some in the worse order are the better; since these by good
living transcend the lot of their lower state, and those lessen the
merit of their higher place by not coming up to it in their behaviour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How they are to be admonished who lament sins of deed, and those
who lament only sins of thought.](2120288)
