[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120364)  [Next](2120366.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.x-p1.1"></span>Epistle XX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p2"></span>*To Antoninus, Subdeacon* <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406.md) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p4"></span>Gregory to Antoninus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p5"></span>Honoratus, archdeacon of the Church of
Salona, had demanded from my predecessor of holy memory, in a petition
that he sent, that he should by no means be forced by his bishop to be
advanced against his will, in a way contrary to custom, to a higher
order.

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p6"></span>\[*Here follows an account of the
subsequent proceedings, almost word for word the same as that given in
Epistle XIX*.\]

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p7"></span>Wherefore we have thought it right to
support thy Experience by the authority of this present order, that thou
mayest resort to Salona, and at least try by exhortation to induce
Natalis, our brother and fellow-bishop, who has been admonished by so
many letters, to restore the above-mentioned Honoratus to his place
immediately.  But if, as has been his wont, he should contumaciously
delay doing this, forbid him by authority of the Apostolic See the use
of the pallium which has been granted him by this See.  But if, even
after loss of the pallium, thou shouldest find him persevering in the
same pertinacity, thou shalt deprive the said bishop of participation in
holy communion.  Moreover, him who, against the rule of justice, has
consented to be promoted to another man’s place we order to be deposed
from the dignity of the same archdeaconry.  And, if he should presume to
minister further in the same place, we deprive him of participation in
holy communion.  For it is right that he should find those severe in
justice whom he sets at naught when approaching him in charity. 
Wherefore, when the archdeacon Honoratus has been restored to his place,
let the aforesaid bishop, at thy instigation, send to us a person with
instructions, who may be able by his allegations to prove to us that the
bishop’s intention is or has been just.

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p8"></span>\[*What follows corresponds exactly with
the conclusion of Epistle XIX*.\]

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p9"></span>As to our brother and fellow-bishop
Malchus <span id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407.md) , thou wilt take care
to make him find a surety, that he may come to us as soon as possible,
to the end that, without any delay or loitering, he may render us an
account of his proceedings, and so be able to return to his own with
security.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[105b:1407](2120365.htm#fr_1406.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p3"></span> This Antoninus was *rector patrimonii*
in Dalmatia (see III. 22), and, though but a subdeacon, appears to have
had the same kind of jurisdiction over the clergy given him in the
pope’s name even in ecclesiastical matters as had been committed to
Peter the subdeacon in Sicily.  (See I. 1.)

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[105b:1408](2120365.htm#fr_1407.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p10"></span> This Malchus was a bishop in Dalmatia
(cf. Lib. 1. Ep. 38<span id="iii.v.ii.x-p10.1"></span>, “Ad Malchum
episcopum Dalmatia,”) and appears to have been in charge of some part of
the patrimony there, for his administration of which he had been called
to account, and was therefore summoned to Rome to clear himself.  He
died there suddenly after his case had been heard, and judgment had been
given against him, Gregory being calumniously accused of having caused
his death.  His case is referred to II. 20, 46; III. 22, 47; IV. 47.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXII](2120366.md)
