[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120304)  [Next](2120306.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle III.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.iii-p2"></span>To Paul, Scholasticus.

<span id="iii.v.i.iii-p3"></span>Gregory to Paul, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.iii-p4"></span>However strangers smile upon me on
account of the dignity of my priestly office, this I take not much
account of; but I do grieve not a little at your smiling upon me on this
account, seeing that you know what I long for, and yet suppose me to
have received advancement.  For to me it would have been the highest
advancement, if what I wished could have been fulfilled; if I could have
accomplished my desire, which you have been long acquainted with, in the
enjoyment of longed-for rest.  Yet, since I am now detained in the city
of Rome, tied by the chains of this dignity, I have something wherein I
may even rejoice in addressing your Glory, seeing that, when the most
eminent lord the ex-consul Leo comes, I suspect that you will not remain
in Sicily; and when thou thyself also, tied by thine own dignity, shalt
come to be detained in Rome, thou wilt come to know what sorrow and what
bitterness I suffer.  But when the magnificent <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.iii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> Maurentius, the *Chartularius*,
comes to you, I pray thee concur with him in regard to the present
straits of the Roman city, since outside we are stabbed without cease by
hostile swords.  But we are still more heavily pressed by danger within
through a sedition of the soldiers.  Further, we commend to your Glory
in all respects Peter our sub-deacon, whom we have sent to rule the
patrimony of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop of Constantinople.](2120306.md)
