[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120506)  [Next](2120508.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p2"></span>To Secundus.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p3"></span>Gregory to Secundus, servant of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>God</span> at
Ravenna <span id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652.md) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p5"></span>Now that Castorius <span
id="fr_1653"></span>[1654](#fn_1653.md) has returned and made known to us
all that has been done between you and King Agilulph, we have taken care
to send him back to you with all speed, lest any one should find an
excuse against us on the ground of delay.  Having learnt then from him
all that is to be done, give the matter your earnest attention, and
press in all ways for this peace to be arranged, since, as report goes,
there are some who are trying to hinder it.  On this account make haste
to act strenuously, that your labour may not remain without effect.  For
both these parts and various islands are already placed in great danger.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p7"></span>Stir up with such words as thou canst
use our brother the bishop Marinianus <span
id="fr_1654"></span>[1655](#fn_1654.md) :  for I suspect that he has fallen
asleep.  For certain persons have come to me, among whom were some aged
mendicants, who were questioned by me as to what they had received and
from whom they had received it; and they told me particularly how much
had been given them on their journey, and by whom it had been given. 
But, when I enquired of them what my aforesaid brother had given them,
they replied that they had asked him, but had received nothing at all
from him; so that they did not get even bread on the way, though it has
always been the familiar usage of that Church to give to all.  For they
said, He answered saying, I have nothing that I can give you.  And I am
surprised, if he who has clothes, money, and storehouses, has nothing to
give to the poor.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p9"></span>Tell him, then, that with his place he
should change his disposition too.  Let him not believe reading and
prayer alone to be enough for him, so that he should think to sit apart,
and nowise fructify with his hand; but let him have a liberal hand; let
him succour those who suffer need; let him believe the wants of others
to be his own; since, if he has not these things, he bears but a
bishop’s empty name.  I did indeed give him some admonitions about his
soul in my letter; but he <span id="page_199b">p. 199b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxi-Page_199b"></span>has sent me no reply whatever; whence
I suppose that he has not even deigned to read them.  For this reason it
is needless now for me to admonish him at all in my letter to him; and
so I have written only what I was able to dictate as his adviser in
worldly matters.  For it is not incumbent on me to tire myself, by
dictation for a man who does not read what is said to him.  Let, then,
thy Love speak to him about all these things privately, and admonish him
how he ought to demean himself, lest through present negligence he lose
the advantage of his former life, which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p9.1"></span>God</span> forbid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[198b:1653](2120507.htm#fr_1652.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p4"></span> Gregory appears to have communicated
with this Secundus, rather than with the bishop of Ravenna, for reasons
which appear below, and to have employed him in negotiations with the
Exarch for peace with the Lombards.

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[198b:1654](2120507.htm#fr_1653.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p6"></span> A Castorius is mentioned in Gregory’s
letter to the Emperor as having been the *magister militum* in command
at Rome during its siege by Agilulph.  This may be the same person.

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[198b:1655](2120507.htm#fr_1654.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxi-p8"></span> For his appointment to the see of
Ravenna, cf. V. 48.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXII](2120508.md)
