[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120222)  [Next](2120224.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p2.1"></span>On the Fast of the Seventh Month, III <span
id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184.md) .</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p4"></span>I.  *The Fasts, which the ancient prophets
proclaimed, are still necessary.*

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p5"></span>Of what avail, dearly-beloved, are
religious fasts in winning the mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.1"></span>God</span>, and in renewing the fortunes of
human frailty, we know from the statements of the holy Prophets, who
proclaim that justice of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.2"></span>God</span>, Whose vengeance the people of
Israel had again and again incurred through their iniquities, cannot be
appeased save by fasting.  Thus it is that the Prophet Joel warns them,
saying, “thus saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.3"></span>Lord</span> your <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.4"></span>God</span>, turn ye to Me with all your heart,
with fasting and weeping and mourning, and rend your hearts and not your
garments, and turn ye to the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.5"></span>Lord</span> your <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.6"></span>God</span>, for He is merciful and patient,
and of great kindness, and very merciful <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185.md) ,” and again, “sanctify a fast,
proclaim a healing, assemble the people, sanctify the church <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[1187](#fn_1186.md) .”  And this exhortation must in
our days also be obeyed, because these healing remedies must of
necessity be proclaimed by us too, in order that in the observance of
the ancient sanctification Christian devotion may gain what Jewish
transgression lost.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p8"></span>II.  *Public services are of a higher
character than private.*

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p9"></span>But the respect that is paid to the Divine
decrees always brings a special blessing, whatever may be the extent of
our voluntary services, so that publicly proclaimed celebrations are of
a higher character than those which rest on private institution <span
id="fr_1187"></span>[1188](#fn_1187.md) .  For the exercise of
self-restraint, which each individual imposes on himself at his own
discretion, concerns the benefit of a certain portion only of the
Church, but the fast which the whole Church undergoes leaves out no one
from the general purification, and <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p10.1"></span>God’s</span> people then become strongest,
when the hearts of all the faithful meet together in one common act of
holy obedience, when in the camp of the Christian army there is on all
sides the same making ready for the fight and for defence.  Though the
cruel enemy rage in restless fury, and spread all round his hidden
snares, yet he will be able to catch no one and wound no one, if he find
no one off his guard, no one given up to sloth, no one inactive in works
of piety.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p11"></span>III.  *The September fast calls us in
this public way to self-amendment.*

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p12"></span>To this unconquerable strength of unity,
therefore, dearly-beloved, we are even now invited by the solemn Fast of
the Seventh Month, that we may lift our souls to the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlv-p12.1"></span>Lord</span> free from
worldly cares and earthly concerns.  <span id="page_199">p. 199</span>
<span id="ii.v.xlv-Page_199"></span>And because, always needful as this
endeavour is, we cannot all adhere to it perpetually, and often through
human frailty we fall back from higher things to the things of earth,
let us at least on these days, which are most healthfully ordained for
our correction, withdraw ourselves from worldly occupations, and steal a
little time for promoting our eternal welfare.  “For in many things,” as
it is written, “we all stumble <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[1189](#fn_1188.md) .”  And though by the daily gift of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlv-p13.2"></span>God <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1190](#fn_1189.md) </span> we be cleansed from divers
pollutions, yet there cling to unwary souls for the most part darker
stains, which need a greater care to wash them out, a stronger effort to
destroy them.  And the fullest abolition of sins is obtained when the
whole Church offers up one prayer and one confession.  For if the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlv-p14.1"></span>Lord</span> has promised
fulfilment of all they shall ask, to the holy and devout agreement of
two or three, what shall be denied to many thousands of the people who
unite in one act of worship, and with one breath make their common
supplications <span id="fr_1190"></span>[1191](#fn_1190.md) ?

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p16"></span>IV.  *Community of goods and of actions
is most precious in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p16.1"></span>God’s</span> sight.*

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p17"></span>It is a great and very precious thing,
beloved, in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p17.1"></span>Lord’s</span> sight, when Christ’s whole
people engage together in the same duties, and all ranks and degrees of
either sex co-operate with the same intent:  when one purpose animates
all alike of declining from evil and doing good; when <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlv-p17.2"></span>God</span> is glorified in
the works of His slaves, and the Author of all godliness <span
id="fr_1191"></span>[1192](#fn_1191.md) is blessed in unstinted giving of
thanks.  The hungry are nourished, the naked are clothed, the sick are
visited, and men seek not their own but “that which is another’s <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[1193](#fn_1192.md) ,” so long as in relieving the
misery of others each one makes the most of his own means; and it is
easy to find “a cheerful giver <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1194](#fn_1193.md) ,” where a man’s performances are
only limited by the extent of his power.  By this grace of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlv-p20.2"></span>God</span>, “which worketh
all in all <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194.md) ,” the benefit and
the deserts of the faithful are both enjoyed in common.  For they, whose
income is not like, can yet think alike, and when one rejoices over
another’s bounty his feelings put him on the same level with him whose
powers of spending are on a different level.  In such a community there
is no disorder nor diversity, for all the members of the whole body
agree in one strong purpose of godliness, and he who glories in the
wealth of others is not put to shame at his own poverty.  For the
excellence of each portion is the glory of the whole body, and when we
are all led by <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p21.2"></span>God’s</span> Spirit, not only are the things
we do ourselves our own but those of others also over the doing of which
we rejoice.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p22"></span>V.  *Let us then make the best use
possible of the opportunity.*

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p23"></span>Let us then, dearly-beloved, lay hold
upon this most sacred unity in all its blessed integrity and engage in
the solemn fast with the concordant purpose of a good will.  Nothing
hard, nothing harsh is asked of anyone, nor is anything imposed beyond
our strength, whether in the discipline of abstinence or in the amount
of alms.  Each knows what he can and what he cannot do:  let every one
pay his quota, assessing himself at a just and reasonable rate, that the
sacrifice of mercy be not offered sadly nor reckoned among losses.  Let
so much be expended on pious work, as will justify the heart, wash the
conscience, and in a word profit both giver and receiver.  Happy indeed
is that soul and truly to be admired which in its love of doing good
fears not the failing of the means, and has no distrust that He will
give him money still to spend, from Whom he had what he spent in the
past.  But because few possess this greatness of heart, and yet it is
truly a pious thing for each one not to forsake the care of his own, we,
without prejudice to the more perfect sort, lay down for you this
general rule and exhort you to perform <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p23.1"></span>God’s</span> bidding according to the measure
of your ability.  For cheerfulness becomes the benevolent man, who
should so manage his liberality that while the poor rejoice over the
help supplied, home needs may not suffer.  “And He that ministers seed
to the sower, shall both provide bread to be eaten and multiply your
seed and increase the fruits of your righteousness <span
id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195.md) .”  On Wednesday and Friday
therefore let us fast; and on Saturday keep vigil all together <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196.md) in the presence of the most blessed
Apostle Peter, by whose merits and prayers we are sure <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlv-p25.1"></span>God’s</span> mercy will be
vouchsafed to us in all things through our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p25.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, Who lives and
reigns for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[198:1185](2120223.htm#fr_1184.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p3"></span> That is the September, or as we should
now say, the Michaelmas Embertide.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[198:1186](2120223.htm#fr_1185.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.7"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p6"></span> [Joel
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[198:1187](2120223.htm#fr_1186.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p7"></span> [Joel
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[198:1188](2120223.htm#fr_1187.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p10"></span> He pursues the same thought in chap. 2
of Sermon LXXXIX. e.g. *tunc est efficacior sacratiorque devotia, quando
in operibus pietatis totius Ecclesiæ unus animus et unus est census;
publica enim præferenda sunt propriis et ibi intelligenda est præcipua
ratio utilitatis, ubi vigilat cura communis*.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[199:1189](2120223.htm#fr_1188.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p13"></span> S. [James iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[199:1190](2120223.htm#fr_1189.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p14"></span> Cf. Serm. LXXVIII. 2. *donet licet
sanctis suis quotidianam gratia Divina victoriam, non aufert tamen
dimicandi materiam*.

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[199:1191](2120223.htm#fr_1190.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p15"></span> Cf. S. [Matt.
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[199:1192](2120223.htm#fr_1191.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p18"></span> *Totius pietatis auctori*:  cf. Collect
for 23rd Sunday after Trinity, which is based on that in the Gregorian
Sacramentary.

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[199:1193](2120223.htm#fr_1192.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p19"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md), [1 Cor.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006.md), [2 Cor.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[199:1194](2120223.htm#fr_1193.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p20"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md), [1 Cor.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006.md), [2 Cor.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[199:1195](2120223.htm#fr_1194.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p21"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#024.md), [1 Cor.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006.md), [2 Cor.
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[199:1196](2120223.htm#fr_1195.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p24"></span> [2 Cor. ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#010.md)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[199:1197](2120223.htm#fr_1196.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p25"></span> *Pariter*.  He thus keeps up the leading
thought of this sermon to end .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XC](2120224.md)
