[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120495)  [Next](2120497) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.x"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.x-p1.1"></span>Epistle XIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p2"></span>*To the Count Narses* <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p4"></span>Gregory to Narses, &c.

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p5"></span>Your Charity, being anxious to learn our
opinion, has been at the pains of writing to us to ask what we think of
the book against the presbyter Athanasius which was sent to us.  Having
thoroughly perused some parts of it, we find that he has fallen into the
dogma of Manichæus.  But he who has noted some places as heretical by a
mark set against them slips also himself into Pelagian heresy; for he
has marked certain places as heretical which are catholicly expressed
and entirely orthodox.  For when this is written; that when Adam sinned
his soul died, the writer shews afterwards how it is said to have died,
namely that it lost the blessedness of its condition.  Whosoever denies
this is not a Catholic.  For <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.x-p5.1"></span>God</span> had said, *In the hour ye eat
thereof, in death ye shall die* ([Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.vi.x-p5.2"></span>).  When, therefore, Adam ate of the
forbidden tree, we know that he did not die in the body, seeing that
after this he begat children and lived many years.  If, then, he did not
die in the soul, the impious conclusion follows that He himself lied who
foretold that in the day that he sinned he should die.  But it is to be
understood that death takes place in two ways; either from ceasing to
live, or with respect to the mode of living.  When, then, man’s soul is
said to have died in the eating of the forbidden thing, it is meant, not
in the sense of ceasing to live, but with regard to the mode of
living;—that he should live afterwards in pain who had been created to
live happily in joy <span id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642) .  He,
then, who has marked this passage in the book sent to me by my brother
the bishop John as heretical is a Pelagian; for his view is evidently
that of Pelagius, which the apostle Paul plainly confutes in his
epistles.  The particular passages in his epistle I need not quote, as I
write to one who knows.  But Pelagius, who was condemned in the Ephesine
synod, maintained this view with the intention of shewing that we were
redeemed by Christ unreally.  For, if we did not through Adam die in the
soul, we were redeemed unreally, which it were impious to say.  Further,
having examined the acts of the synod of Ephesus, we find nothing at all
about Adelphius and Sava, and the others who are said to have been
condemned there, and we think that, as the synod of Chalcedon was in one
place falsified by the Constantinopolitan Church, <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643) so something of the kind has been
done with regard to the synod of Ephesus.  Wherefore let your Charity
make a thorough search for old copies of the acts of this synod, and
thus see whether anything of the kind is found there, and send such copy
as you may find to me, which I will return as soon as I have read it. 
For recent copies are not entirely to be trusted; and it is for this
reason that I have been in doubt, and have not wished as yet to reply in
this case to my aforesaid brother the bishop John.  Further, the Roman
copies are much more correct than the Greek <span id="page_193b">p.
193b</span> <span id="iii.v.vi.x-Page_193b"></span>ones, since, as we
have not your cleverness, so neither have we any impostures.

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p8"></span>Now concerning the presbyter John, know
that his case has been decided in synod, whereby I have clearly
ascertained that his adversaries have wished and long endeavoured to
make him out a heretic, but have entirely failed.

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p9"></span>Salute in my name your friends, who are
ours:  ours also, who are yours, salute you heartily through me.  May
Almighty <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.x-p9.1"></span>God</span>
protect thee with His hand in the midst of so many thorns, that thou
mayest, unhurt, gather those flowers which the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.x-p9.2"></span>Lord</span> hath chosen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[192b:1642](2120496.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="iii.v.vi.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p3"></span> On the case of John of Chalcedon and
Athanasius of Isaura, referred to in this and the three following
letters, see III. 53, note 9.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[192b:1643](2120496.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="iii.v.vi.x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p6"></span> Cf. VII. 34 and IX. 49, where the same
argument, in nearly the same words, is set forth.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[192b:1644](2120496.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="iii.v.vi.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.x-p7"></span> The reference may be to Canon xxviii.
of the Council of Chalcedon, assigning rank and jurisdiction to the
patriarchs of Constantinople, which was protested against by the Roman
legates at the Council and afterwards disallowed by Pope Leo.  It is
omitted in the Latin version of the canons published by Dionysius
Exiguus about the beginning of the sixth century, though it had been in
the *Prisca Versio* which he amended.  It appears as if Gregory, not
finding it in the Latin version before him, supposed it to have been
interpolated at Constantinople; the fact being that it had been
purposely omitted at Rome, as not having the Pope’s sanction.  If such
is the allusion, it may seem strange that Gregory did not know the
circumstances better.  But this is not the only instance of his
imperfect knowledge of past events, even in ecclesiastical matters.  Cf.
II. 51, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop.](2120497)
