[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120244)  [Next](2120246.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p2"></span>What manner of man ought not to come
to rule.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p3"></span>Wherefore let every one measure
himself wisely, lest he venture to assume a place of rule, while in
himself vice still reigns unto condemnation; lest one whom his own guilt
depraves desire to become an intercessor for the faults of others.  For
on this account it is said to Moses by the supernal voice, *Speak unto
Aaron; Whosoever he be of thy seed throughout their generations that
hath a blemish, he shall not offer loaves of bread to the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p3.1"></span>Lord</span> his <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p3.2"></span>God</span>* ([Lev. xxi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p3.3"></span>).  And it is also immediately subjoined;
*If he be blind, if he be lame, if he have either a small or a large and
crooked nose, if he be brokenfooted or brokenhanded, if he be
hunchbacked, if he be bleareyed (lippus), if he have a white speck
(albuginem) in his eye, if chronic scabies, if impetigo in his body, or
if he be ruptured (ponderosus)* ([Lev.
21.18](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p3.4"></span> <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) .md).  For that man is indeed blind
who is unacquainted with the light of supernal contemplation, who,
whelmed in the darkness of the present life, while he beholds not at all
by loving it the light to come, knows not whither he is advancing the
steps of his conduct.  Hence by Hannah prophesying it is said, *He will
keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness*
([1 Kings ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.8"></span>).  But that man is lame <span
id="page_8b">p. 8b</span> <span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-Page_8b"></span>who
does indeed see in what direction he ought to go, but, through infirmity
of purpose, is unable to keep perfectly the way of life which he sees,
because, while unstable habit rises not to a settled state of virtue,
the steps of conduct do not follow with effect the aim of desire.  Hence
it is that Paul says, *Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble
knees, and make straight paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be
turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed* ([Heb.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.9"></span>).  But one with a small nose is he who
is not adapted for keeping the measure of discernment.  For with the
nose we discern sweet odours and stenches:  and so by the nose is
properly expressed discernment, through which we choose virtues and
eschew sins.  Whence also it is said in praise of the bride, *Thy nose
is as the tower which is in Lebanon* ([Song of Sol.
7.4](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.10"></span>); because, to wit, Holy Church, by
discernment, espies assaults issuing from this or that quarter, and
detects from an eminence the coming wars of vices.  But there are some
who, not liking to be thought dull, busy themselves often more than
needs in various investigations, and by reason of too great subtilty are
deceived.  Wherefore this also is added, *Or have a large and crooked
nose.*  For a large and crooked nose is excessive subtilty of
discernment, which, having become unduly excrescent, itself confuses the
correctness of its own operation.  But one with broken foot or hand is
he who cannot walk in the way of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.11"></span>God</span> at all, and is utterly
without part or lot in good deeds, to such degree that he does not, like
the lame man, maintain them however weakly, but remains altogether apart
from them.  But the hunchbacked is he whom the weight of earthly care
bows down, so that he never looks up to the things that are above, but
is intent only on what is trodden on among the lowest.  And he, should
he ever hear anything of the good things of the heavenly country, is so
pressed down by the weight of perverse custom, that he lifts not the
face of his heart to it, being unable to erect the posture of his
thought, which the habit of earthly care keeps downward bent.  Of this
kind of men the Psalmist says, *I am bent down and am brought low
continually* ([Ps. xxxviii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.12"></span>).  The fault of such as these the Truth
in person reprobates, saying, *But the seed which fell among thorns are
they which, when they have heard the word, go forth, and are choked with
cares and riches and pleasures of life, and bear no fruit* ([Luke viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.13"></span>).  But the blear-eyed is he whose
native wit flashes out for cognition of the truth, and yet carnal works
obscure it.  For in the blear-eyed the pupils are sound; but the
eyelids, weakened by defluxion of humours, become gross; and even the
brightness of the pupils is impaired, because they are worn continually
by the flux upon them.  The blear-eyed, then, is one whose sense nature
has made keen, but whom a depraved habit of life confuses.  To him it is
well said through the angel, *Anoint thine eyes with eyesalve that thou
mayest see* ([Rev. 3.18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.14"></span>).  For we may be said to anoint our
eyes with eyesalve that we may see, when we aid the eye of our
understanding for perceiving the clearness of the true light with the
medicament of good conduct.  But that man has a white speck in his eye
who is not permitted to see the light of truth, in that he is blinded by
the arrogant assumption of wisdom or of righteousness.  For the pupil of
the eye, when black, sees; but, when it bears a white speck, sees
nothing; by which we may understand that the perceiving sense of human
thought, if a man understands himself to be a fool and a sinner, becomes
cognizant of the clearness of inmost light; but, if it attributes to
itself the whiteness of righteousness or wisdom, it excludes itself from
the light of knowledge from above, and by so much the more fails
entirely to penetrate the clearness of the true light, as it exalts
itself within itself through arrogance; as of some it is said,
*Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools* ([Rom. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.15"></span>).  But that man has chronic *scabies*
whom the wantonness of the flesh without cease overmasters.  For in
*scabies* the violent heat of the bowels is drawn to the skin; whereby
lechery is rightly designated, since, if the heart’s temptation shoots
forth into action, it may be truly said that violent internal heat
breaks out into *scabies* of the skin:  and it now wounds the body
outwardly, because, while sensuality is not repressed in thought, it
gains the mastery also in action.  For Paul had a care to cleanse away
this itch of the skin, when he said, *Let no temptation take you but
such as is human* ([1 Cor. x. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.16"></span>); as if to say plainly, It is human to
suffer temptation in the heart; but it is devilish, in the struggle of
temptation, to be also overcome in action.  He also has impetigo in his
body whosoever is ravaged in the mind by avarice; which, if not
restrained in small things, does indeed dilate itself without measure.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p5"></span>For, as *impetigo* invades the body
without pain, and, spreading with no annoyance to him whom it invades,
disfigures the comeliness of the members, so avarice, too, exulcerates,
while it pleases, the mind of one who is captive to it.  As it offers to
the thought one thing after another to be gained, it kindles the fire of
enmities, and gives no pain with the wounds it causes, because it
promises to the fevered mind abundance out <span id="page_9b">p.
9b</span> <span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-Page_9b"></span>of sin.  But the
comeliness of the members is destroyed, because the beauty of other
virtues is also hereby marred:  and it exulcerates as it were the whole
body, in that it corrupts the mind with vices of all kinds; as Paul
attests, saying, *The love of money is the root of all evils* ([1 Tim.
vi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>).  But the ruptured one is he who does
not carry turpitude into action, but yet is immoderately weighed down by
it in mind through continual cogitation; one who is indeed by no means
carried away to the extent of nefarious conduct; but his mind still
delights itself without prick of repugnance in the pleasure of lechery. 
For the disease of rupture is when *humor viscerum ad virilia labitur,
quæ profecto cum molestia dedecoris intumescunt*   He, then, may be said
to be ruptured who, letting all his thoughts flow down to
lasciviousness, bears in his heart a weight of turpitude; and, though
not actually doing deeds of shame, nevertheless in mind is not withdrawn
from them.  Nor has he power to rise to the practice of good living
before the eyes of men, because, hidden within him, the shameful weight
presses him down.  Whosoever, therefore, is subjected to any one of
these diseases is forbidden to offer loaves of bread to the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, lest in
sooth he should be of no avail for expiating the sins of others, being
one who is still ravaged by his own.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p6"></span>And now, having briefly shewn after
what manner one who is worthy should come to pastoral authority, and
after what manner one who is unworthy should be greatly afraid, let us
now demonstrate after what manner one who has attained to it worthily
should live in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[7b:1267](2120245.htm#fr_1266.md) <span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4"></span> The designations here given of the
bodily imperfections, enumerated in [Levit.
xxi](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.1"></span>. as disqualifying for priestly
functions, are the same as those in the Tridentine edition of the
Vulgate, except that instead of *herniosus* Gregory has *ponderosus*,
which was a word used in the same sense, denoting one suffering from
rupture (Cf. Augustine, *De Civitate Dei, Lib. ult., cap*. viii.).  The
idea expressed by the latter word, and carried out in Gregory’s
application, was that of the weight (*pondus*), or downward pressure, of
the intestines in a ruptured person.  The Hebrew Bible (see A.V.), and
also the rendering of the LXX. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.2"></span>μονόρχις</span>), conveys a different
idea of the ailment intended.  The cutaneous diseases specified are
denoted, here as in the Vulgate, by *jugas scabies* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.3"></span>ψώρα ἀγρία</span>,
LXX.; *scurvy*, A.V.) and *impetigo* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.4"></span>λειχὴν</span>, LXX.; *scabbed* A.V.). 
Whatever may be the exact meaning of the original Hebrew words,
Gregory’s conception of these diseases evidently was that the former was
a chronic and painful eruption, proceeding from internal heat, and the
latter a painless, but disfiguring, affection of the skin.  The diseases
of the eye, with regard to which the Hebrew (and consequently our A.V.)
differs from the LXX. and Vulgate, are denoted by *lippus* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.5"></span>πτίλλος τοὺς
οφθαλμούς</span>, LXX.), and *albuginem habens* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.6"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iv.ii.xii-p4.7"></span>φηλος</span>, LXX.);
of which Gregory’s conception was that the former was an affection, not
properly of the eye, but eyelid, the flux from which impaired the power
of vision, while the latter was an obscuration of the pupil itself,
exhibiting a white colour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II](2120246.md)
