[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120498)  [Next](2120500.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xiii-p2"></span>To Theotistus.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xiii-p3"></span>Gregory to Theotistus, kinsman of the
Emperor.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xiii-p4"></span>We know that the Christianity of your
Excellency is always intent on good works and therefore we provide for
you occasions for reaping reward, which you are certain to be glad of,
so that we by so providing may have a share in your merits.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xiii-p5"></span>We therefore inform you that John the
presbyter, the bearer of these presents, has come out free from those by
whom he had been accused.  For having, according to his request held a
council, and subjected his faith to a subtle scrutiny, we found him
guiltless of any wrong confession.  And, inasmuch as he appeared to be,
by the mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>God</span>, a professor and follower of
the right faith, we absolved him by our definite sentence; especially as
his accusers professed that they did not know what the heresy of the
Marcionists, which they spoke of, was.  On this account, saluting you
with paternal affection, we request you to protect him with the grace of
your favour.  And, lest any one hereafter should be disposed to afflict
him to no purpose, or in any way to cause him annoyance in this matter,
let the advocacy of your Excellency so protest and defend him—and this
the more instantly in consideration of your own reward—that no unjust
affliction may any more consume him, and that the Creator and Redeemer
of the human race, whom you worship with a sincere confession, may
recompense your action in this behalf among your many good works.  The
month of October.  Indiction 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop.](2120500.md)
