[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120072)  [Next](2120074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter LXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p2.1"></span>From Three Gallic Bishops to St.
Leo.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p3"></span>Ceretius, Salonius and Veranus to the
holy <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p3.1"></span>Lord</span>,
most blessed father, and pope most worthy of the Apostolic See, Leo.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p4"></span>I.  *They congratulate and thank Leo
for the Tome.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p5"></span>Having perused your Excellency’s
letter, which you composed for instruction in the Faith, and sent to the
bishop of Constantinople, we thought it our duty, being enriched with so
great a wealth of doctrine, to pay our debt of thanks by at least
inditing you a letter.  For we appreciate your fatherly solicitude on
our behalf, and confess that we are the more indebted to your preventing
care because we now have the benefit of the remedy before experiencing
the evils.  For knowing that those remedies are well-nigh too late which
are applied after the infliction of the wounds, you admonish us with the
voice of loving forethought to arm ourselves with those Apostolic means
of defence.  We acknowledge frankly, most blessed pope <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402.md) , with what singular loving-kindness
you have imparted to us the innermost thoughts of your breast, by the
efficacy of which you secure the safety of others:  and while you
extract the old Serpent’s infused poison from the hearts of others,
standing as it were on the watch-tower of Love, with Apostolic care and
watchfulness you cry aloud, lest the enemy come on us unawares and off
our guard, lest careless security expose us to attack, O holy Lord, most
blessed father and pope, most worthy of the Apostolic See.  Moreover we,
who specially belong to you <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403.md) ,
are filled with a great and unspeakable delight, because this special
statement of your teaching is so highly regarded wherever the Churches
meet together, that the unanimous opinion is expressed that the primacy
of the Apostolic See is rightfully there assigned, from whence the
oracles of the Apostolic Spirit still receive their interpretations.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p8"></span>II.  *They ask him to correct or add to
their copy of the Tome*.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p9"></span>Therefore, if you deem it worth while,
we entreat your holiness to run through and correct any mistake of the
copyist in this work, so valuable both now and in the future, which we
have had committed to parchment <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md)
, in our desire to preserve it, or if you have devised anything further
in your zeal, which will profit all who read, give orders in your loving
care that it be added to this copy, so that not only many holy bishops
our brethren throughout the provinces of Gaul, but also many of your
sons among the laity, who greatly desire to see this letter for the
revelation of the Truth, may be permitted, when it is sent back to us,
corrected by your holy hand, to transcribe, read and keep it.  If you
think fit, we are anxious that our messengers should return soon, in
order that we may the speedier have an account of your good health over
which to rejoice:  for your well-being is our joy and health.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p11"></span>May Christ the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p11.1"></span>Lord</span> long keep your eminence
mindful of our humility, O holy Lord, most blessed father and pope most
worthy of the Apostolic See.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p12"></span> <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-Page_63"></span>I, Ceretius, your adopted (son?), salute
your apostleship, commending me to your prayers.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p13"></span>I, Salonius, your adorer, salute your
apostleship, entreating the aid of your prayers.

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p14"></span>I, Veranus, the worshipper of your
apostleship, salute your blessedness, and beseech you to pray for me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_402"></span>[62:403](2120073.htm#fr_402.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p6"></span> Cf. Lett. XVII. n. 2a.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[62:404](2120073.htm#fr_403.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p7"></span> *Peculiares tui.*  So in each one’s
autograph subscription at the end of the letter Ceretius calls himself
*susceptus vester*, Salonius *venerator vester*, and Veranus *cultor
vestri apostolatus*.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[62:405](2120073.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxiii-p10"></span> *Foliis.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theodosius Augustus.](2120074.md)
