[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120404)  [Next](2120406.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xix-p2"></span>*To Sabinus, Guardian (Defensorem).*

<span id="iii.v.iii.xix-p3"></span>Gregory to Sabinus, Guardian of
Sardinia.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xix-p4"></span>Certain serious matters having come
to our ears which require canonical correction, we therefore charge thy
Experience not to neglect to cause Januarius, our brother and
fellow-bishop, together with John the notary, to appear before us with
all speed, all excuses being laid aside, that in his presence what has
been reported to us may be subjected to a thorough investigation. 
Further, if the religious women Pompeiana and Theodosia, according to
their request, should wish to come hither, afford them your succour in
all ways, that they may be able, through your assistance, to accomplish
their desires:  but especially be careful by all means to bring with you
the most eloquent Isidore, as he has requested, that, the merits of his
case which he is known to have against the Church of Caralis having been
fully gone into, he may be able to have it legally terminated.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xix-p5"></span>Furthermore, some personal
misdemeanours having been reported to us of the presbyter Epiphanius, it
is necessary for you to investigate everything diligently, and to make
haste to bring at the same time with you the women with whom he is said
to have sinned, or others whom you suppose to know anything about the
matter; that so the truth may be clearly laid open to the rigour of
ecclesiastical discipline.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xix-p6"></span>Now you will take care to accomplish
all these things so efficiently as to lay yourself open to no blame for
negligence, knowing that it will be entirely at your peril if this our
order should in any way be slackly executed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXVIII](2120406.md)
