[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120159)  [Next](2120161.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.cl"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.cl-p1.1"></span>Letter CLVI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.cl-p2.1"></span>To Leo Augustus.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Leo Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p4"></span>I.  *There is no need to open the question
of doctrine again now.*

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p5"></span>Your clemency’s letter, which was full of
vigorous faith and of the light of truth, I have respectfully received,
which I wish I could obey, even in the matter of my personal attendance,
which your Majesty thinks necessary; for then I should gain the greater
advantage from the sight of your splendour.  But I believe you will
approve of my view when reason has shown it preferable.  For since with
holy and spiritual zeal you consistently maintain the Church’s peace,
and nothing is more conducive to the defence of the Faith than to adhere
to those things which have been incontrovertibly defined under the
unceasing guidance of the Holy Spirit, we shall seem <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574.md) to be doing our best to upset <span
id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="ii.iv.cl-Page_100"></span>the
decrees, and at the bidding of a heretic’s petition to overthrow the
authorities which the universal Church has adopted, and thus to remove
all limits from the conflicts of Churches, and giving full rein to
rebellion, to extend rather than appease contentions.  And hence because
after the disgraceful scenes at the synod of Ephesus, whereat through
the wickedness of Dioscorus the catholic Faith was rejected, and
Eutyches’ heresy accepted, nothing more useful could be devised for the
preservation of the Christian Faith than that the holy Synod of
Chalcedon should rescind his wicked acts, and that such care should be
bestowed thereat on heavenly doctrine, that nothing should linger in any
one’s mind in disagreement with the utterances of either the Prophets or
the Apostles, such moderation of course being observed that only the
persistent rebels should be cast off from the unity of the Church, and
no one who was penitent should be denied pardon, what more in accordance
with men’s expectations or with religion will your Majesty be able to
decree, than that no one henceforth be permitted to attack what has been
determined by decrees which are Divine rather than human, lest they be
truly worthy but to lose <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cl-p6.1"></span>God’s</span> gift, who have dared to doubt
concerning His Truth?

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p7"></span>II.  *The proposal to reconsider the
question proceeds from Antichrist or the Devil himself*.

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p8"></span>Since, therefore, the universal Church has
become a rock (*petra*) through the building up of that original
Rock <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575.md) , and the first of the
Apostles, the most blessed Peter, heard the voice of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cl-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> saying, “Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock (*petra*) I will build My Church <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576.md) ,” who is there who dare assail such
impregnable strength, unless he be either antichrist or the devil, who,
abiding unconverted in his wickedness, is anxious to sow lies by the
vessels of wrath which are suited to his treachery, whilst under the
false name of diligence he pretends to be in search of the Truth.  And
his unrestrained madness and blind wickedness has deservedly brought
contempt and disrepute on himself, so that while he rages against the
holy church of Alexandria with diabolical purpose, men may learn the
character of those who desire to reconsider the Synod of Chalcedon.  For
it cannot possibly have been that an opinion was there expressed
contrary to the holy Synod of Nicæa, as the heretics falsely maintain,
who pretend that they hold the faith of the Nicene Council, in which our
holy and venerable fathers, being assembled against Arius, affirmed not
that the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cl-p10.2"></span>Lord’s</span>
Flesh, but that the Son’s Godhead was *homoousion* with the Father,
whereas in the Council of Chalcedon against the blasphemy of Eutyches,
it was defined that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cl-p10.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ took the reality of
our body from the substance of the Virgin-mother.

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p11"></span>III.  *All the bishops of Christendom
agree with him in this.*

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p12"></span>Therefore in addressing our most
Christian Emperor, who is worthy to be classed among the champions of
Christ, I use the freedom of the catholic Faith and fearlessly exhort
you to throw in your lot with Apostles and Prophets; firmly to despise
and reject those who have deprived themselves of their Christian name,
and not to let blasphemous parricides, who, it is agreed, wish to annul
the Faith, discuss that Faith under treacherous pretexts.  For since the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cl-p12.1"></span>Lord</span> has
enriched your clemency with such insight into His mystery, you ought
unhesitatingly to consider that the kingly power has been conferred on
you not for the governance of the world alone but more especially for
the guardianship of the Church:  that by quelling wicked attempts you
may both defend that which has been rightly decreed, and restore true
peace where there has been disturbance, that is to say by deposing
usurpers <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577.md) of the rights of others
and reinstating the ancient Faith in the See of Alexandria, that by your
reforms <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cl-p13.1"></span>God’s</span>
wrath may be appeased, and so He take not vengeance for their doings on
a people hitherto religious, but forgive them.  Set before the eyes of
your heart, venerable Emperor, the fact that all the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cl-p13.2"></span>Lord’s</span> priests which
are in all the world, are beseeching you on behalf of that Faith,
wherein is Redemption for the whole world.  In which those maintainers
of the Apostolic Faith more particularly appeal to you who have presided
over the Church of Alexandria, entreating your Majesty not to allow
heretics who have rightfully been condemned for their perversity, to
continue in their usurpation <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578.md) ;
for, whether you look at the wickedness of their error or consider the
deed which their madness has perpetrated, not only are they unable to be
admitted to the dignity of the priesthood, but they even deserve to be
cut off from the name of Christian.  For—and I entreat your Majesty’s
forgiveness for saying so—they to some extent dim your own splendour,
most glorious Emperor, when such treacherous parricides dare to ask for
<span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="ii.iv.cl-Page_101"></span>that which even the guiltless could not
lawfully obtain.

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p15"></span>IV.  *The difference between the two
petitions which have been presented to the Emperor.*

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p16"></span>Petitions have been presented to your
Majesty <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579.md) , copies of which you
subjoined to your letter.  But in that which comes in deprecation from
the catholics, a list of signatures is contained:  and because their
case had good reason in it, the names of individuals, and even their
dignified rank is confidently disclosed.  But in that, which heretical
intrusion has not feared to offer to our orthodox Emperor under the
vague sanction of a motley body, all particular names are withheld for
this reason, lest not only the paucity of members but also their worth
might be discovered.  For they think it expedient to conceal their
number, though their quality is indicated, and not improperly they are
afraid to proclaim their position, seeing that they deserve to be
condemned.  In the one document therefore is contained the petition of
catholics, in the other the fictions of heretics are set forth.  Here
the overthrow of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cl-p17.1"></span>Lord’s</span> priests, of the whole Christian
people, and of the monasteries is bemoaned:  there is displayed the
continuance of gigantic wrongs, so that what ought never to have been
heard of <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580.md) is allowed to be widely
extended.

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p19"></span>V.  *It is a great opportunity for the
Emperor to show his faith.*

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p20"></span>Is it not clear which side you ought to
support and which to oppose, if the Church of Alexandria, which has
always been the “house of prayer,” is not now to be “a den of
robbers <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md) ?”  For surely it is
manifest that through the cruellest and maddest savagery all the light
of the heavenly mysteries is extinguished.  The offering of the
sacrifice is cut off, the hallowing of the chrism has failed <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582.md) , and from the murderous hands of
wicked men all the mysteries have withdrawn themselves.  Nor can there
be any manner of doubt what decree ought to be passed on these then, who
after unutterable acts of sacrilege, after shedding the blood of a most
highly reputed priest, and scattering the ashes of his burnt body to be
the sport of the winds of heaven, dare to demand for themselves the
rights of a usurped dignity and to arraign before councils the
inviolable Faith of the Apostolic teaching.  Great, therefore, is the
opportunity for you to add to your diadem from the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cl-p22.1"></span>Lord’s</span> hand the crown
of faith also, and to triumph over the Church’s foes:  for, if it be
matter of praise to you to vanquish the armies of opposing nations, how
great will be the glory of freeing from its mad tyrant the church of
Alexandria, the affliction of which is an injury to all Christians?

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p23"></span>VI.  *He promises more detailed
statements on the Faith subsequently, and begs him to correct certain
things in which Anatolius is remiss.*

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p24"></span>But in order that my correspondence may
have the effect on your Majesty of a mouth to mouth colloquy, I have
seen that whatever suggestions I would make about our common Faith, must
be conveyed in subsequent communications <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583.md) .  And lest the pages of this epistle
reach too great a length, I have comprised in another letter what is
agreeable to the maintenance of the catholic Faith, in order that,
though the published statements of the Apostolic See were sufficient,
yet these additional statements might also break down the snares of the
heretics.  For your Majesty’s priestly and Apostolic mind ought to be
still further kindled to righteous vengeance by this pestilential evil,
which mars the purity of the church of Constantinople, in which are
found certain clerics, who agree with the interpretations of the
heretics and within the very heart of the Church assist them by their
support <span id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md) .  In removing whom if
my brother Anatolius is found remiss through too good-natured leniency,
vouchsafe to show your faith by administering this remedy also to the
Church, that such men be driven not only from the ranks of the clergy,
but also from dwelling in the city.  I commend to you your Majesty’s
loyal subjects, bishop Julian and presbyter Aetius, with a request that
you will deign to listen quietly to their suggestions in defence of the
catholic Faith, because they are in good truth men who may be found
helpful to your faith in all things.  Dated the 1st of Dec. in the
consulship of the illustrious Constantine and Rufus (457).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_574"></span>[99:575](2120160.htm#fr_574.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p6"></span> i.e. by carrying out your plan.  The
appeal to the Emperor’s orthodoxy must be regarded as diplomatic rather
than accurate:  for Leo was the nominee of Arianism, if not himself an
Arian.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[100:576](2120160.htm#fr_575.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p9"></span> *Per illius principalis petræ
ædificationem*:  here *petra* is apparently Christ Himself, cf. Letter
XXVIII. chap. 5, and Bright’s n. 64.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[100:577](2120160.htm#fr_576.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p10"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.iv.cl-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[100:578](2120160.htm#fr_577.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p13"></span> Sc. Timothy Ælurus.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[100:579](2120160.htm#fr_578.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p14"></span> *Pervasione*, others read *persuasione*
(false opinion).

<span id="fn_579"></span>[101:580](2120160.htm#fr_579.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p17"></span> These had come, one from either side, as
the sequel shows:  that of the catholics was signed by fourteen bishops,
four presbyters, and two deacons (Ball.).

<span id="fn_580"></span>[101:581](2120160.htm#fr_580.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p18"></span> *Audiri*:  others *auderi* (to have been
ventured on).

<span id="fn_581"></span>[101:582](2120160.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p21"></span> S. [Luke xix.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#046.md)<span id="ii.iv.cl-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[101:583](2120160.htm#fr_582.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p22"></span> Cf. Serm. LXVI. chap. 2, *nobiscum est
signaculum circumcisionis, sanctificatio chrismatum, consecratio
sacerdotum*:  see Bright’s n. 90, from which we learn that “this chrism
was that which, from the second century, had been administered in
connection with Confirmation.”  This rite, which had at first been part
of the Baptism itself, was now apparently performed at a shorter or
longer interval after Baptism according to the convenience of the
Bishop:  cf. Serm. LXXVII. 1.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[101:584](2120160.htm#fr_583.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p25"></span> Viz. Letters CLXII., CLXIV., and esp.
CLXV. (which last is in a large measure a rescription of Letter CXXIV.
q.v.).

<span id="fn_584"></span>[101:585](2120160.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cl-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cl-p26"></span> Two of these are mentioned by name
subsequently, e.g. in Lett. CLVII. (to Anatolius), chap. 4, viz. Atticus
a presbyter and Andrew, in which chapter he blames Anatolius severely
for his double-dealing (*cogor vehementius de tua dissimulatione
causari, etc*.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Anatolius, Bishop of Constantinople.](2120161.md)
