[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120117)  [Next](2120119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.cviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p1.1"></span>Letter CXIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p2.1"></span>To Julian, Bishop of Cos.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p3"></span>Leo, bishop of Rome, to Julian, bishop
of Cos.

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p4"></span>I.  *After thanks for Julian’s sympathy
he complains of the deposition of Aetius from the archdeaconry.*

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p5"></span>I acknowledge in your letter, beloved,
the feelings of brotherly love, in that you sympathize with us in true
grief at the many grievous evils we have borne.  But we pray that these
things which the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> has either allowed or wished us
to suffer, may avail to the correction of those who live through
them <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) , and that adversities may
cease through the cessation of offences.  Both which results will follow
through the mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p6.1"></span>God</span>, if only He remove the scourge
and turn the hearts of His people to Himself.  But as you, brother, are
saddened by the hostilities which have raged around us, so I am made
anxious because, as your letter indicates, the treacherous attacks of
heretics are not set at rest in the church of Constantinople, and men
seek occasion to persecute those who have been the defenders of the
catholic Faith.  For so long as Aetius is removed from his office of
archdeacon under pretence of promotion <span
id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) and Andrew is taken into his place,
who had been cast off for associating with heretics; so long as respect
is shown to the accusers of Flavian of holy memory, and the partners or
disciples of that most pious confessor are put down, it is only too
clearly shown what pleases the bishop of the church itself.  Towards
whom I put off taking action till I hear the merits of the case and
await his own dealing with me in the letter our son Aetius tells me he
will send, giving opportunity for voluntary correction, whereby I desire
my vexation to be appeased.  Nevertheless, I have written to our most
clement Prince and the most pious Augusta about these things which
concern the peace of the Church; and I do not doubt they will in the
devoutness of their faith take heed lest a heresy already condemned
should succeed in springing up again to the detriment of their own
glorious work.

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p8"></span>II.  *He asks Julian to act for him as
Anatolius is deficient in vigour.*

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p9"></span>See then, beloved brother, that you
bestow <span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="ii.iv.cviii-Page_83"></span>the necessary thought on the cares of
the Apostolic See, which by her rights as your mother commends to you,
who were nourished at her breast, the defence of the catholic Truth
against Nestorians and Eutychians, in order that, supported by the
Divine help, you may not cease to watch the interests of the city of
Constantinople, lest at any time the storms of error arise within her. 
And because the faith of our glorious Princes is so great that you may
confidently suggest what is necessary to them, use their piety for the
benefit of the universal Church.  But if ever you consult me, beloved,
on things which you think doubtful, my reply shall not fail to supply
instruction, so that, apart from cases which ought to be decided by the
inquiries of the bishops of each particular church, you may act as my
legate and undertake the special charge of preventing the Nestorian or
Eutychian heresy reviving in any quarter; because the bishop of
Constantinople does not possess catholic vigour, and is not very jealous
either for the mystery of man’s salvation or for his own reputation: 
whereas if he had any spiritual activity, he ought to have considered by
whom he was ordained, and whom he succeeded in such a way as to follow
the blessed Flavian rather than the instruments of his promotion.  And,
therefore, when our most religious Princes deign in accordance with my
entreaties to reprimand our brother Anatolius on those matters, which
deservedly come under blame, join your diligence to theirs, beloved,
that all causes of offences may be removed by the application of the
fullest correction and he cease from injuring our son Aetius.  For with
a catholic-minded bishop even though there was something which seemed
calculated to annoy in his archdeacon, it ought to have been passed over
from regard for the Faith, rather than that the most worthless heretic
should take the place of a catholic.  And so when I have learnt the rest
of the story, I shall then more clearly gather what ought to be done. 
For, meanwhile, I have thought better to restrain my vexation and to
exercise patience that there might be room for forgiveness.

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p10"></span>III.  *He asks for further information
about the rioting in Palestine and in Egypt.*

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p11"></span>But with regard to the monks of
Palestine, who are said this long time to be in a state of mutiny, I
know not by what spirit they are at present moved.  Nor has any one yet
explained to me what reasons they seem to bring forward for their
discontent:  whether for instance, they wish to serve the Eutychian
heresy by such madness, or whether they are irreconcilably vexed that
their bishop could have been misled into that blasphemy, whereby, in
spite of the very associations of the holy spots, from which issued
instruction for the whole world, he has alienated himself from the Truth
of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p11.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Incarnation, and in their
opinion that cannot be venial in him which in others had to be wiped out
by absolution.  And therefore I desire to be more fully informed about
these things that proper means may be taken for their correction;
because it is one thing to arm oneself wickedly against the Faith, and
another thing to be immoderately disturbed on behalf of it.  You must
know, too, that the documents which Aetius the presbyter told me before
had been dispatched, and the epitome of the Faith which you say you have
sent, have not yet arrived.  Hence, if an opportunity offers itself of a
more expeditious messenger, I shall be glad for any information that may
seem expedient to be sent me as soon as possible.  I am anxious to know
about the monks of Egypt <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) ,
whether they have regained their peacefulness and their faith, and about
the church of Alexandria, what trustworthy tidings reaches you:  I wish
you to know what I wrote to its bishop or his ordainers, or the clergy,
and have therefore sent you a copy of the letter.  You will learn also
what I have said to our most clement Prince and our most religious
Empress from the copies sent.

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p13"></span>IV.  *He asks for a Latin translation
of the acts of Chalcedon.*

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p14"></span>I wish to know whether my letter <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) has been delivered to you, brother,
which I sent you by Basil the deacon, upon the Faith of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.cviii-p15.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
Incarnation, while Flavian of holy memory was still alive; for I fancy
you have never made any comment on its contents.  We have no very clear
information about the acts of the Synod, which were drawn up at the time
of the council at Chalcedon, on account of the difference of
language <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) .  And therefore I
specially enjoin upon you, brother, that you have the whole collected
into one volume, accurately translated of course into Latin, that we may
not be in doubt on any portion of the proceedings, and that there may be
no manner of uncertainty after you have taken pains to bring it fully
within my understanding.  Dated March 11th, in the consulship of the
illustrious Opilio (453).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_474"></span>[82:475](2120118.htm#fr_474) <span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p6"></span> *Servatorum.*  I am not sure whether
this is the right sense; others read *multorum*.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[82:476](2120118.htm#fr_475) <span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p7"></span> In Lett. CXI., chap. ii., he is said
to have been *cœmeterio deputatis*, and, according to Quesnel, when the
cemeteries (or catacombs) had no longer to be used as refuges for the
persecuted Christians, the custom had grown up of putting priests in
charge to perpetuate the memory of the martyrs therein buried; in
process of time, when love grew cold, this was looked upon as a sort of
exile, and an onerous duty in consequence.

<span id="fn_476"></span>[83:477](2120118.htm#fr_476) <span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p12"></span> There had been riots among the monks
of Egypt about the appointment of Proterius as bishop, instead of
Dioscorus, deposed.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[83:478](2120118.htm#fr_477) <span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p15"></span> This is Letter XXXV. (*q.v*.).

<span id="fn_478"></span>[83:479](2120118.htm#fr_478) <span
id="ii.iv.cviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cviii-p16"></span> It is, of course, well known that Leo
knew no Greek whatever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Bishops Assembled in Synod at Chalcedon.](2120119)
