[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120277)  [Next](2120279) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p2"></span>How those who use food intemperately
and those who use it sparingly are to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 20.)  Differently to be
admonished are the gluttonous and the abstinent.  For superfluity of
speech, levity of conduct, and lechery accompany the former; but the
latter often the sin of impatience, and often that of pride.  For were
it not the case that immoderate loquacity carries away the gluttonous,
that rich man who is said to have fared sumptuously every day would not
burn more sorely than elsewhere in his tongue, saying, *Father Abraham,
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his
finger in water, and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame*
([Luke xvi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p3.1"></span>).  By these words it is surely shewn that
in his daily feasting he had frequently sinned by his tongue, seeing
that, while burning all over, he demanded to be cooled especially in his
tongue.  Again, that levity of conduct follows closely upon gluttony
sacred authority testifies, when it says, *The people sat down to eat
and drink, and rose up to play* ([Exod. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p3.2"></span>).  For the most part also edacity leads
us even to lechery, because, when the belly is distended by repletion,
the stings of lust are excited.  Whence also to the cunning foe, who
opened the sense of the first man by lust for the apple, but bound it in
a noose of sin, it is said by the divine voice, *On breast and belly
shalt thou creep* ([Gen. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p3.3"></span>); as if it were plainly said to him, In
thought and in maw thou shalt have dominion over human hearts.  That
lechery follows upon gluttony the prophet testifies, denouncing hidden
things while he speaks of open ones, when he says, *The chief of the
cooks broke down the walls of Jerusalem* ([Jer.
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009), [2 Kings
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#010)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p3.4"></span>) <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) .  For the chief of the cooks is
the belly, to which the cooks pay observance with great care, that it
may itself be delectably filled with viands.  But the walls of Jerusalem
are the virtues of the soul, elevated to a longing for supernal peace. 
The chief of the cooks, therefore, throws down the walls of Jerusalem,
because, when the belly is distended with gluttony, the virtues of the
soul are destroyed through lechery.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p5"></span>On the other hand, were it not that
impatience commonly shakes the abstinent out of the bosom of
tranquillity, Peter would by no means, when saying, *Supply in your
faith virtue, and in your virtue knowledge, and in your knowledge
abstinence* ([2 Pet. i. 5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>), have straightway vigilantly added, *And
in your abstinence patience.*  For he foresaw that the patience which he
admonished them to have would be wanting to the abstinent.  Again, were
it not that the sin of pride sometimes pierces through the cogitations
of the abstinent, Paul would by no means have said, *Let not him that
eateth not judge him that eateth* ([Rom. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p5.2"></span>).  And again, speaking to others, while
glancing at the maxims of such as gloried in the virtue of abstinence,
he added, *Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in superstition and
humility, and for not sparing of the body, not in any honour for the
satisfying of the flesh* ([Coloss. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p5.3"></span>).  Here it is to be noted that the
excellent preacher, in his argument, joins a show of humility to
superstition, because, when the flesh is worn more than needs by
abstinence, humility is displayed outwardly, but on account of this very
humility there is grievous pride within.  And unless the mind were
sometimes puffed up by the virtue of abstinence, the arrogant Pharisee
would by no means have studiously numbered this among his great merits,
saying, *I fast twice in the week* ([Luke xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p5.4"></span>).

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p6"></span>Thus the gluttonous are to be
admonished, that in giving themselves to the enjoyment of dainties they
pierce not themselves through with the sword of lechery; and that they
perceive how great loquacity, how great levity of mind, lie in wait for
them through eating; lest, while they softly serve the belly, they
become cruelly bound in the nooses of vice.  <span id="page_44b">p.
44b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-Page_44b"></span>For by so much the
further do we go back from our second parent as by immoderate
indulgence, when the hand is stretched out for food, we renew the fall
of our first parent.  But, on the other hand, the abstinent are to be
admonished ever anxiously to look out, lest, while they fly the vice of
gluttony, still worse vices be engendered as it were of virtue lest,
while they macerate the flesh, their spirit break out into impatience;
and so there be no virtue in the vanquishing of the flesh, the spirit
being overcome by anger.  Sometimes, moreover, while the mind of the
abstinent keeps anger down, it is corrupted, as it were, by a foreign
joy coming in, and loses all the good of abstinence in that it fails to
guard itself from spiritual vices.  Hence it is rightly said through the
prophet, *In the days of your fasts are found your wills* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>, lxx.).  And shortly after, *Ye fast for
debates and strifes, and ye smite with the fists* ([Isa.
58.3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p6.2"></span>.).  For the will pertains to delight, the
fist to anger.  In vain, then, is the body worn by abstinence, if the
mind, abandoned to disorderly emotions, is dissipated by vices.  And
again, they are to be admonished that, while they keep up their
abstinence without abatement, they suppose not this to be of eminent
virtue before the hidden judge; lest, if it be perchance supposed to be
of great merit, the heart be lifted up to haughtiness.  For hence it is
said through the prophet, *Is it such a fast that I have chosen?  But
break thy bread to the hungry, and bring the needy and the wanderers
into thine house* ([Isa. 58.5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p6.3"></span>).

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p7"></span>In this matter it is to be considered
how small the virtue of abstinence is accounted, seeing that it is not
commended but for other virtues.  Hence Joel says, *Sanctify a fast.* 
For indeed to sanctify a fast is to shew abstinence of the flesh to be
worthy of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p7.1"></span>God</span> by other good things being
added to it.  The abstinent are to be admonished that they then offer to
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p7.2"></span>God</span> an
abstinence that pleases Him, when they bestow on the indigent the
nourishment which they withhold from themselves.  For we should wisely
attend to what is blamed by the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p7.3"></span>Lord</span> through the prophet, saying,
*When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month far these
seventy years, did ye at all fast a fast unto Me?  And when ye did eat
and drink, did ye not eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves*
([Zech. 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p7.4"></span> *seq*.)?  For a man fasts not to <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p7.5"></span>God</span> but to
himself, if what he withholds from his belly for a time he gives not to
the needy, but keeps to be offered afterwards to his belly.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8"></span>Wherefore, lest either gluttonous
appetite throw the one sort off their guard, or the afflicted flesh trip
up the other by elation, let the former hear this from the mouth of the
Truth, *And take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged in surfeiting and drunkenness and cares of this world*
([Luke xxi. 34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.1"></span>).  And in the same place there is added a
profitable fear; *And so that day come upon you unawares.  For as a
snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
earth* ([Luke 21.35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.2"></span>).  Let the latter hear, *Not that which
goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the
mouth, this defileth a man* ([Matth. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.3"></span>).  Let the former hear, *Meat for the
belly, and the belly far meats; but <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.4"></span>God</span> shall destroy both it and them*
([1 Cor. vi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.5"></span>).  And again, *Not in rioting and
drunkenness* ([Rom. xiii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.6"></span>).  And again, *Meat commendeth us not to
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.7"></span>God</span>* ([1
Cor. viii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.8"></span>).  Let the latter hear, *To the pure all
things are pure:  but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is
nothing pure* ([Tit. i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.9"></span>).  Let the former hear, *Whose <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.10"></span>God</span> is their
belly, and whose glory is in their own confusion* ([Philip. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.11"></span>).  Let the latter hear, *Some shall
depart from the faith;* and a little after, *Forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.12"></span>God</span> hath created to be received
with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth* ([1 Tim.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.13"></span>).  Let those hear, *It is good neither
to eat flesh nor to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother
stumbleth* ([Rom. xiv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.14"></span>).  Let these hear, *Use a little wine
far thy stomach’s sake and thine often infirmities* ([1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.15"></span>).  Thus both the former may learn not to
desire inordinately the food of the flesh, and the latter not dare to
condemn the creature of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p8.16"></span>God</span>, which they lust not after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[43b:1276](2120278.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p4"></span> The designation (Rab-tabbachim) of
Nabuzaradan, who acted for Nebuchadnezzar after the capture of
Jerusalem, is rendered in the LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xx-p4.2"></span>ρχιμάγειρος</span>, i.e. Chief Cook.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How to be admonished are those who give away what is their own,
and those who seize what belongs to others.](2120279)
