[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120578)  [Next](2120580.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p2"></span>To Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p4"></span>Our common son, the bearer of
these presents, when he brought the letters of your Holiness found me
sick, and has left me sick; whence it has ensued that the scanty water
of my brief epistle has been hardly able to exude to the large fountain
of your Blessedness.  But it was a heavenly boon that, while in a state
of bodily pain, I received the letter of your Holiness to lift me up
with joy for the instruction of the heretics of the city of Alexandria,
and the concord of the faithful, to such an extent that the very joy of
my mind moderated the severity of my suffering.  And indeed we rejoice
with new exultation to hear of your good doings, though at the same time
we by no means suppose that it is a new thing for you to act thus
perfectly.  For that the people of holy Church increases, that spiritual
crops of corn for the heavenly garner are multiplied, we never doubted
that this was from the grace of Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p4.1"></span>God</span> which flowed largely to
you, most blessed ones.  We therefore render thanks to Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p4.2"></span>God</span>, that we
see fulfilled in you what is written, *Where there is much increase,
there the strength of the oxen is manifest* ([Prov. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p4.3"></span>).  For, if a strong ox had not drawn
the plough of the tongue over the ground of the hearts of hearers, so
great an increase of the faithful would by no means have sprung up.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p5"></span>But, since in the good things you
do I know that you also rejoice with others, I make you a return for
your favour, and announce things not unlike yours; for while the nation
of the Angli, placed in a corner of the world, remained up to this time
misbelieving in the worship of stocks and stones, I determined, through
the aid of your prayers for me, to send to it, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p5.1"></span>God</span> granting it, a monk of my
monastery for the purpose of preaching.  And he, having with my leave
been made bishop by the bishops of Germany, proceeded, with their aid
also, to the end of the world to the aforesaid nation; and already
letters have reached us telling us of his safety and his work; to the
effect that he and those that have been sent with him are resplendent
with such great miracles in the said nation that they seem to imitate
the powers of the apostles in the signs which they display.  Moreover,
at the solemnity of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p5.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Nativity which occurred
in this first indiction, more than ten thousand Angli are reported to
have been baptized by the same our brother and fellow-bishop.  This have
I told you, that you may know what you are effecting among the people of
Alexandria by speaking, and what in the ends of the world by praying. 
For your prayers are in the place where you are not, while your holy
operations are shewn in the place where you are.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p6"></span>In the next place, as to the
person of Eudoxius the heretic <span
id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751.md) , about whose error I have
discovered nothing in the Latin language, I rejoice that I have been
most abundantly satisfied by your Blessedness.  For you have adduced the
testimonies of the strong men, Basil, Gregory, and Epiphanius; and we
acknowledge him to be manifestly slain, at whom our heroes have cast so
many darts.  But with regard to these errors which are proved to have
arisen in the Church of Constantinople, you have replied on all heads
most learnedly, and as it became you to utter the judgment of so great a
see.  Whence we give thanks to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p7.1"></span>God</span>, that the tables of the
covenant are still in the ark of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p7.2"></span>God</span>.  For what is the priestly
heart but the ark of the covenant?  And since spiritual doctrine retains
its vigour therein, without doubt the tables of the law are lying in it.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p8"></span>Your Blessedness has also been
careful to declare that you do not now make use of proud titles, which
have sprung from a root of vanity, in writing to certain persons, and
<span id="page_241b">p. 241b</span> <span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-Page_241b"></span>you address me saying, *As you
have commanded.*  This word, *command*, I beg you to remove from my
hearing, since I know who I am, and who you are.  For in position you
are my brethren, in character my fathers.  I did not, then, command, but
was desirous of indicating what seemed to be profitable.  Yet I do not
find that your Blessedness has been willing to remember perfectly this
very thing that I brought to your recollection.  For I said that neither
to me nor to any one else ought you to write anything of the kind; and
lo, in the preface of the epistle which you have addressed to myself who
forbade it, you have thought fit to make use of a proud appellation,
calling me Universal Pope.  But I beg your most sweet Holiness to do
this no more, since what is given to another beyond what reason demands
is subtracted from yourself.  For as for me, I do not seek to be
prospered by words but by my conduct.  Nor do I regard that as an honour
whereby I know that my brethren lose their honour.  For my honour is the
honour of the universal Church:  my honour is the solid vigour of my
brethren.  Then am I truly honoured when the honour due to all and each
is not denied them.  For if your Holiness calls me Universal Pope, you
deny that you are yourself what you call me universally.  But far be
this from us.  Away with words that inflate vanity and wound charity.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p9"></span>And, indeed, in the synod of
Chalcedon and afterwards by subsequent Fathers, your Holiness knows that
this was offered to my predecessors <span
id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752.md) .  And yet not one of them would
ever use this title, that, while regarding the honour of all priests in
this world, they might keep their own before Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p10.1"></span>God</span>.  Lastly,
while addressing to you the greeting which is due, I beg you to deign to
remember me in your holy prayers, to the end that the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> for your
intercessions may absolve me from the bands of my sins, since my own
merits may not avail me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[240b:1752](2120579.htm#fr_1751.md) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p7"></span> Cf. VII. 4, and 34.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[241b:1753](2120579.htm#fr_1752.md) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xviii-p10"></span> Cf. V. 18, note 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXIII](2120580.md)
