[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120525)  [Next](2120527.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xl"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xl-p1.1"></span>Epistle LIX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xl-p2"></span>To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xl-p3"></span>Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xl-p4"></span>The Christianity of your Excellence has
been so truly known to us of old that we do not in the least doubt of
your goodness, but rather hold it to be in all ways certain that you
will devoutly and zealously concur with us in the cause of faith, and
supply most abundantly the succour of your religious sincerity.  Being
for this reason well assured, and greeting you with paternal charity, we
inform you that it has come to our knowledge how that the nation of the
Angli, by <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xl-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> permission, is <span
id="page_206b">p. 206b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.xl-Page_206b"></span>desirous of becoming Christian, but
that the priests who are in their neighbourhood have no pastoral
solicitude with regard to them.  And lest their souls should haply
perish in eternal damnation, it has been our care to send to them the
bearer of these presents, Augustine the servant of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xl-p4.2"></span>God</span>, whose zeal and
earnestness are well known to us, with other servants of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xl-p4.3"></span>God</span>; that through
them we might be able to learn their wishes, and, as far as is possible,
you also striving with us, to take thought for their conversion.  We
have also charged them that for carrying out this design they should
take with them presbyters from the neighbouring regions.  Let, then,
your Excellency, habitually prone to good works, on account as well of
our request as of regard to the fear of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xl-p4.4"></span>God</span>, deign to hold him as in all
ways commended to you, and earnestly bestow on him the favour of your
protection, and lend the aid of your patronage to his labour and, that
he may have the fullest fruit thereof, provide for his going secure
under your protection to the above-written nation of the Angli, to the
end that our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xl-p4.5"></span>God</span>, who has adorned you in this
world with good qualities well-pleasing to Him, may cause you to give
thanks here and in eternal rest with His saints.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xl-p5"></span>Furthermore, commending to your
Christianity our beloved son Candidus, presbyter and *rector* of the
patrimony of our Church which is situated in your parts, we beg that he
may in all things obtain the favour of your protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eulogius, Bishop.](2120527.md)
