[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120474)  [Next](2120476) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p2"></span>To Sebastian, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p3"></span>Gregory to Sebastian, Bishop of
Sirmium.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p4"></span>I have received the most sweet and
pleasant letter of thy Fraternity, which, though you are never absent
from my heart, has nevertheless made your Holiness as it were present
with me bodily.  But I beseech Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxi-p4.1"></span>God</span> to protect you with His right
hand, and to grant you a tranquil life here, and, when it shall please
Him, eternal rewards.  But I beg you, if you love me with that love
wherewith you always loved me when we were together, to pray for me more
earnestly, that so Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxi-p4.2"></span>God</span> may loose me from the bands of
my sins, and make me to stand free in His sight, released from the
burden of this corruption.  For, however inestimable be the sweetness of
the heavenly country for drawing one towards it, yet there are many
sorrows in this life to impel us daily to the love of heavenly things. 
And these only please me exceedingly from the very fact that they do not
allow anything to please me in this world.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p5"></span>For we can by no means describe, most
holy brother, what we suffer in this land at the hands of your friend,
the lord Romanus <span id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) .  Yet I may
briefly say that his malice towards us has surpassed the swords of the
Lombards; so that the enemies who kill us seem kinder than the judges of
the republic, who by their malice, rapines, and deceits wear us out with
anxiety.  And to bear at the same time the charge of bishops and clergy,
and also of monasteries and people, and to watch anxiously against the
plots of the enemy, and to be ever suspicious of the deceitfulness and
malice of the dukes; what labours and what sorrows all this involves,
your Fraternity may the more truly estimate as you more purely love me
who suffer these things

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p7"></span>Furthermore, while addressing you with
the greeting that I owe you, I inform you that it has come to my
knowledge from the report of Boniface the *defensor*, that our brother
the most holy lord Anastasius the patriarch <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) has wished to commit to you the
government of the Church in one of his cities, and that you have refused
your assent.  This your feeling and your wisdom I most gladly approve
of, and strongly commend; and I account you happy, and myself unhappy in
having consented at such a time as this to undertake the government of
the Church.  If, however, by any chance, in condescension to your
brethren, and as being intent on works of mercy, you should ever decide
to consent to such a proposal, I beg you by no means to prefer any one
else’s love to mine.  For there are in the island of Sicily Churches
without bishops, and, if by the guidance of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxi-p8.1"></span>God</span> you are pleased to take the
government of a Church, you will be able to do this better near the
threshold of the blessed apostle Peter, with his aid.  But if you are
not so pleased, remain happily as you are, that this resolution may
continue in you; and pray for us unhappy ones.  Now may Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p8.2"></span>God</span> keep you under
His protection, in whatever place it be His will that you should be, and
bring you to heavenly rewards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[178b:1610](2120475.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="iii.v.v.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p6"></span> Romanus Patricius, the Exarch.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[178b:1611](2120475.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="iii.v.v.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxi-p8"></span> Viz. of Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eulogius and Anastasius, Bishops.](2120476)
