[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120279)  [Next](2120281) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p1"></span> <span id="page_47b">p. 47b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-Page_47b"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
desire not the things of others, but keep their own; and those who give
of their own, yet seize on those of others.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 22.)  Differently to
be admonished are those who neither desire what belongs to others nor
bestow what is their own, and those who give of what they have, and yet
desist not from seizing on what belongs to others.  Those who neither
desire what belongs to others nor bestow what is their own are to be
admonished to consider carefully that the earth out of which they are
taken is common to all men, and therefore brings forth nourishment for
all in common.  Vainly, then, do those suppose themselves innocent, who
claim to their own private use the common gift of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p3.1"></span>God</span>; those who, in not imparting
what they have received, walk in the midst of the slaughter of their
neighbours; since they almost daily slay so many persons as there are
dying poor whose subsidies they keep close in their own possession. 
For, when we administer necessaries of any kind to the indigent, we do
not bestow our own, but render them what is theirs; we rather pay a debt
of justice than accomplish works of mercy.  Whence also the Truth
himself, when speaking of the caution required in shewing mercy, says,
Take heed that ye do not your justice before men ([Matth. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p3.2"></span>).  The Psalmist also, in agreement with
this sentence, says, He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor, his
justice endureth for ever ([Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p3.3"></span>).

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p4"></span>For, having first mentioned bounty
bestowed upon the poor, he would not call this mercy, but rather
justice:  for it is surely just that whosoever receive what is given by
a common <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> should use it in common. 
Hence also Solomon says, Whoso is just will give and will not spare
([Prov. xxi. 26](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p4.2"></span>).  They are to be admonished also
anxiously to take note how of the fig-tree that had no fruit the
rigorous husbandman complains that it even cumbers the ground.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p5"></span>For a fig-tree without fruit cumbers
the ground, when the soul of the niggardly keeps unprofitably what might
have benefited many.  A fig-tree without fruit cumbers the ground, when
the fool keeps barren under the shade of sloth a place which another
might have cultivated under the sun of good works.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p6"></span>But these are wont sometimes to say,
We use what has been granted us; we do not seek what belongs to others;
and, if we do nothing worthy of the reward of mercy, we still commit no
wrong.  So they think, because in truth they close the ear of their
heart to the words which are from heaven.  For the rich man in the
Gospel who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and feasted sumptuously
every day, is not said to have seized what belonged to others, but to
have used what was his own unfruitfully; and avenging hell received him
after this life, not because he did anything unlawful but because by
immoderate indulgence he gave up his whole self to what was lawful.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p7"></span>The niggardly are to be admonished
to take notice that they do <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p7.1"></span>God</span>, in the first place, this
wrong; that to Him Who gives them all they render in return no sacrifice
of mercy.  For hence the Psalmist says. *He will not give his
propitiation to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p7.2"></span>God</span>, nor the price of the
redemption of his soul* ([Psa.
49.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p7.3"></span> <span
id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) ).  For to give the price of
redemption is to return good deeds for preventing grace.  Hence John
cries aloud saying, *Now the axe is laid unto the root of the tree. 
Every tree which bringeth not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and
cast into the fire* ([Luke iii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p8.1"></span>).  Let those, therefore, who esteem
themselves guiltless because they do not seize on what belongs to others
look forward to the stroke of the axe that is nigh at hand, and lay
aside the torpor of improvident security, lest, while they neglect to
bear the fruit of good deeds, they be cut off from the present life
utterly, as it were from the greenness of the root.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p9"></span>But, on the other hand, those who
both give what they have and desist not from seizing on what belongs to
others are to be admonished not to desire to appear exceeding
munificent, and so be made worse from the outward show of good.  For
these, giving what is their own without discretion, not only, as we have
said above, fall into the murmuring of impatience, but, when want urges
them, are swept along even to avarice.  What, then, is more wretched
than the mind of those in whom avarice is born of bountifulness, and a
crop of sins is sown as it were from virtue?  First, then, they are to
be admonished to learn how to keep what is theirs reasonably, and then
in the end not to go about getting what is another’s.  For, if the root
of the fault is not burnt out in the profusion itself, the thorn of
avarice, exuberant through the branches, is never dried up.  So then,
cause for seizing is withdrawn, if the right of possession be first
adjusted well.  But then, further, let those who are admonished be told
how to give mercifully what they have, when they have learnt not to
confound the good of mercy by throwing into it the wickedness of
robbery.  For they violently exact what <span id="page_48b">p.
48b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-Page_48b"></span>they mercifully
bestow.  For it is one thing to shew mercy on account of our sins;
another thing to sin on account of shewing mercy; which can no longer
indeed be called mercy, since it cannot grow into sweet fruit, being
embittered by the poison of its pestiferous root.  For hence it is that
the <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span>
through the prophet rejects even sacrifices themselves, saying, *I the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p9.2"></span>Lord</span> love
judgment, and I hate robbery in a whole burnt offering* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p9.3"></span>).   Hence again He has said, *The
sacrifices of the ungodly are abominable, which are offered of
wickedness* ([Prov. xxi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p9.4"></span>).  Such persons also often withdraw
from the indigent what they give to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p9.5"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p10"></span>But the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> shews with what strong
censure he disowns them, saying through a certain wise man, *Whoso
offereth a sacrifice of the substance of the poor doeth as one that
killeth the son before the father’s eyes* ([Ecclesiasticus
34.20](../../../bib/apo/sir034.htm#020)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p10.2"></span>).  For what can be more intolerable
than the death of a son before his father’s eyes?  Wherefore it is shewn
with what great wrath this kind of sacrifice is beheld, in that it is
compared to the grief of a bereaved father.  And yet for the most part
people weigh well how much they give; but how much they seize they
neglect to consider.  They count, as it were, their wage, but refuse to
consider their defaults.  Let them hear therefore what is written, *He
that hath gathered wages hath put them into a bag with holes* ([Hagg. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p10.3"></span>).  For indeed money put into a bag
with holes is seen when it is put in, but when it is lost it is not
seen.  Those, then, who have an eye to how much they bestow, but
consider not how much they seize, put their wages into a bag with holes,
because in truth they look to them when they gather them together in
hope of being secure, but lose them without looking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[47b:1277](2120280.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxii-p8"></span> In *English Bible*, xlix. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How those that are at variance and those that are at peace are to
be admonished.](2120281)
