[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120199)  [Next](2120201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p1.1"></span>Sermon XL.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p2.1"></span>On Lent, II.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p3"></span>I.  *Progress and improvement always
possible.*

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p4"></span>Although, dearly-beloved, as the Easter
festival approaches, the very recurrence of the season points out to us
the Lenten fast, yet our words also must add their exhortations which,
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span>
helping us, may be not useless to the active nor irksome to the devout. 
For since the idea of these days demands the increase of all our
religious performances, there is no one, I am sure, that does not feel
glad at being incited to good works.  For though our nature which, so
long as we are mortal, will be changeable, is advancing to the highest
pursuits of virtue, yet always has the possibility of falling back, so
has it always the possibility of advancing.  And this is the true
justness of the perfect that they should never assume themselves to be
perfect, lest flagging in the purpose of their yet unfinished journey,
they should fall into the danger of failure, through giving up the
desire for progress.

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p5"></span>And, therefore, because none of us,
dearly beloved, is so perfect and holy as not to be able to be more
perfect and more holy, let us all together, without difference of rank,
without distinction of desert, with pious eagerness pursue our race from
what we have attained to what we yet aspire to, and make some needful
additions to our regular devotions.  For he that is not more attentive
than usual to religion in these days, is shown at other times to be not
attentive enough.

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p6"></span>II.  *Satan seeks to supply his numerous
losses by fresh gains.*

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p7"></span>Hence the reading of the Apostle’s
proclamation has sounded opportunely in our ears, saying, “Behold now is
the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation <span
id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914) .”  For what is more accepted than
this time, what more suitable to salvation than these days, in which war
is proclaimed against vices and progress is made in all virtues?  Thou
hadst indeed always to keep watch, O Christian soul, against the enemy
of thy salvation, lest any spot should be exposed to the tempter’s
snares:  but now greater wariness and keener prudence must be employed
by thee when that same foe of thine rages with fiercer hatred.  For now
in all the world the power of his ancient sway is taken from him, and
the countless vessels of captivity are rescued from his grasp.  The
people of all nations and of all tongues are breaking away from their
cruel plunderer, and now no race of men is found that does not struggle
against the tyrant’s laws, while through all the borders of the earth
many thousands of thousands are being prepared to be reborn in
Christ <span id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) :  and as the birth of a
new creature draws near, spiritual wickedness is being driven out by
those who were possessed by it.  The blasphemous fury of the despoiled
foe frets, therefore, and seeks new gains because it has lost its
ancient right.  Unwearied and ever wakeful, he snatches at any sheep he
finds straying carelessly from the sacred folds, intent on leading them
over the steeps of treasure and down the slopes of luxury into the
abodes of death.  And so he inflames their wrath, feeds their hatreds,
whets their desires, mocks at their continence, arouses their gluttony.

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p10"></span> <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxii-Page_155"></span>III.  *The twofold nature of Christ shown
at the Temptation.*

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p11"></span>For whom would he not dare to try, who
did not keep from his treacherous attempts even on our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxii-p11.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ? 
For, as the story of the Gospel has disclosed <span
id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) , when our Saviour, Who was true <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxii-p12.1"></span>God</span>, that He might
show Himself true Man also, and banish all wicked and erroneous
opinions, after the fast of 40 days and nights, had experienced the
hunger of human weakness, the devil, rejoicing at having found in Him a
sign of possible and mortal nature, in order to test the power which he
feared, said, “If Thou art the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p12.2"></span>God</span>, command that these stones become
bread <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917) .”  Doubtless the Almighty
could do this, and it was easy that at the Creator’s command a creature
of any kind should change into the form that it was commanded:  just as
when He willed it, in the marriage feast, He changed the water into
wine:  but here it better agreed with His purposes of salvation that His
haughty foe’s cunning should be vanquished by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p13.2"></span>Lord</span>, not in the power of His
Godhead, but by the mystery of His humiliation.  At length, when the
devil had been put to flight and the tempter baffled in all his arts,
angels came to the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p13.3"></span>Lord</span> and ministered to Him, that He
being true Man and true <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p13.4"></span>God</span>, His Manhood might be unsullied
by those crafty questions, and His Godhead displayed by those holy
ministrations.  And so let the sons and disciples of the devil be
confounded, who, being filled with the poison of vipers, deceive the
simple, denying in Christ the presence of both true natures, whilst they
rob either His Godhead of Manhood, or His Manhood of Godhead, although
both falsehoods are destroyed by a twofold and simultaneous proof:  for
by His bodily hunger His perfect Manhood was shown, and by the attendant
angels His perfect Godhead.

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p14"></span>IV.  *The Fast should not end with
abstinence from food, but lead to good deeds*.

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p15"></span>Therefore, dearly-beloved, seeing that,
as we are taught by our Redeemer’s precept, “man lives not in bread
alone, but in every word of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p15.1"></span>God <span id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918)
</span>,” and it is right that Christian people, whatever the amount of
their abstinence, should rather desire to satisfy themselves with the
“Word of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxii-p16.2"></span>God</span>”
than with bodily food, let us with ready devotion and eager faith enter
upon the celebration of the solemn fast, not with barren abstinence from
food, which is often imposed on us by weakliness of body, or the disease
of avarice, but in bountiful benevolence:  that in truth we may be of
those of whom the very Truth speaks, “blessed are they which hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled <span
id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) .”  Let works of piety, therefore, be
our delight, and let us be filled with those kinds of food which feed us
for eternity.  Let us rejoice in the replenishment of the poor, whom our
bounty has satisfied.  Let us delight in the clothing of those whose
nakedness we have covered with needful raiment.  Let our humaneness be
felt by the sick in their illnesses, by the weakly in their infirmities,
by the exiles in their hardships, by the orphans in their destitution,
and by solitary widows in their sadness:  in the helping of whom there
is no one that cannot carry out some amount of benevolence.  For no
one’s income is small, whose heart is big:  and the measure of one’s
mercy and goodness does not depend on the size of one’s means.  Wealth
of goodwill is never rightly lacking, even in a slender purse. 
Doubtless the expenditure of the rich is greater, and that of the poor
smaller, but there is no difference in the fruit of their works, where
the purpose of the workers is the same.

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p18"></span>V.  *And still further it should lead to
personal amendment and domestic harmony.*

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p19"></span>But, beloved, in this opportunity for
the virtues’ exercise there are also other notable crowns, to be won by
no dispersing abroad of granaries, by no disbursement of money, if
wantonness is repelled, if drunkenness is abandoned, and the lusts of
the flesh tamed by the laws of chastity:  if hatreds pass into
affection, if enmities be turned into peace, if meekness extinguishes
wrath, if gentleness forgives wrongs, if in fine the conduct of master
and of slaves is so well ordered that the rule of the one is milder, and
the discipline of the other is more complete.  It is by such observances
then, dearly-beloved, that <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p19.1"></span>God’s</span> mercy will be gained, the
charge of sin wiped out, and the adorable Easter festival devoutly
kept.  And this the pious Emperors of the Roman world have long guarded
with holy observance; for in honour of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p19.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion and Resurrection they
bend their lofty power, and relaxing the severity of their decrees set
free many of their prisoners:  so that on the days when the world is
saved by the Divine mercy, their clemency, which is modelled on the
Heavenly goodness, may be zealously followed by us.  Let Christian
peoples then imitate their princes, and be <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> <span id="ii.v.xxii-Page_156"></span>incited to forbearance
in their homes by these royal examples.  For it is not right that
private laws should be severer than public.  Let faults be forgiven, let
bonds be loosed, offences wiped out, designs of vengeance fall through,
that the holy festival through the Divine and human grace may find all
happy, all innocent:  through our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p19.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ Who with the Father
and the Holy Spirit liveth and reigneth <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxii-p19.4"></span>God</span> for endless ages of ages.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_914"></span>[154:915](2120200.htm#fr_914) <span
id="ii.v.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p8"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.xxii-p8.1"></span>
from the Epistle for the First Sunday in Lent:  cf. Serm. XXXVI. I, n.
7.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[154:916](2120200.htm#fr_915) <span
id="ii.v.xxii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p9"></span> Viz. by baptism at the Easter festival.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[155:917](2120200.htm#fr_916) <span
id="ii.v.xxii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p12"></span> *Ut evangelica patefecit historia*, cf.
Serm. XXXIX. 3, n. 8.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[155:918](2120200.htm#fr_917) <span
id="ii.v.xxii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p13"></span> S. [Matt. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xxii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[155:919](2120200.htm#fr_918) <span
id="ii.v.xxii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p16"></span> [Matt.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004), [Deut.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xxii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[155:920](2120200.htm#fr_919) <span
id="ii.v.xxii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxii-p17"></span> S. [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xxii-p17.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XLII](2120201)
