[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120391)  [Next](2120393) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle VII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p3"></span>Gregory to John, bishop of Larissa.

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p4"></span>Our brother Adrian, bishop of the city
of Thebæ, has come to Rome, bitterly complaining of having been
condemned, neither lawfully nor canonically, on certain charges by thy
Fraternity, and also by John, bishop of Prima Justiniana.  And, when for
a long time we saw no representative of the opposite party arrive here
who might have replied to his objections, we delivered for perusal <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473) , with a view to the necessary
ascertainment of the truth, the proceedings which had taken place before
you.  From these we ascertained that John and Cosmas, deacons who had
been deposed from their office, one for frailty of the body and the
other for fraudulent dealing with ecclesiastical property, had sent a
representation to our most pious emperors against him, with respect to
pecuniary matters and also criminal charges.

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p6"></span>They, in their commands sent to thee,
desired thee (that is with strict observance of law and canons) to take
cognizance of the matter so as to pass a sentence firm in law as to the
pecuniary questions, but, as to the criminal charges, to report to their
Clemency after a searching examination.  Now if thy Fraternity had
received in a right frame of mind these such right commands, you would
never have accepted for a general accusation of their bishop men removed
from their own office for their transgressions, and already hostilely
disposed; especially as by their representation addressed to our most
pious lords their untruthfulness is detected, in that they declared that
they made it with the consent of all the clergy.

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p7"></span>Yet after this, to touch briefly and
summarily on some of the proceedings before thee, the first head of
accusation was concerning the Theban deacon Stephen, whom the bishop
Adrian had failed to deprive of the dignity of his order, though
supposed to have been aware of his most shameful life.  As to this head,
no witnesses were produced to show that bishop Adrian had any knowledge
of the matter, except that Stephen alone, a man of shameful life and on
his own confession to be condemned, is alleged to have said so.  The
second charge made against him appears to have been concerning infants
having been debarred by his order from receiving holy baptism, and so
having died with the filth of sin unwashed away.  But none of the
witnesses brought forward against him declared their knowledge of
anything of the kind having come under the notice of bishop Adrian, but
said that they had learnt it from the mothers of the infants, whose
husbands, it is said, had been removed from the church for their
crimes.  But even so they did not declare that the hour of death had
overtaken those infants while unbaptized, as was contained in the
invidious representation of the accusers, it being evident that they had
been baptized in the city of Demetrias.  So much then for the criminal
charges.

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p8"></span>But, as to the pecuniary matters,
after what manner they were adjudged by thee is attested by the enquiry
of the men deputed by the prince in pursuance of the most pious order of
the most serene princes <span id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474) . 
For, when the oft-named Adrian had appealed against thy sentence, then,
so far as we have ascertained from the depositions of four witnesses
which were laid before John, bishop of Prima Justiniana, he was thrust
into most close confinement, and forced by thy Fraternity to produce a
document in which he confessed the charges brought against him.  And it
is true that in the document so produced by him he is found to have
assented to thy sentence as to pecuniary matters.  But the criminal
charges he touched on in an indefinite and dubious sort of way, so that
both thy purpose might be frustrated by the raising of certain clouds,
and he might afterwards the better escape from his confession in the
obscurity of a perplexed mode of speech.  And when the appeal handed in
by his people, and the rest of the proceedings under thy cognizance, had
been reported to the most pious princes, and Honoratus, deacon of our
See, with the glorious antigraphus <span
id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475) Sebastian having been deputed, as
we have said, he was exempted by the most serene lords from all further
orders.  But, by <span id="page_126b">p. 126b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iii.vi-Page_126b"></span>what sought out contrivances I know
not, another imperial order was again elicited, requiring John, bishop
of Prima Justiniana, to enquire closely and pass judgment concerning all
the aforesaid charges.  In which trial all bishop Adrian’s clergy, and
Demetrius the deacon, the latter in the midst of torments, declared that
all this calumny against bishop Adrian had been got up by the
contrivance of thy Fraternity.  Nor were any of the criminal charges
that had been made in thy audience against the bishop Adrian proved. 
But there came up, contrary to canons and laws, another cruel and crafty
enquiry directed against his deacon Demetrius and other persons, in the
course of which nothing was discovered for which the oft-mentioned
Adrian could have been lawfully condemned, but rather ground for his
acquittal.  But with respect to John, prelate of the city of Prima
Justiniana, and his most iniquitous and abominable judgment, we shall
take further measures.  As to bishop Adrian, we find both that he has
laboured under thy enmity in a way ill-befitting thy priestly character,
and that he has been condemned in pecuniary matters for no just cause by
the sentence of thy Fraternity.

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p11"></span>Since then, having been deposed also
by the above-said John bishop of Prima Justiniana in contravention of
law and canons, he could not be left deprived of his rank and honour, we
have decreed that he be reinstated in his church, and recalled to the
order of his proper dignity.  And, though thou oughtest to have been
deprived of the communion of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>Lord’s</span> body, for that, setting at
naught the admonition of my predecessor of holy memory, whereby he
exempted him and his church from the jurisdiction of thy authority, thou
hast again presumed to retain some jurisdiction over them, yet we,
decreeing more humanely, and still allowing thee the sacrament of
communion, decree that thy Fraternity shall abstain from all exercise of
the jurisdiction formerly held by thee over him and his church; but
that, according to the written instructions of our predecessor, if any
case should possibly arise, whether touching the faith, or criminal, or
pecuniary, against the aforesaid Adrian our fellow-priest, it be either
taken cognizance of, if the question be a slight one, by those who are
or may be our representatives in the royal city, or, if it be an arduous
one, it be brought hither to the Apostolic See, to the end that it may
be heard and decided before ourselves.  But, if thou shouldest attempt
at any time, on any pretext or by any surreptitious device, to
contravene these our ordinances, know that we decree thee to be deprived
of holy communion, and not to partake of it except at the close of thy
life, unless upon leave granted by the Roman pontiff.  For this we lay
down as a rule, agreeably to the teaching of the holy fathers, that
whosoever knows not how to obey the holy canons, neither is he worthy to
minister or receive the communion at the holy altars.  Moreover let thy
Fraternity restore to him without any delay the sacred property, or any
other, movable or immovable, which thou art said to retain so far; a
specification whereof, that has been handed to us, we append to this
letter.  Concerning which if any question arises between you, we desire
it to be considered by our representative in the royal city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[125b:1474](2120392.htm#fr_1473) <span
id="iii.v.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p5"></span> “Relegenda tradidimus,” not
“relegimus;” presumably because, the Acts being drawn up in Greek,
Gregory was unable to read them himself.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[125b:1475](2120392.htm#fr_1474) <span
id="iii.v.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p9"></span> The Emperor Mauricius had associated
his son Theodosius, being four years of age, with himself in the
empire.  Hence “princibus.”

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[125b:1476](2120392.htm#fr_1475) <span
id="iii.v.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.vi-p10"></span> See I. 39, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Natalis, Archbishop.](2120393)
