[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120010)  [Next](2120012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.i"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="ii.iv.i-Page_1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Letters.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii.iv.i-p3"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p3.1"></span>Letter I.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p4.1"></span>To the Bishop of Aquileia.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p5"></span>I.  *Through the negligence of the
authorities the Pelagian heresy has been spreading in his province.*

<span id="ii.iv.i-p6"></span>From the account of our holy brother and
fellow-bishop Septimus which is contained in the subjoined letter <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) , we have understood that certain priests
and deacons and clergy of various orders <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) in your province who have been drawn in
by the Pelagian or Cælestian heresy, have attained to catholic communion
without any recantation of their peculiar error being required of them;
and that, whilst the shepherds set to watch were fast asleep, wolves
clothed in sheep-skins but without laying aside their bestial minds have
entered into the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p8.1"></span>Lord’s</span> sheep-fold:  and that they make a
practice of what is not allowed even to non-offenders by the injunctions
of our canons and decrees <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) :  to wit
that they should leave the churches in which they received or regained
their office and carry their uncertainty in all directions, loving to
continue wandering and never to remain on the foundations of the
Apostles.  For without being sifted by any test or bound by any previous
confession of faith, they make a great point of their right to the
privilege of going to one house after another under cover of their being
in communion with the Church, and corrupting the hearts of many through
men’s ignorance <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) of their false
name.  And yet I am sure they could not do this, if the rulers of the
churches had exercised their rightful diligence in the matter of
receiving such, and had not allowed any of them to wander from place to
place.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p11"></span>II.  *He orders a provincial synod to be
convened to receive the recantation of the heretics in express terms.*

<span id="ii.iv.i-p12"></span>Accordingly, lest this should be attempted
any further, and lest this pernicious habit, which owes its introduction
to certain persons’ negligence, should result in the overthrow of many
souls, by this our authoritative injunction we charge you, brother, to
give diligence that a synod of the clergy <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) of your province be convened, and all,
whether priests or deacons or clerics of any rank who have been
re-admitted from their alliance with the Pelagians and the Cælestians
into catholic communion with such precipitation that they were not first
constrained to recant their error, be now at least forced to a true
correction, which can advantage themselves and hurt no one, since their
deceitfulness has in part been disclosed.  Let them by their public
confession condemn the authors of this presumptuous <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) error and renounce all that the universal
Church has repudiated in their doctrine:  and let them announce by full
and open statements, signed by their own hand, that they embrace and
entirely approve of all the synodal decrees which the authority of the
Apostolic See has ratified to the rooting out of this heresy.  Let
nothing obscure, nothing ambiguous be found in their words.  For we know
that their cunning is such that they reckon that the meaning of any
particular clause of their execrable doctrine can be defended if they
only keep it distinct from the main body of their damnable views <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) .

<span id="ii.iv.i-p16"></span> <span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="ii.iv.i-Page_2"></span>III.  *The Pelagian view of God’s grace is
unscriptural.*

<span id="ii.iv.i-p17"></span>And when they pretend to disapprove of and
give up all their definitions to facilitate evasion through their
complete art of deception, unless their meaning is detected, they make
exception of the dogma that the grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p17.1"></span>God</span> is given according to the merits of
the recipient.  And yet surely, unless it is given freely, it is not a
gift <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) , but a price and compensation
for merits:  for the blessed Apostle says, “by grace ye have been saved
through faith, and that not of yourselves but it is the gift of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.i-p18.2"></span>God</span>; not of works lest
any should perchance be exalted.  For we are His workmanship created in
Christ Jesus in good works, which <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p18.3"></span>God</span> prepared that we should walk in
them <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) .”  Thus every bestowal of
good works is of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p19.2"></span>God’s</span> preparing:  because a man is
justified by grace rather than by his own excellence:  for grace is to
every one the source of righteousness, the source of good and the
fountain of merit.  But these heretics say it is anticipated by men’s
natural goodness for this reason, that that nature which (in their view)
is before grace conspicuous for good desires of its own, may not seem
marred by any stain of original sin, and that what the Truth says may be
falsified:  “For the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was
lost <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) .”

<span id="ii.iv.i-p21"></span>IV.  *Prompt measures are essential.*

<span id="ii.iv.i-p22"></span>You must take heed, therefore, beloved,
and with great diligence make provision that offences which have long
been removed be not set up again through such men and that no seed of
the same evil spring up in your province from a doctrine which has once
been uprooted:  for not only will it take root and grow, but also will
taint the future generations of the Church with its poisonous
exhalations.  Those who wish to appear corrected must purge themselves
of all suspicion:  and by obeying us, prove themselves ours.  And if any
of them decline to satisfy our wholesome injunctions, be he cleric or
layman, he must be driven from the society of the Church lest he deal
treacherously by others’ safety as well as forfeit his own soul.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p23"></span>V.  *The canons must be enforced against
clerics who wander from one church to another*.

<span id="ii.iv.i-p24"></span>We admonish you also to restore to full
working that part of the discipline of the Church whereby the holy
Fathers and we have often in former times decreed that neither in the
grade of the priesthood nor in the order of the diaconate nor in the
lower ranks of the clergy, is any one at liberty to migrate from church
to church:  to the end that each one may persevere where he was ordained
without being enticed by ambition, or led astray by greed, or corrupted
by men’s evil beliefs:  and thus that if any one, seeking his own
interests, not those of Jesus Christ <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) , neglect to return to his own
people <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) and church, he may be
reckoned out of the pale both in respect of promotion and of the bond of
communion.  But do not doubt, beloved, that we must be somewhat sorely
moved if, as we think not, our decrees for the maintenance of the canons
and the integrity of the faith be neglected:  because the short-comings
of the lower orders <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) are to be laid
at the door of none so much as of those slothful and remiss rulers who
often foster much pestilence by shrinking from the application of a
stringent remedy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[1:16](2120011.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p7"></span> It is to be supposed that the letter of
Septimus, bp. of Altinum, was sent with this letter.  See Lett. XVIII.
n. 3.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[1:17](2120011.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p8"></span> Viz. members of the minor order as they
are now called, subdeacons, exorcists, &c.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[1:18](2120011.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p9"></span> It has been the rule at least since the
council of Nicæa (325) that the clergy should stay in the church (or
“diocese” as we should call it) of their ordination, cf. Canons of Nicæa
xxi. *de his qui Ecclesias deserunt et ad alias transeunt*, and xxii.
*de non suscipiendis alterius Ecclesiæ clericis*.  And we often find Leo
insisting on the observance of the rule.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[1:19](2120011.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p10"></span> *Inscientiam*:  the general reading being
*scientiam*, the sense of which is not clear.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[1:20](2120011.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p13"></span> *Sacerdotum*:  I am in doubt as to what
this term here includes, but think it probable that all ranks of the
clergy were to be summoned.  The words *sacerdos* and *antistes* in
early ecclesiastical Latin very often mean the bishop (*episcopus*)
specifically rather than the presbyter (*sacerdos secundi ordinis*),
because it was the bishop who offered the “sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving” (i.e. the Eucharist), and the presbyter only in his
default; but the term *sacerdos* does certainly often include the
presbyters and also the deacons (*sacerdotes tertii ordinis*) when in
connexion with the priests and bishops, and it seems likely that the
whole body of the clergy of the province would be summoned to the
synod:  see Bright’s note 110:  also Bingham, Antiq., Bk. II., chap.
xix., §§ 14, 15.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[1:21](2120011.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p14"></span> *Superbi* (proud):  the epithet is well
chosen and not a random one:  for pride and presumption are at the root
of the Pelagian views as birth-sin and baptismal grace:  perfectionism
is little in accordance with Christian humility.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[1:22](2120011.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p15"></span> For the same sentiment cf. Prosper, *de
ingratis*, v. 188.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[2:23](2120011.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p18"></span> The reader need hardly be reminded that
in the New Testament “grace” (Lat. *gratia*, Gk. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.i-p18.1"></span>χάρις</span>) signifies “a
free gift.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[2:24](2120011.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p19"></span> [Eph. ii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.i-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[2:25](2120011.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p20"></span> S. [Luke ix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.i-p20.1"></span>. 
Between this and the next chapter some of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.i-p20.2"></span>mss.</span> and the earlier editions insert a
passage from Augustine’s Enchiridion, which thus formed chapter iv.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[2:26](2120011.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p25"></span> A reminiscence of [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[2:27](2120011.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p26"></span> *Plebem*:  this being the regular term
for the “Laity” in early Christian Latin.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[2:28](2120011.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.iv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.i-p27"></span> Sc. of the clergy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Septimus, Bishop of Altinum.](2120012)
