[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120289)  [Next](2120291.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
praise the unlawful things of which they are conscious, and those who
while condemning them, in no wise guard against them.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 32.)  Differently to
be admonished are they who even praise the unlawful things which they
do, and those who censure what is wrong, and yet avoid it not.  For they
who even praise the unlawful things which they do are to be admonished
to consider how for the most part they offend more by the mouth than by
deeds.  For by deeds they perpetrate wrong things in their own persons
only; but with the mouth they bring out wickedness in the persons of as
many as there are souls of hearers, to whom they teach wicked things by
praising them.  They are therefore to be admonished that, if they evade
the eradication of evil, they at least be afraid to sow it.  They are to
be admonished to let their own individual perdition suffice them.  And
again they are to be admonished that, if they fear not to be bad, they
at least blush to be seen to be what they are.  For usually a sin, when
it is concealed, is shunned; because, when a soul blushes to be seen to
be what nevertheless it does not fear to be, it comes in time to blush
to be what it shuns being seen to be.  But, when any bad man shamelessly
courts notice, then the more freely he perpetrates every wickedness, the
more does he come even to think it lawful; and in what he imagines to be
lawful he is without doubt sunk ever more and more.  Hence it is
written, *They have declared their sin as Sodom, neither have they
hidden it* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000.md), [Isa.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p3.1"></span>).  For, had Sodom hidden her sin, she
would still have sinned, but, in fear.  But she had utterly lost the
curb of fear, in that she did not even seek darkness for her sin. 
Whence also again it is written, *The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is
multiplied* ([Gen. xviii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p3.2"></span>).  For sin with a voice is guilt in
act; but sin with even a cry is guilt at liberty.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p4"></span>But, on the other hand, those who
censure wrong things and yet avoid them not are to be admonished to
weigh circumspectly what they can say in their own excuse before the
strict judgment of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p4.1"></span>God</span>, seeing they are not excused
from the guilt of their crimes, even themselves being judges.  What,
then, are these men but their own summoners?  They give their voices
against misdeeds, and deliver themselves up as guilty in their doings. 
They are to be admonished to perceive how it even now comes of the
hidden retribution of judgment that their mind is enlightened to see the
evil which it perpetrates, but strives not to <span id="page_64b">p.
64b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-Page_64b"></span>overcome it; so
that the better it sees the worse it may perish; because it both
perceives the light of understanding, and also relinquishes not the
darkness of wrong-doing.  For, when they neglect the knowledge that has
been given to help them, they turn it into a testimony against
themselves; and from the light of understanding, which they had in truth
received that they might be able to do away their sins, they augment
their punishments.  And, indeed, this their wickedness, doing the evil
which it condemns, has already a taste here of the judgment to come; so
that, while kept liable to eternal punishment, it shall not meanwhile be
absolved here in its own test of itself; and that it may experience
there the more grievous torments, in that here it forsakes not the evil
which even itself condemns.  For hence the Truth says, *That servant
which knew his <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p4.2"></span>Lord’s</span> will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes* ([Luke xii. 47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p4.3"></span>).  Hence the Psalmist says, *Let them
go down quick into hell* ([Psa.
55.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p4.4"></span> <span
id="fr_1292"></span>[1293](#fn_1292) .md).  For the quick know and feel
what is being done about them; but the dead can feel nothing.  For they
would go down dead into hell if they committed what is evil without
knowledge.  But when they know what is evil, and yet do it, they go down
quick, miserable, and feeling, into the hell of iniquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[64b:1293](2120290.htm#fr_1292.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxii-p5"></span> In *English Bible*, lv. 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How those are to be admonished who sin from sudden impulse and
those who sin deliberately.](2120291.md)
