[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120545)  [Next](2120547.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p2"></span>To Gregoria.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p3"></span>Gregory to Gregoria, Lady of the
Bed-chamber (*cubiculariæ*) to Augusta.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p4"></span>I have received the longed for
letters of your Sweetness, in which you have been at pains all through
to accuse yourself of a multitude of sins:  but I know that you
fervently love the Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p4.1"></span>Lord</span>, and I trust in His mercy
that the sentence which was pronounced with regard to a certain holy
woman proceeds from the mouth of the Truth with regard to you:  *Her
sins, which are many, are forgiven her, for she loved much* ([Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p4.2"></span>).  And how they were forgiven is shewn
also by what follows afterwards; that she sat at the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p4.3"></span>Lord’s</span> feet, and
heard the word from His mouth ([Luke x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#039.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p4.4"></span>) <span
id="fr_1702"></span>[1703](#fn_1702.md) .  For, being rapt in the
contemplative, she had transcended the active life, which Martha her
sister still pursued ([Luke 10.40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>).  She also sought earnestly her buried
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, and,
stooping over the sepulchre, found not His body.  But, even when the
disciples went away, she remained standing before the door of the
sepulchre, and whom she sought as dead, Him she was counted worthy to
see alive, and announced to the disciples that He had risen again.  And
this was by the wonderful dispensation of the loving-kindness of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p5.3"></span>God</span>, that life
should be announced by a woman’s mouth, because by a woman’s mouth had
been the first taste of death in Paradise.  And at another time also,
with another Mary, she saw the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p5.4"></span>Lord</span> after His resurrection, and
held His feet.  Bring before your eyes, I pray you, what hands held
whose feet.  That woman who had been a sinner in the city, those hands
which had been polluted with iniquity, touched the feet of Him who sits
at the right hand of the Father above all the angels.  Let us estimate,
if we can, what those bowels of heavenly loving-kindness are, that a
woman who had been plunged through sin into the whirlpool’s depth should
be thus lifted high on the wing of love through grace.  It is fulfilled,
sweet daughter, it is fulfilled, what was promised to us by the
prophetic voice concerning this time of the holy Church:  *And in that
day the house of David shall be an open fountain for ablution of the
sinner and of her that is unclean* ([Zech.
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p5.5"></span>).  For the house of David is an open
fountain for ablution to us sinners, because we are washed from the
filth of our iniquities by mercy now disclosed through the son of David
our Saviour.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p6"></span>But as to what thy Sweetness has
added in thy letters, namely that thou wilt continue to be urgent with
me till I write that it has been revealed to me that thy sins are
forgiven, thou hast demanded a difficult, nay even an unprofitable
thing; difficult indeed, because I am unworthy of having a revelation
made to me; but unprofitable, because thou oughtest not to become secure
about thy sins, except when in the last day of thy life thou shalt be
able no longer to bewail them.  But, until that day comes, thou
oughtest, ever suspicious and ever fearful, to be afraid of faults, and
wash them with daily tears.  Assuredly the apostle Paul had already
ascended into the third heaven, had also been caught up into Paradise,
and heard secret words which it was not lawful for a man to speak ([2
Cor. xii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>, &c.), and yet, still fearful, he said,
*I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any
means, while preaching to others, I myself should become a castaway* ([1
Cor. ix. 27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p6.2"></span>).  One who is caught up into heaven
still fears; and shall one whose conversation is still on earth desire
already not to fear?  Consider, most sweet daughter, that security is
wont to be the mother of carelessness.  Thou oughtest not, then, in this
life to have security, whereby thou mayest be rendered careless.  For it
is written, *Happy is the man that is always afraid* ([Prov. xxviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p6.3"></span>).  And again it is written, *Serve the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p6.4"></span>Lord</span> in
fear, and rejoice unto him with trembling* ([Ps. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p6.5"></span>).  In short, then, it must needs be that
in the time of this life trembling possess your soul, to the end that it
may hereafter rejoice without end through the joy of security.  May
Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p6.6"></span>God</span> fill your soul with the grace
of His Holy Spirit, and, after the tears which you daily shed in prayer,
bring you to eternal joys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1702"></span>[219b:1703](2120546.htm#fr_1702.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p4.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xiv-p5"></span> It will be observed that Gregory
identifies the woman who had been a sinner in the city with the sister
of Martha, and also with the Magdalene.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theoctista, Patrician.](2120547.md)
