[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120547)  [Next](2120549) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p2"></span>To Anastasius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p3"></span>Gregory to Anastasius, Bishop of
Antioch.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p4"></span>I have received through the hands of
our common son the deacon Sabinianus the longed for letter of your most
sweet Holiness, in which the words have flowed not from your tongue but
from your soul.  And it is not surprising that one speaks well who lives
perfectly.  And, since you have learnt, through the Spirit teaching you
in the school of the heart, the precepts of life—to despise all earthly
things and to speed to the heavenly country,—in proportion as you have
advanced in good you think what is good of others.  But, when I heard
many things said in the letters of your Blessedness in praise of me, I
understood your intention; how that you wished to describe not what I
am, but what I ought to be.  But as to your saying that I ought to
remember my manner of life, and on no account give place to the
malignant spirit who seeks to sift souls, I indeed recollect myself to
have been always of bad manner of life, and hasten to overcome and put
an end to this my manner of life, if I can.  If however, as you believe,
I have had anything good in me, I trust in the help of Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p4.1"></span>God</span> that I have
not forgotten it.  But your Holiness, as I see, by the words of
sweetness at the beginning and <span id="page_222b">p. 222b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.xvi-Page_222b"></span>the words that follow, has wished
your letter to be like a bee, which carries both honey and a sting,
satiating me with the honey and piercing me with the sting.  But
meanwhile I return to meditation on the words of Solomon, *That better
are the wounds of one that loves than the kisses of a flattering foe*
([Prov. xxvii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p4.2"></span>).  Thus, as to your saying that we ought
not to give occasion of offence for no cause at all, this is what your
son, our most pious lord (for whose life we ought continually to pray)
has already written repeatedly; and what he says out of power I know
that you say out of love.  Nor do I wonder that you have made use of
imperial language in your letters, since there is a very close
relationship between love and power.  For both presume in a princely
way; both ever speak with authority.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p5"></span>And indeed on the receipt of the
synodical epistle of our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus it was not
worth my while to make a difficulty on account of the profane title at
the risk of disturbing the unity of holy Church:  but nevertheless I
took care to admonish him with respect to this same superstitious and
proud title, saying that he could not have peace with us unless he
corrected the elation of the aforesaid expression, which the first
apostate invented.  You, however, ought not to say that this is a matter
of no consequence, since, if we bear it with equanimity, we are
corrupting the faith of the Universal Church; for you know how many not
only heretics but heresiarchs have issued from the Constantinopolitan
Church.  And, not to speak of the injury done to your dignity, if one
bishop is called Universal, the Universal Church comes to ruin, if the
one who is universal falls.  But far, far be this levity from my ears. 
Yet I trust in Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p5.1"></span>God</span> that what He has promised He
will soon fulfil; *Whosoever exalteth himself shall be humbled* ([Luke
xiv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p5.2"></span>).

<span id="iii.v.vii.xvi-p6"></span>So much, in the midst of many
occupations.  I have briefly replied to what you have said in your
letters:  for what I ought not just now to express in writing remains
imprinted on my mind.  I beg your Blessedness always to recall me to
your memory in your holy prayers, that so your intercessions may rescue
me from temporal and eternal ills.  Pray moreover zealously and
fervently for the most serene lord the Emperor; for his life is very
necessary for the world.  I refrain from saying more, for I doubt not
that you know.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theodore, Physician.](2120549)
