[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120202)  [Next](2120204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XLIX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p2.1"></span>On Lent, XI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p3"></span>I.  *The Lenten fast is incumbent on all
alike.*

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p4"></span>On all days and seasons, indeed,
dearly-beloved, some marks of the Divine goodness are set, and no part
of the year is destitute of sacred mysteries, in order that, so long as
proofs of our salvation meet us on all sides, we may the more eagerly
accept the never-ceasing calls of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> mercy.  But all that is bestowed
on the restoration of human souls in the divers works and gifts of grace
is put before us more clearly and abundantly now, when no isolated
portions of the Faith are to be celebrated, but the whole together.  For
as the Easter festival approaches, the greatest and most binding of
fasts is kept, and its observance is imposed on all the faithful without
exception; because no one is so holy that he ought not to be holier, nor
so devout that he might not be devouter.  For who, that is set in the
uncertainty of this life, can be found either exempt from temptation, or
free from fault?  Who is there who would not wish for additions to his
virtue, or removal of his vice? seeing that adversity does us harm, and
prosperity spoils us, and it is equally dangerous not to have what we
want at all, and to have it in the fullest measure.  There is a trap in
the fulness of riches, a trap in the straits of poverty.  The one lifts
us up in pride, the other incites us to complaint.  Health tries us,
sickness tries us, so long as the one fosters carelessness and the other
sadness.  There is a snare in security, a snare in fear; and it matters
not whether the mind which is given over to earthly thoughts, is taken
up with pleasures or with cares; for it is equally unhealthy to languish
under empty delights, or to labour under racking anxiety.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p5"></span>II.  *The broad road is crowded, the
narrow way of salvation nearly empty.*

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p6"></span>And thus is perfectly fulfilled that
assurance of the Truth, by which we learn that “narrow and steep is the
way that leads to life <span id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940.md) ;” and
whilst the breadth of the way that leads to death is crowded with a
large company, the steps are few of those that tread the path of
safety.  And wherefore is the left road more thronged than the right,
save that the multitude is prone to worldly joys and carnal goods?  And
although that which it desires is short-lived and uncertain, yet men
endure toil more willingly for the lust of pleasure than for love of
virtue.  Thus while those who crave things visible are unnumbered, those
who prefer the eternal to the temporal are hardly to be found.  And,
therefore, seeing that the blessed Apostle Paul says, “the things which
are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal <span id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941.md) ,” the path of virtue
lies hid and in concealment, to a certain extent, since “by hope we were
saved <span id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942.md) ,” and true faith loves
that above all things, which it attains to without any intervention of
the flesh.  A great work and toil it is then to keep our wayward heart
from all sin, and, with the numberless allurements of pleasure to
ensnare it on all sides, not to let the vigour of the mind give way to
any attack.  Who “toucheth pitch, and is not defiled thereby <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943.md) ?” who is not weakened by the flesh?
who is not begrimed by the dust? who, lastly, is of such purity as not
to be polluted by those things without which one cannot live?  For the
Divine teaching commands by the Apostle’s mouth that “they who have
wives” should “be as though they had none:  and those that weep as
though they wept not; and those that rejoice as though they rejoiced
not; and those that buy as though they possessed not; and those that use
this world as though they used it not; for the fashion of this world
passeth away <span id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944.md) .”  Blessed,
therefore, is the mind that passes the time of its pilgrimage in chaste
sobriety, and loiters not <span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxv-Page_161"></span>in the things through which it has to
walk, so that, as a stranger rather than the possessor of its earthly
abode, it may not be wanting in human affections, and yet rest on the
Divine promises.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p12"></span>III.  *Satan is incited to fresh efforts
at this season of the year.*

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p13"></span>And, dearly-beloved, no season requires
and bestows this fortitude more than the present, when by the observance
of a special strictness a habit is acquired which must be persevered
in.  For it is well known to you that this is the time when throughout
the world the devil waxes furious, and the Christian army has to combat
him, and any that have grown lukewarm and slothful, or that are absorbed
in worldly cares, must now be furnished with spiritual armour and their
ardour kindled for the fray by the heavenly trumpet, inasmuch as he,
through whose envy death came into the world <span
id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945.md) , is now consumed with the strongest
jealousy and now tortured with the greatest vexation.  For he sees <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946.md) whole tribes of the human race brought
in afresh to the adoption of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p15.1"></span>God’s</span> sons and the offspring of the
New Birth multiplied through the virgin fertility of the Church.  He
sees himself robbed of all his tyrannic power, and driven from the
hearts of those he once possessed, while from either sex thousands of
the old, the young, the middle-aged are snatched away from him, and no
one is debarred by sin either of his own or original, where
justification is not paid for deserts, but simply given as a free gift. 
He sees, too, those that have lapsed, and have been deceived by his
treacherous snares, washed in the tears of penitence and, by the
Apostle’s key unlocking the gates of mercy, admitted to the benefit of
reconciliation <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947.md) .  He feels,
moreover, that the day of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p16.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion is at hand, and that he
is crushed by the power of that cross which in Christ, Who was free from
all debt of sin, was the world’s ransom and not the penalty of sin.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p17"></span>IV.  *Self-examination by the standard of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxv-p17.1"></span>God’s</span> commands
the right occupation in Lent.*

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p18"></span>And so, that the malice of the fretting
foe may effect nothing by its rage, a keener devotion must be awaked to
the performance of the Divine commands, in order that we may enter on
the season, when all the mysteries of the Divine mercy meet together,
with preparedness both of mind and body, invoking the guidance and help
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxv-p18.1"></span>God</span>, that we
may be strong to fulfil all things through Him, without Whom we can do
nothing.  For the injunction is laid on us, in order that we may seek
the aid of Him Who lays it.  Nor must any one excuse himself by reason
of his weakness, since He Who has granted the will, also gives the
power, as the blessed Apostle James says, “If any of you lack wisdom,
let him ask of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p18.2"></span>God</span>, Who giveth to all liberally and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948.md) .”  Which of the faithful does not
know what virtues he ought to cultivate, and what vices to fight
against?  Who is so partial or so unskilled a judge of his own
conscience as not to know what ought to be removed, and what ought to be
developed?  Surely no one is so devoid of reason as not to understand
the character of his mode of life, or not to know the secrets of his
heart.  Let him not then please himself in everything, nor judge himself
according to the delights of the flesh, but place his every habit in the
scale of the Divine commands, where, some things being ordered to be
done and others forbidden, he can examine himself in a true balance by
weighing the actions of his life according to this standard.  For the
designing mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p19.2"></span>God <span id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949.md)
</span> has set up the brightest mirror in His commandments, wherein a
man may see his mind’s face and realize its conformity or dissimilarity
to <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxv-p20.1"></span>God’s</span>
image:  with the specific purpose that, at least, during the days of our
Redemption and Restoration, we may throw off awhile our carnal cares and
restless occupations, and betake ourselves from earthly matters to
heavenly.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p21"></span>V.  *Forgiveness of our own sins requires
that we should forgive others.*

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p22"></span>But because, as it is written, “in many
things we all stumble <span id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950.md) ,” let the
feeling of mercy be first aroused and the faults of others against us be
forgotten; that we may not violate by any love of revenge that most holy
compact, to which we bind ourselves in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p23.2"></span>Lord’s</span> prayer, and when we say
“forgive us our debts as we also forgive our debtors,” let us not be
hard in forgiving, because we must be possessed either with the desire
for revenge, or with the leniency of gentleness, and for man, who is
ever exposed to the dangers of temptations, it is more to be desired
that his own faults should not need punishment <span
id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951.md) than that he should get the faults of
others punished.  And <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxv-Page_162"></span>what is more suitable to the Christian
faith than that not only in the Church, but also in all men’s homes,
there should be forgiveness of sins?  Let threats be laid aside; let
bonds be loosed, for he who will not loose them will bind himself with
them much more disastrously.  For whatsoever one man resolves upon
against another, he decrees against himself by his own terms.  Whereas
“blessed are the merciful, for <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p24.1"></span>God</span> shall have mercy on them <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952.md) :”  and He is just and kind in His
judgments, allowing some to be in the power of others to this end, that
under fair government may be preserved both the profitableness of
discipline and the kindliness of clemency, and that no one should dare
to refuse that pardon to another’s shortcomings, which he wishes to
receive for his own.

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p26"></span>VI.  *Reconciliation between enemies and
alms-giving are also Lenten duties.*

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p27"></span>Furthermore, as the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxv-p27.1"></span>Lord</span> says, that “the
peacemakers are blessed, because they shall be called sons of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxv-p27.2"></span>God <span
id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953.md) </span>,” let all discords and
enmities be laid aside, and let no one think to have a share in the
Paschal feast that has neglected to restore brotherly peace.  For with
the Father on high, he that is not in charity with the brethren, will
not be reckoned in the number of His sons.  Furthermore, in the
distribution of alms and care of the poor, let our Christian fast-times
be fat and abound; and let each bestow on the weak and destitute those
dainties which he denies himself.  Let pains be taken that all may bless
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxv-p28.2"></span>God</span> with one
mouth, and let him that gives some portion of substance understand that
he is a minister of the Divine mercy; for <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p28.3"></span>God</span> has placed the cause of the poor
in the hand of the liberal man; that the sins which are washed away
either by the waters of baptism, or the tears of repentance, may be also
blotted out by alms-giving; for the Scripture says, “As water
extinguisheth fire, so alms extinguisheth sin <span
id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954.md) .”  Through our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxv-p29.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_940"></span>[160:941](2120203.htm#fr_940.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p7"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[160:942](2120203.htm#fr_941.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p8"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[160:943](2120203.htm#fr_942.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p9"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[160:944](2120203.htm#fr_943.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p10"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
13.1](../../../bib/apo/sir013.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[160:945](2120203.htm#fr_944.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p11"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
29-31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxv-p11.1"></span>.  In the last clause but one, the Lat. runs,
*qui utuntur hoc mundo tanquam non* utantur (as also the Vulg. and the
margin of R.V., “(as not) using to the full,” though the text reads, “as
not abusing it”).

<span id="fn_945"></span>[161:946](2120203.htm#fr_945.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p14"></span> [Wisdom ii.
24](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#024.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[161:947](2120203.htm#fr_946.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p15"></span> The allusion is of course to the large
number of persons baptized every year at Easter.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[161:948](2120203.htm#fr_947.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p16"></span> *Portas misericordiæ Apostolica clave
reserante ad remedia reconciliationis admitti*:  no doubt confession and
priestly absolution is meant with a reference to S. [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[161:949](2120203.htm#fr_948.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p19"></span> S. [James i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[161:950](2120203.htm#fr_949.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p20"></span> *Artifex misericordia Dei*.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[161:951](2120203.htm#fr_950.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p23"></span> S. [James iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[161:952](2120203.htm#fr_951.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p24"></span> *Ut suas culpas habeat impunitas* (some
through a misunderstanding of the argument read *punitas* here) *quam ut
plectat alienas*.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[162:953](2120203.htm#fr_952.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p25"></span> S. [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p25.1"></span>,
quoted in the same form in Serm. XCV. chap. 7, q.v.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[162:954](2120203.htm#fr_953.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p28"></span> S. [Matt. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[162:955](2120203.htm#fr_954.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxv-p28.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxv-p29"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
3.30](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#030.md)<span id="ii.v.xxv-p29.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LI](2120204.md)
