[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120557)  [Next](2120559.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XL.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p2"></span>To Eulogius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of
Alexandria.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p4"></span>Your most sweet Holiness has spoken
much in your letter to me about the chair of Saint Peter, Prince of the
apostles, saying that he himself now sits on it in the persons of his
successors.  And indeed I acknowledge myself to be unworthy, not only in
the dignity of such as preside, but even in the number of such as
stand.  But I gladly accepted all that has been said, in that he has
spoken to me about Peter’s chair who occupies Peter’s chair.  And,
though special honour to myself in no wise delights me, yet I greatly
rejoiced because you, most holy ones, have given to yourselves what you
have bestowed upon me.  For who can be ignorant that holy Church has
been made firm in the solidity of the Prince of the apostles, who
derived his name from the firmness of his mind, so as to be called
Petrus <span id="page_229b">p. 229b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-Page_229b"></span>from *petra*.  And to him it is
said by the voice of the Truth, *To thee I will give the keys of the
kingdom of heaven* ([Matth. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>).  And again it is said to him, *And
when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren* ([Matt.
22.32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>).  And once more, *Simon, son of Jonas,
lovest thou Me?  Feed my sheep* ([Joh. xxi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p4.3"></span>).  Wherefore though there are many
apostles, yet with regard to the principality itself the See of the
Prince of the apostles alone has grown strong in authority, which in
three places is the See of one <span
id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721.md) .  For he himself exalted the See
in which he deigned even to rest and end the present life.  He himself
adorned the See to which he sent his disciple as evangelist.  He himself
stablished the See in which, though he was to leave it, he sat for seven
years.  Since then it is the See of one, and one See, over which by
Divine authority three bishops now preside, whatever good I hear of you,
this I impute to myself.  If you believe anything good of me, impute
this to your merits, since we are one in Him Who says, *That they all
may be one, as Thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee that they also may
be one in us* ([Joh. xvii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>).  Moreover, in paying you the debt of
salutation which is due to you, I declare to you that I exult with great
joy from knowing that you labour assiduously against the barkings of
heretics; and I implore Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>God</span> that He would aid your
Blessedness with His protection, so as through your tongue to uproot
every root of bitterness from the bosom of holy Church, lest it should
germinate again to the hindrance of many, and through it many should be
defiled.  For having received your talent you think on the injunction,
*Trade till I come* ([Luke xix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p5.3"></span>).  I therefore, though unable to trade
at all nevertheless rejoice with you in the gains of your trade,
inasmuch as I know this, that if operation does not make me partaker,
yet charity does make me a partaker in your labour.  For I reckon that
the good of a neighbour is common to one that stands idle, if he knows
how to rejoice in common in the doings of the other.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p6"></span>Furthermore, I have wished to send
you some timber:  but your Blessedness has not indicated whether you are
in need of it:  and we can send some of much larger size, but no ship is
sent hither capable of containing it:  and I think shame to send the
smaller sort.  Nevertheless let your Blessedness inform me by letter
what I should do.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p7"></span>I have however sent you, as a small
blessing from the Church of Saint Peter who loves you, six of the
smaller sort of Aquitanian cloaks (*pallia*), and two napkins
(*oraria*); for, my affection being great, I presume on the
acceptableness of even little things.  For affection itself has its own
worth, and it is quite certain that there will be no offence in what out
of love one has presumed to do.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p8"></span>Moreover I have received the
blessing of the holy Evangelist Mark, according to the note appended to
your letter.  But, since I do not drink *colatum* <span
id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722.md) and *viritheum* <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723.md) with pleasure, I venture to ask for
*cognidium* <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724.md) , which last
year, after a long interval, your Holiness caused to be known in this
city.  For we here get from the traders the name of *cognidium*, but not
the thing itself.  Now I beg that the prayers of your Holiness may
support me against all the bitternesses which I suffer in this life, and
defend me from them by your intercessions with Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>God</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[229b:1722](2120558.htm#fr_1721.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p4.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p5"></span> As to the view here expressed of
the unity of the three Sees of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, see
*Prolegom*., p. xii.

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[229b:1723](2120558.htm#fr_1722.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p9"></span> “<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>Colaticus</span>.  Lapides quoque
medicinalium, mortariarum, et pigmentariarum usibus apti (*Isid. Lib*.
16. *Orig. cap*. 4).”  Du Cange.  But *colatum* here appears to have
been some drink.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[229b:1724](2120558.htm#fr_1723.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p10"></span> *Genus potionis*, Papiæ, Ægyptios
vel Alexandrinos—Illud forte de quo S. Hieronymus de Vita Clericorum cum
*palmarum fructus exprimuntur in liquorem, coatisque frugibus aqua
pinguior coloratur*.  Du Cange.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[229b:1725](2120558.htm#fr_1724.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxvi-p11"></span> “Potionis species apud Ægyptianos,
vel saltem Alexandrinos.”  Du Cange.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLII](2120559.md)
