[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120532)  [Next](2120534) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_210b">p. 210b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vii.i-Page_210b"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.v.vii.i-p1.1"></span>Book VII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.i-p2.1"></span>Epistle II.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.i-p3"></span>To Columbus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.i-p4"></span>Gregory to Columbus, Bishop of
Numidia <span id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682) .

<span id="iii.v.vii.i-p6"></span>We received at the hands of the bearer,
your deacon, the epistle of your Fraternity, in which you informed us of
what had been done among you with regard to the person of the bishop
Paul.  This has been done so late that he could not now have appeared
here in person.  For his Excellency also, our son Gennadius the
Patrician, sent his chancellor to us with reference to the same case. 
But when we had caused enquiry to be made whether he was willing to
plead against him \[i.e. against the bishop Paul\] before us, he replied
that he had been by no means sent with this intent but had only brought
hither certain three persons from his Church who would allege many
things against him.  While, then, we neither found him prepared to
commence an action, nor were moved by the quality of those persons to
regard them as fit accusers of a bishop, we could not gainsay or offer
hindrance to the often before-mentioned bishop Paul, who petitioned us
in the hope of having leave given him to resort to the royal city; but
we presently allowed him according to his petition, with two others whom
he should take with him, to set forth.  If, then, there have been any
things that could be reasonably said against him, the proper course
would have been for him to come here at once, and for your Fraternity to
inform us of all particulars, as you have now done.  For, as to your
having signified to us that you suffer from the enmities of many on
account of our frequently visiting you by our letters, there is no
doubt, most reverend brother, that the good suffer from the grudges of
the bad, and that those who are intent on divine works are harassed by
the oppositions of the perverse.  But, in proportion as these bad things
are around you, ought you to be more instantly occupied with the care of
the government committed to you, and to watch for the custody of the
flock of Christ; and in proportion as the contrariety of unrighteous men
presses upon you, ought the care of pastoral solicitude to inflame you
to be more active, and very certain of the promised reward, to the end
that you may be able to offer to the chief Shepherd gain from the work
given you to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[210b:1683](2120533.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="iii.v.vii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.i-p5"></span> On the subject of this letter, see IV.
34, 35:  also VI. 63.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle IV](2120534)
