[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120550)  [Next](2120552.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xix-p2"></span>To Cyriacus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xix-p3"></span>Gregory to Cyriacus, Bishop of
Constantinople.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4"></span>We have received the letters of your
Blessedness, which speak to us in words not of the tongue but of the
soul.  For they open to me your mind, which, however, was not closed to
me, since of myself I retain experience of the same sweetness. 
Wherefore I return thanks continually to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.1"></span>God</span>, since, if charity the mother
of virtues abides in your heart towards us, you will never lose the
branches of good works, seeing that you retain the very root of
goodness.  You ought, then, to shew the beauty of this charity to me and
to all your brethren by this good work in the first place,—your
hastening to discard that word of pride whereby grave offence is
engendered in the Churches, thus fulfilling in all ways what is written,
*Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace*
([Ephes. iv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.2"></span>):  and again, *Give none occasion to the
adversary to speak reproachfully* ([1 Tim. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.3"></span>).  For then will true charity be
displayed, if there is no schism among us through an example of pride. 
For, as for me, I call Jesus to witness in my soul, that to no one among
men from the highest to the lowest do I wish to give occasion of
offence.  I desire that all should be great and honourable, yet so that
their honour detract not from the honour of Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.4"></span>God</span>.  For whoso
covets to be honoured against <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.5"></span>God</span> to me is not honourable.  But,
that you may learn what good will I have towards your Blessedness, I
have sent my son the deacon Anatolius to the feet of our most pious
lords, for satisfying their Piety and your Fraternity that I desire to
injure no man in this matter, but to keep the humility that is pleasing
to <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.6"></span>God</span>, and
the concord of holy Church.  And because Antichrist, the enemy of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.7"></span>God</span>, is near at
hand, I studiously desire the he may not find anything belonging to
himself, not only in the manners, but even in the titles of priests. 
Let then what has been introduced after a new fashion be removed in like
manner as it was brought in, and peace in the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.8"></span>Lord</span> will remain with us
inviolate.  For what pleasantness, what charity, will there be amongst
us, if we cheer ourselves up with words, while we are galled by facts? 
Let then your Holiness so act that we may feel in our inmost hearts the
good things you speak of, to the end that, the hearts of priests being
in unanimity, when we supplicate for the life of our most pious lords,
we may be counted worthy to be heard all the more as peace illuminates
your prayers before the eyes of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xix-p4.9"></span>God</span>, and no stain of discord
darkens them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Anastasius, Presbyter.](2120552.md)
