[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120167)  [Next](2120169.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.clviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXIV. <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md) </span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p3.1"></span>To Leo Augustus.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p4"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Leo Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p5"></span>I.  *He sends envoys but deprecates
any fresh discussion of the Faith.*

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p6"></span>Rejoicing that it has been proved to
me by <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-Page_106"></span>many clear proofs with what
earnestness you consult the interests of the universal Church, I have
not delayed to obey your Majesty’s commands on the first opportunity, by
despatching Domitian and Geminian my brothers and fellow-bishops, who in
furtherance of my earnest prayers, shall entreat you for the peaceful
acceptance of the gospel-teaching and obtain the liberty of the Faith in
which through the instruction of the Holy Spirit you yourself are so
conspicuously eminent, now that the enemies of Christ are driven far
away, who even if they had wished to conceal their madness, could not
lie hid, because the holy simplicity of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p6.1"></span>Lord’s</span> flock is very different from
the pretences of beasts who hide themselves in sheeps’ clothing, nor can
they creep in by hypocrisy now that their exceeding madness has revealed
them.  Recognize, therefore, august and venerable Emperor, how that you
are called by Divine providence to the guardianship of the whole world,
and understand what aid you owe to your Mother, the Church, who makes
especial boast of you.  Disputes that are ended must not be allowed to
rise with renewed vigour against the triumphs of the Almighty’s right
hand, especially when this can in no wise be allowed to heretics, whose
attempts have long ago been condemned and the labours of the faithful
have a just claim to this result, that all the fulness of the Church
shall remain secure in the completeness of her unity, and that nothing
whatever of what has been well laid down shall be reconsidered, because,
after constitutions have been legitimately framed under Divine guidance,
to wish still to wrangle is the sign not of a peace-making but of a
rebellious spirit, as says the Apostle, “for to strive with words is
profitable for nothing, but for the subverting of them that hear <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md) .”

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p8"></span>II.  *In matters of Faith human
rhetoric is out of place.*

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p9"></span>For if it be always free for human
fancies to assert themselves in dispute, there never will be wanting men
who will dare to oppose the Truth, and to put their trust in the glib
utterances of this world’s wisdom, whereas the Christian Faith and
wisdom knows from the teaching of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ Himself how
strictly it ought to shun this most harmful vanity.  For when Christ was
about to summon all nations to the illumination of the Faith, He chose
those who were to devote themselves to the preaching of the Gospel not
from among philosophers or orators, but took humble fishermen as the
instruments by which He would reveal Himself, lest the heavenly
teaching, which was of itself full of mighty power, should seem to need
the aid of words.  And hence the Apostle protests and says, “For Christ
sent me not to baptize but to preach the Gospel, not in wisdom of words
lest the cross of Christ should be made void; for the word of the cross
is to them indeed that perish foolishness, but to those which are being
saved it is the power of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p9.2"></span>God</span>.  For it is written, I will
destroy the wisdom of the wise and the prudence of the prudent will I
reject.  Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the inquirer
of this age? has not <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p9.3"></span>God</span> made foolish the wisdom of this
world <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md) ?”  For rhetorical
arguments and clever debates of man’s device make their chief boast in
this, that in doubtful matters which are obscured by the variety of
opinions they can induce their hearers to accept that view which each
has chosen for his own genius and eloquence to bring forward; and thus
it happens that what is maintained with the greatest eloquence is
reckoned the truest.  But Christ’s Gospel needs not this art; for in it
the true teaching stands revealed by its own light:  nor is there any
seeking for that which shall please the ear, when to know Who is the
Teacher is sufficient for true faith.

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p11"></span>III.  *Eutyches’ dogma is condemned
by the testimony of Scripture and cannot further be entertained.*

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p12"></span>But nothing severs those who are
deceived by their own inventions, from the light of the Gospel so much
as their not thinking that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p12.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Incarnation appertains in a
true sense to man’s, that is, our, nature:  as if it were unworthy of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clviii-p12.2"></span>God’s</span> glory
that the majesty of the impassible Word should have taken the reality of
human flesh, whereas men’s salvation could not otherwise have been
restored had not He Who is in the form of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p12.3"></span>God</span> deigned also to take the form
of a slave.  And hence since the holy Synod of Chalcedon, which was
attended by all the provinces of the Roman world and obtained universal
acceptance for its decisions, and is in complete harmony therein with
the most sacred council of Nicæa, has cut off all the wicked followers
of the Eutychian dogma from the body of the catholic communion, how
shall any of the lapsed regain the peace of the church, without purging
himself by a full course of penitence?  For what licence can be granted
them for discussing, when they have deserved to be condemned by a just
and holy <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-Page_107"></span>judgment, so that they might most
truly fall under that sentence of the blessed Apostle, wherewith at the
very outset of the infant Church he overthrew the enemies of Christ’s
cross, saying:  “every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ to have come
in the flesh is of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p12.4"></span>God</span>, and every spirit which
dissolves Jesus is not of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p12.5"></span>God</span>, but this is antichrist <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md) .”  And this pre-existent teaching of
the Holy Ghost we must faithfully and stedfastly make use of, lest, by
admitting the discussions of such men the authority of the divinely
inspired decrees be diminished, when in all parts of your kingdom and in
all borders of the earth that Faith which was confirmed at Chalcedon is
being established on the surest basis of peace, nor is any one worthy of
the name of Christian who cuts himself off from communion with us.  Of
whom the Apostle says, “a man that is heretical after a first and a
second admonition, avoid, knowing that such a one is perverse and
condemned by his own judgment <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608.md) .”

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p15"></span>IV.  *If the Divine mercy is to be
exercised, the heretics must cease entirely from the error of their
ways.*

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p16"></span>What therefore the unholy parricide
has perpetrated by seizing on the holy Church and cruelly murdering its
very ruler, cannot be expiated by man’s forgiveness, unless He Who alone
can rightly punish such things, and alone can of His unspeakable mercy
remit them, be propitiated.  But though we are not anxious for
vengeance, we cannot in any way be allied with the devil’s servants. 
Yet if we learn they are quitting the ranks of heresy, repenting them of
their error and turning from the weapons of discord to the lamentations
of sorrow, we also can intercede for them, lest they perish for ever,
thus following the example of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p16.1"></span>Lord’s</span> loving-kindness, who, when
nailed to the wood of the cross prayed for His persecutors, “Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609.md) .”  And that Christian love may do
this profitably for its enemies, wicked heretics must cease to harass
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clviii-p17.2"></span>God’s</span> ever
religious and ever devout Church; they must not dare to disturb the
souls of the simple by their falsehoods, to the end that, where in all
former times the purest faith has flourished, the teaching of the Gospel
and of the Apostles may now also have free course; because we also
imitating, so far as we can, the Divine mercy desire no one to be
punished by justice, but all to be released by mercy.

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p18"></span>V.  *Let him restore the refugee
clergy and laity and utterly reject those who persist in heresy.*

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p19"></span>I entreat your clemency, listen to
the suggestions of my brethren already mentioned, whom, as I some time
ago have said in a former letter <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610.md)
, I have sent not to wrangle with the condemned, but merely to intercede
with you for the stability of the catholic Faith.  And in accordance
with your faith in and regard for the Divine Majesty this especially you
should grant, that completely setting aside the contentions of heretics
you should deign to bestow a merciful attention on those who have fallen
upon such evil days, and, after restoring the liberty of the church of
Alexandria to its pristine state, should set up there a bishop who,
upholding the decrees of the Synod of Chalcedon and agreeing with the
ordinances of the Gospel, shall be able to restore peace among that
greatly disturbed people.  Those bishops and clergy also whom the unholy
parricide has driven out of their churches, should be recalled at your
Majesty’s command, all others also, whom a like maliciousness has
banished from their dwellings, being restored to their former estate, to
the end that we may have due cause fully and perfectly to rejoice in the
grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p20.1"></span>God</span> and your faith without any
further noise of strife.  For if any one is so forgetful of the
Christian hope and his own salvation as to venture by any dispute to
assail the Evangelical and Apostolical decrees of the holy Synod of
Chalcedon, thus overthrowing the most sacred Council of Nicæa also, him
with all heretics who have held blasphemous and abominable views on the
Incarnation of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p20.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ we condemn by a
like anathema and equal curse, so that, without refusing the remedy of
repentance to those who make full and legitimate atonement, the sentence
of the Synod, which is based on truth, may rest upon those who still
resist.  Dated 17th of August, in the consulship of Leo and Majorian
Augusti (458).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_604"></span>[105:605](2120168.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p2"></span> Portions of this letter are found
quoted by various ancient Fathers, e.g. by Popes Vigilius and Pelagius
II. in the sixth cent; by Facundus, bishop of Hermiæ, in the same
century, and almost one half of the whole by Prudentius, bishop of
Troyes (ninth cent.) in his famous treatise on Predestination against
John Scotus Erigena.  Quesnel, however, appears to have been the first
to print it as a whole *ex codice Grimanico*; after which the Ball. also
discovered it in the Ratisbon <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p2.1"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_605"></span>[106:606](2120168.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p7"></span> Loosely quoted from [2 Tim. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[106:607](2120168.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p10"></span> [1 Cor. i.
17-20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[107:608](2120168.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p12.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p13"></span> [1 John
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p13.1"></span>.  For the reading *solvit* (dissolves),
cf. Lett. XXVIII. (Tome), chap. 5 and note.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[107:609](2120168.htm#fr_608.md) <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p14"></span> [Titus
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[107:610](2120168.htm#fr_609.md) <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p17"></span> S. [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[107:611](2120168.htm#fr_610.md) <span
id="ii.iv.clviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clviii-p20"></span> Viz. Lett. CLXII. chap. iii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Leo Augustus.](2120169.md)
