[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120413)  [Next](2120415) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of
Ravenna <span id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p5"></span>It is not long since certain
things had been <span id="page_137b">p. 137b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-Page_137b"></span>told us about thy Fraternity
concerning which we remember having declared ourselves in full, when
Castorius, notary of the holy church over which we preside, went into
your parts.  For it had come to our ears that some things were being
done in your church contrary to custom and to the way of humility, which
alone, as you well know, exalts the priestly office.  Now, if your
Wisdom had received our admonitions kindly or with episcopal
seriousness, you ought not to have been incensed by them, but have
corrected these same things with thanks to us.  For it is contrary to
ecclesiastical use, if even unjust correction (the which be far from us)
is not most patiently borne.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p6"></span>But your Fraternity has been too
much moved; and when, in the swelling of thy heart, as if to justify
thyself, thou wrotest that thou didst not use the pallium except after
the sons of the Church had been dismissed from the sacristy <span
id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504) , and at the time of mass, and in
solemn litanies, thou madest acknowledgment in words with most manifest
truth of having usurped something contrary to the usage of the Church in
general.  For how can it be that at a time of ashes and sackcloth,
through the streets among the noises of the people thou couldest do
lawfully what thou hast disclaimed the doing of as being unlawful in the
assembly of the poor and nobles, and in the sacristy of the Church?  Yet
this, dearest brother, is not, we think, unknown to thee; that it has
hardly ever been heard of any metropolitan in any parts of the world
that he has claimed to himself the use of the pallium except at the time
of mass.  And that you knew well this custom of the Church in general
you have shewn most plainly by your epistles, in which you have sent to
us appended the precept of our predecessor John of blessed memory, to
the effect that all the customs conceded in the way of privilege to you
and your church by our predecessors should be retained.  You
acknowledge, then, that the custom of the Church in general is
different, seeing that you claim the right of doing what you do on the
score of privilege.  Thus, as we think, we can have no remaining
doubtfulness in this matter.  For either the usage of all metropolitans
should be observed also by thy Fraternity, or, if thou sayest that
something has been specially conceded to thy church, it is for your side
to shew the precept of former pontiffs of the Roman City wherein these
things have been conceded to the Church of Ravenna.  But, if this is not
shewn, it remains, seeing that you establish your claim to do such
things on the score neither of general custom nor of privilege, that you
prove yourself to have usurped in what you have done.  And what shall we
say to the future judge, most beloved brother, if we defend the use of
that heavy yoke and chain on our neck with a view, I do not say to
ecclesiastical, but to a certain secular dignity; judging ourselves to
be lowered if we are without so great a weight even for a short space of
time?  We desire to be adorned with the pallium, being, it may be,
unadorned in character; whereas nothing shines more splendidly on a
bishop’s neck than humility.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p8"></span>It is therefore the duty of thy
Fraternity, if thou art firmly determined to defend thy honours with any
kind of arguments, either to follow the use of the generality without
written authority, or to defend thyself under privileges shewn in
writing.  Or, if lastly thou doest neither, we will not have thee set an
example of presumption of this sort to other metropolitans.  But, lest
thou shouldest perchance think that we, in thus writing to you, have
neglected what belongs to fraternal charity, know ye that careful search
has been made in our archives for the privileges of thy Church.  And
indeed some things have been found, sufficient to obviate entirely the
aims of thy Fraternity, but nothing to support the contentions of your
Church on the points in question.  For even concerning the very custom
of thy Church which thou allegest against us, which custom we wrote
before should be proved on your side, we would have you know that we
have already taken thought sufficiently, having questioned our sons,
Peter the deacon and Gaudiosus the *primicerius* <span
id="fr_1505"></span>[1506](#fn_1505) , and also Michael the guardian
(*defensorem*) of our see, or others who on various commissions have
been sent by our predecessors to Ravenna; and they have most positively
denied that thou hast done these things in their presence.  It is
therefore apparent that what was done in secret must have been an
unlawful usurpation.  Hence what has been latently introduced can have
no firm ground to justify its continuance.  What things, then, thou or
thy predecessors have presumed to do superfluously do thou, having
regard to charity, and with brotherly kindness, study to correct.  To no
degree attempt—I do not say of thine own <span id="page_138b">p.
138b</span> <span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-Page_138b"></span>accord, but
after the fashion set by others, even thy predecessors,—to deviate from
the rule of humility.  For, to sum up shortly what I have said above, I
admonish thee to this effect; that unless thou canst shew that this has
been allowed thee by my predecessors in the way of privilege, thou
presume not any more to use the pallium in the streets, lest thou come
not to have even for mass what thou audaciously usurpest even in the
streets.  But as to thy sitting in the sacristy, and receiving the sons
of the Church with the pallium on (which thing thy Fraternity has both
done and disclaimed), we now for the present make no complaint; since,
following the decision of synods, we refuse to punish minor faults,
which are denied.  Yet we know this to have been done once and again,
and we prohibit its being done any more.  But let thy Fraternity take
careful heed, lest presumption which in its commencement is pardoned be
more severely visited if it proceeds further.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p10"></span>Furthermore, you have complained
that certain of the sacerdotal order in the city of Ravenna are involved
in serious criminal charges.  Their case we desire thee either to
examine on the spot, or to send them hither (unless, indeed, difficulty
of proof owing to the distance of the places stands in the way of this),
that the case may be examined here.  But if, relying on the patronage of
great people, which we do not believe, they should scorn to submit to
thy judgment or to come to us, and should refuse contumaciously to
answer to the charges made against them, we desire that after thy second
and third admonition, thou interdict them from the ministry of the
sacred office, and report to us in writing of their contumacy, that we
may deliberate how thou oughtest to make a thorough enquiry into their
doings, and correct them according to canonical definitions.  Let,
therefore, thy Fraternity know that we are most fully absolved from
responsibility in this case, seeing that we have committed to you a
thorough investigation of the matter; and that, if all their sins should
pass unpunished, the whole weight of this enquiry redounds to the peril
of thy soul.  And know, beloved, that thou wilt have no excuse at the
future judgment, if thou dost not correct the excesses of thy clergy
with the utmost severity of canonical strictness, and if thou allowest
any against whom such excesses shall have been proved to profane sacred
orders any longer.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p11"></span>Further, what you have written in
defence of the use of napkins by your clergy is strenuously opposed by
our own clergy, who say that this has never been granted to any other
Church whatever, and that neither have the clergy of Ravenna, either
there or in the Roman city, presumed, to their knowledge, in any such
way, nor, if it has been attempted in the way of furtive usurpation,
does it form a precedent.  But, even though there had been such
presumption in any church whatever, they assert that it ought to be
corrected, not being by grant of the Roman pontiff, but merely a
surreptitious presumption.  But we, to save the honour of thy
Fraternity, though against the wish of our aforesaid clergy, still allow
the use of napkins to your first deacons (whose former use of them has
been testified to us by some), but only when in attendance upon thee. 
The use of them, at any other time, or by any other persons, we most
strictly prohibit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[136b:1504](2120414.htm#fr_1503) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p4"></span> This John, and apparently
previous bishops of Ravenna, appear to have assumed a dignity not
conceded to other metropolitans; perhaps on the ground of Ravenna being
the seat of the Exarch, and having been once the imperial residence. 
The pallium usually granted to Metropolitans was allowed to be used by
them only during the celebration of the Eucharist; and we find Gregory,
in several epistles, restricting them to such use of it, when he sent it
to them.  John was reported to have worn it while receiving the laity in
the sacristy before celebration; and he owned to having worn it in
solemn processions through the city, alleging custom and peculiar
privilege.  Further, his clergy, when accompanying him in processions,
had been accustomed to carry napkins (*mappulæ*), which appear to have
been signs of dignity.  It is for these assumptions that Gregory now
remonstrates with him; but apparently in vain with regard to the use of
the pallium in processions through the city:  for Marinianus, the
successor of John, continued the custom, though whether he finally
persisted in it does not appear.  Other letters referring to the subject
are V. 15; VI. 34, 61.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[137b:1505](2120414.htm#fr_1504) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p7"></span> *Secretarium*, viz. the chamber
adjoining the church in which the vestments and sacred utensils were
kept, and the clergy vested for service; and in which also as appears
from this and the following epistle, the bishop was accustomed to
receive the laity before mass.  From the custom of holding synods in the
apartments so called, the sessions of synods were also themselves
sometimes called *secretaria*.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[137b:1506](2120414.htm#fr_1505) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxviii-p9"></span> The term *primicerius*is
variously applied, denoting the chiefs of departments.  In *Ep*. 22,
*supra*, we find *primicerium notariorum*.  In VII. 32, we find also the
designation *Secundi cerius*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From John, Bishop of Ravenna to Pope Gregory.](2120415)
