[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120102)  [Next](2120104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xciii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p1.1"></span>Letter XCVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p2.1"></span>From the Synod of Chalcedon to Leo.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p3"></span>The great and holy and universal Synod,
which by the grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p3.1"></span>God</span> and the sanction of our most
pious and Christ-loving Emperors has been gathered together in the
metropolis of Chalcedon in the province of Bithynia, to the most holy
and blessed archbishop of Rome, Leo.

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p4"></span>I.  *They congratulate Leo on taking
the foremost part in maintaining the Faith*.

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p5"></span>“Our mouth was filled with joy and our
tongue with exultation <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432) .”  This
prophecy grace has fitly appropriated to us for whom the security of
religion is ensured.  For what is a greater incentive to cheerfulness
than the Faith? what better inducement to exultation than the Divine
knowledge which the Saviour Himself gave us from above for salvation,
saying, “go ye and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them
into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
teaching them to observe all things that I have enjoined you <span
id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433) .”  And this golden chain leading down
from the Author of the command to us, you yourself have stedfastly
preserved, being set as the mouthpiece unto all of the blessed Peter,
and imparting the blessedness of his Faith unto all.  Whence we too,
wisely taking you as our guide in all that is good, have shown to the
sons of the Church their inheritance of Truth, not giving our
instruction each singly and in secret, but making known our confession
of the Faith in conceit, with one consent and agreement.  And we were
all delighted, revelling, as at an imperial banquet, in the spiritual
food, which Christ supplied to us through your letter:  and we seemed to
see the Heavenly Bridegroom actually present with us.  For if “where two
or three are gathered together in His name,” He has said that “there He
is in the midst of them <span id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434) ,” must
He not have been much more particularly present with 520 priests, who
preferred the spread of knowledge concerning Him to their country and
their ease?  Of whom you were chief, as the head to the members, showing
your goodwill <span id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435) in the person of
those who represented you; whilst our religious Emperors presided to the
furtherance of due order, inviting us to restore the doctrinal fabric of
the Church, even as Zerubbabel invited Joshua to rebuild Jerusalem <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) .

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p11"></span>II.  *They detail Dioscorus’ wicked
acts.*

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p12"></span>And the adversary would have been like
a wild beast outside the fold, roaring to himself and unable to seize
any one, had not the late bishop of Alexandria thrown himself for a prey
to him, who, though he had done many terrible things before, eclipsed
the former by the latter deeds; for contrary to all the injunctions of
the canons, he deposed that blessed shepherd of the saints at
Constantinople, Flavian, who displayed such Apostolic faith, and the
most pious bishop Eusebius, and acquitted by his terror-won votes
Eutyches, who had been condemned for heresy, and restored to him the
dignity which your holiness had taken away from him as unworthy of it,
and like the strangest of wild beasts, falling upon the vine which he
found in the finest condition, he uprooted it and brought in that which
had been cast away as unfruitful, and those who acted like true
shepherds he cut off, and set over the flocks those who had shown
themselves wolves:  and besides all this he stretched forth his fury
even against him who had been charged with the custody of the vine by
the Saviour, we mean of course your holiness, and purposed
excommunication against one who had at heart the unifying of the
Church.  And instead of showing penitence for this, instead of begging
mercy with tears, he exulted as if over virtuous actions, rejecting your
holiness’ letter and resisting all the dogmas of the Truth.

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p13"></span>III.  *We have deposed Eutyches,
treating him as mercifully as we could.*

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p14"></span>And we ought to have left him in the
position where he had placed himself:  but, since we profess the
teaching of the Saviour “who wishes all men to be saved and to come to a
knowledge of the Truth <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) ,” as a
fact we took pains to carry out this merciful policy towards him, and
called him in brotherly fashion to judgment, not as if trying to cut him
off but affording him room for defence and healing; and we prayed that
he might be victorious over the many charges they had brought against
him, in order that we might conclude our meeting in peace and happiness
and Satan might gain no advantage over us.  But he, being absolutely
convicted by his own conscience <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438)
, by shirking the trial gave countenance to the accusations and rejected
the three lawful <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-Page_73"></span>summonses he received.  In consequence
of which, we ratified with such moderation as we could the vote which he
had passed against himself by his blunders, stripping the wolf of his
shepherd’s skin, which he had long been convicted of wearing for a
pretence.  Thereupon our troubles ceased and straightway a time of
welcome happiness set in:  and having pulled up one tare, we filled the
whole world to our delight with pure grain:  and having received, as it
were, full power to root up and to plant, we limited the up-rooting to
one and carefully plant a crop of good fruit.  For it was <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.7"></span>God</span> who worked,
and the triumphant Euphemia who crowned the meeting as for a
bridal <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) , and who, taking our
definition of the Faith as her own confession, presented it to her
Bridegroom by our most religious Emperor and Christ-loving Empress,
appeasing all the tumult of opponents and establishing our confession of
the Truth as acceptable to Him, and with hand and tongue setting her
seal <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440) to the votes of us all in
proclamation thereof.  These are the things we have done, with you
present in the spirit and known to approve of us as brethren, and all
but visible to us through the wisdom of your representatives.

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p19"></span>IV.  *They announce their decision
that Constantinople should take precedence next to Rome, and ask Leo’s
consent to it.*

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p20"></span>And we further inform you that we have
decided on other things also for the good management and stability of
church matters, being persuaded that your holiness will accept and
ratify them, when you are told.  The long prevailing custom, which the
holy Church of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p20.1"></span>God</span> at Constantinople had of
ordaining metropolitans for the provinces of Asia, Pontus and Thrace, we
have now ratified by the votes of the Synod, not so much by way of
conferring a privilege on the See of Constantinople as to provide for
the good government of those cities, because of the frequent disorders
that arise on the death of their bishops, both clergy and laity being
then without a leader and disturbing church order.  And this has not
escaped your holiness, particularly in the case of Ephesus, which has
often caused you annoyance <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) .  We
have ratified also the canon of the 150 holy Fathers who met at
Constantinople in the time of the great Theodosius of holy memory, which
ordains that after your most holy and Apostolic See, the See of
Constantinople shall take precedence, being placed second:  for we are
persuaded that with your usual care for others you have often extended
that Apostolic prestige which belongs to you, to the church in
Constantinople also, by virtue of your great disinterestedness in
sharing all your own good things with your spiritual kinsfolk. 
Accordingly vouchsafe most holy and blessed father to accept as your own
wish, and as conducing to good government the things which we have
resolved on for the removal of all confusion and the confirmation of
church order.  For your holiness’ delegates, the most pious bishops
Paschasinus and Lucentius, and with them the right Godly presbyter
Boniface, attempted vehemently to resist these decisions, from a strong
desire that this good work also should start from your foresight, in
order that the establishment of good order as well as of the Faith
should be put to your account.  For we duly regarding our most devout
and Christ loving Emperors, who delight therein, and the illustrious
senate and, so to say, the whole imperial city, considered it opportune
to use the meeting of this ecumenical Synod for the ratification of your
honour, and confidently corroborated this decision as if it were
initiated by you with your customary fostering zeal, knowing that every
success of the children rebounds to the parent’s glory.  Accordingly, we
entreat you, honour our decision by your assent, and as we have yielded
to the head our agreement on things honourable, so may the head also
fulfil for the children what is fitting.  For thus will our pious
Emperors be treated with due regard, who have ratified your holiness’
judgment as law, and the See of Constantinople will receive its
recompense for having always displayed such loyalty on matters of
religion towards you, and for having so zealously linked itself to you
in full agreement.  But that you may know that we have done nothing for
favour or in hatred, but as being guided by the Divine Will, we have
made known to you the whole scope of our proceedings to strengthen our
position and to ratify and establish what we have done <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_432"></span>[72:433](2120103.htm#fr_432) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p6"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[72:434](2120103.htm#fr_433) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p7"></span> S. [Matt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[72:435](2120103.htm#fr_434) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p8"></span> [Matt.
18.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[72:436](2120103.htm#fr_435) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p9.1"></span>εὔνοιαν</span>:  others read <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xciii-p9.2"></span>εὐβουλίαν</span> (good
advice).

<span id="fn_436"></span>[72:437](2120103.htm#fr_436) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p10"></span> The reference is to [Ezra iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002)<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[72:438](2120103.htm#fr_437) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p15"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[72:439](2120103.htm#fr_438) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.2"></span>ν ἑαυτῷ ἄκρατον τοῦ συνειδότος ἔχων τὸν
ἔλεγχον</span>.  There seems, however, some grounds, but no actual
necessity for the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.3"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.4"></span>γγραφον</span> = written (instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.5"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.6"></span>κρατον</span>) adopted
by the Ball.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[73:440](2120103.htm#fr_439) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p16.8"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p17.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p17.2"></span>τὸν σύλλογον τῷ νυμφῶνι</span> (lit.
bride-chamber) <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p17.3"></span>στεφανοῦσα καλλίνικος Εὐφημία</span>; this
obscure passage is to a certain extent elucidated by Letter CI., chap.
iii. (*q.v*.).  The martyr, Euphemia, seems to have been a sort of
patron saint of Chalcedon.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[73:441](2120103.htm#fr_440) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p18.2"></span>πισφραγίσασα</span>; others <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xciii-p18.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xciii-p18.4"></span>πιψηφίσασα</span>,
which seems meaningless here.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[73:442](2120103.htm#fr_441) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p21"></span> The reference (acc. to Ball.) is to
the dispute about the bishopric between Bassian and Stephen, in which
Leo interfered, though the letter is not extant.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[73:443](2120103.htm#fr_442) <span
id="ii.iv.xciii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xciii-p22"></span> One of the Latin versions adds the
names and titles of the subscribing bishops here.  For the subject
matter of Chap. iv., see Introduction, p. viii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Ravennus and Other Gallic Bishops.](2120104)
