[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120044)  [Next](2120046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Letter XXXV.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p2.1"></span>To Julian, Bishop of Cos <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p4"></span>Leo, bishop of the city of Rome to his
well-beloved brother, Julian the bishop.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p5"></span>I.  *Eutyches’ heresy involves many
other heresies.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p6"></span>Although by the hands of our brothers,
whom we have despatched from the city on behalf of the Faith, we hare
sent a most full refutation of Eutyches’ excessive heresy to our brother
Flavian, yet because we have received, through our son Basil, your
letter, beloved, which has given us much pleasure from the fervour of
its catholic spirit, we have added this page also which agrees with the
other document, that you may offer a united and strenuous resistance to
those who seek to corrupt the gospel of Christ, since the wisdom and the
teaching of the Holy Spirit is one and the same in you as in us:  and
whosoever does not receive it, is not a member of Christ’s body and
cannot glory in that Head in which he denies the presence of his own
nature.  What advantage is it to that most unwise old man under the name
of the Nestorian heresy to mangle the belief of those, whose most devout
faith he cannot tear to pieces:  when in declaring the only-begotten Son
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p6.1"></span>God</span> to have
been so born of the blessed Virgin’s womb that He wore the appearance of
a human body without the reality of human flesh being united to the
Word, he departs as far from the right path as did Nestorius in
separating the Godhead of the Word from the substance of His assumed
Manhood <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) ?  From which prodigious
falsehood who does not see what monstrous opinions spring? for he who
denies the true Manhood of Jesus Christ, must needs be filled with many
blasphemies, being claimed by Apollinaris as his own, seized upon by
Valentinus, or held fast by Manichæus:  none of whom believed that there
was true human flesh in Christ.  But, surely, if that is not accepted,
not only is it denied that He, who was in the form of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p7.1"></span>God</span>, but yet abode
in the form of a slave, was born Man according to the flesh and
reasonable soul:  but also that He was crucified, dead, and buried, and
that on the third day He rose again, and that, sitting at the right hand
of the Father, he will come to judge the quick and the dead <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) in that body in which He Himself was
judged:  because these pledges <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)
of our redemption are rendered void if Christ is not believed to have
the true and whole nature of true Manhood.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p10"></span>II.  *The two natures are to be found
in Christ.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p11"></span>Or because the signs of His Godhead
were undoubted, shall the proof of his having a human body be assumed
false, and thus the indications of both natures be accepted to prove Him
Creator, but not be accepted for the salvation of the creature <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) ?  No, for the <span id="page_49">p.
49</span> <span id="ii.iv.xxxv-Page_49"></span>flesh did not lessen what
belongs to His Godhead, nor the Godhead destroy what belongs to His
flesh.  For He is at once both eternal from His Father and temporal from
His mother, inviolable in His strength, passible in our weakness:  in
the Triune Godhead, of one and the same substance with the Father and
the Holy Spirit, but in taking Manhood on Himself, not of one substance
but of one and the same person \[so that He was at once rich in poverty,
almighty in submission, impassible in punishment, immortal in
death <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) \].  For the Word was not
in any part of It turned either into flesh or into soul, seeing that the
absolute and unchangeable nature of the Godhead is ever entire in its
Essence, receiving no loss nor increase, and so beatifying the nature
that It had assumed that that nature remained for ever glorified in the
person of the Glorifier.  \[But why should it seem unsuitable or
impossible that the Word and flesh and soul should be one Jesus Christ,
and that the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p13.1"></span>God</span> and the Son of Man should be
one, if flesh and soul which are of different natures make one person
even without the Incarnation of the Word:  since it is much easier for
the power of the Godhead to produce this union of Himself and man than
for the weakness of manhood by itself to effect it in its own
substance.\]  Therefore neither was the Word changed into flesh nor
flesh into the Word:  but both remains in one and one is in both, not
divided by the diversity and not confounded by intermixture:  He is not
one by His Father and another by His mother, but the same, in one way by
His Father before every beginning, and in another by His mother at the
end of the ages:  so that He was “mediator between <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p13.2"></span>God</span> and men, the
man Christ Jesus <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) ,” in whom
dwelt “the fulness of the Godhead bodily <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) :”  because it was the assumed
(nature) not the Assuming (nature) which was raised, because <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p15.2"></span>God</span> “exalted Him
and gave Him the Name which is above every name:  that in the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things on earth and
things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p15.3"></span>Lord</span> is in the glory of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p15.4"></span>God</span> the
Father <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) .”

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p17"></span>III.  *The soul of Christ and the body
of Christ were real in the full human sense, though the circumstances of
His birth were unique.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p18"></span>\[But as to that which Eutyches dared
to say in the court of bishops “that before the Incarnation there were
two natures in Christ, but after the Incarnation one <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) ,” he ought to have been pressed by
the frequent and anxious questions of the judges to render an account of
his acknowledgment, lest it should be passed over as something trivial,
though it was seen to have issued from the same fount as his other
poisonous opinions.  For I think that in saying this he was convinced
that the soul, which the Saviour assumed, had had its abode in the
heavens before He was born of the Virgin Mary, and that the Word joined
it to Himself in the womb.  But this is intolerable to catholic minds
and ears:  because the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p19.1"></span>Lord</span> who came down from heaven
brought with Him nothing that belonged to our state:  for He did not
receive either a soul which had existed before nor a flesh which was not
of his mother’s body.  Undoubtedly our nature was not assumed in such a
way that it was created first and then assumed, but it was created by
the very assumption.  And hence that which was deservedly condemned in
Origen must be punished in Eutyches also, unless he prefers to give up
his opinion, viz. the assertion that souls have had not only a life but
also different actions before they were inserted in men’s bodies <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) \].  For although the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p20.1"></span>Lord’s</span> nativity
according to the flesh has certain characteristics wherein it transcends
the ordinary beginnings of man’s being, both because He alone was
conceived and born without concupiscence of a pure Virgin, and because
He was so brought forth of His mother’s womb that her fecundity bare Him
without loss of virginity:  yet His flesh was not of another nature to
ours:  nor was the soul breathed into Him from another source to that of
all other men, and it excelled others not in difference of kind but in
superiority of power.  For He had no opposition in His flesh \[nor did
the strife of desires give rise to a conflict of wishes <span
id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) \].  His bodily senses were active
without the law of sin, and the reality of His emotions being under the
control of His Godhead and His mind, was neither assaulted by
temptations nor yielded to injurious influences.  But true Man was
united to <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p21.2"></span>God</span>
and was not brought down from heaven as regards a pre-existing soul, nor
created out of nothing as regards the flesh:  it wore the same person in
the Godhead of the Word and possessed a nature in common with us in its
body and soul.  For He would not be “the mediator between <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p21.3"></span>God</span> <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="ii.iv.xxxv-Page_50"></span>and man,”
unless <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p21.4"></span>God</span>
and man had co-existed in both natures forming one true Person.  The
magnitude of the subject urges us to a lengthy discussion:  but with one
of your learning there is no need for such copious dissertations,
especially as we have already sent a sufficient letter to our brother
Flavian by our delegates for the confirmation of the minds, not only of
priests but also of the laity.  The mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p21.5"></span>God</span> will, we believe, provide that
without the loss of one soul the sound may be defended against the
devil’s wiles, and the wounded healed.  Dated 13th June in the
consulship of the illustrious Asturius and Protogenes (449).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_342"></span>[48:343](2120045.htm#fr_342) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p3"></span> See Lett. XXXIV., chap. ii. n. 5.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[48:344](2120045.htm#fr_343) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p7"></span> The Gk. version here adds and “from the
very conception of the Virgin,” but this is probably only a repetition
of the words “of the Virgin’s womb,” just above.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[48:345](2120045.htm#fr_344) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p8"></span> It can escape no one that he is here,
and frequently throughout this letter, quoting from the Creed.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[48:346](2120045.htm#fr_345) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p9"></span> *Sacramenta.*

<span id="fn_346"></span>[48:347](2120045.htm#fr_346) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p12"></span> i.e. shall the signs of His being God,
which are undoubted, and the signs that He had a body of some sort be
allowed to prove Him one with the Creator of the world, but not go so
far as to show that that body which He had was a fully human one?

<span id="fn_347"></span>[49:348](2120045.htm#fr_347) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p13"></span> *So that—in death*, bracketed by the
editors as not being translated in the Gk. version, and perhaps here we
have a gloss to explain the somewhat obscure words that precede it:  but
throughout this letter large portions are so bracketed, in each case the
Gk. version omitting them.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[49:349](2120045.htm#fr_348) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p14"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[49:350](2120045.htm#fr_349) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p15"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[49:351](2120045.htm#fr_350) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p15.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p16"></span> [Phil. ii.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[49:352](2120045.htm#fr_351) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p19"></span> Cf. the Tome, Lett. XXVIII., chap.
vi., n. 5.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[49:353](2120045.htm#fr_352) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p20"></span> Cf. Lett. XV., chap. xi., n. 6.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[49:354](2120045.htm#fr_353) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxv-p21"></span> Here again the second clause (in
brackets) seems a gloss on the first, see n. 2, above:  what is meant
will be seen by comparing S. Paul’s famous disquisition ([Rom.
vii.](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxv-p21.1"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Flavian, Bishop of Constantinople.](2120046)
