[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120172)  [Next](2120174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p2.1"></span>To Leo Augustus.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Leo Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p4"></span>I.  *He heartily thanks the Emperor
for what he has done, and asks him to complete the work in any way he
can.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p5"></span>If we should seek to reward your
Majesty’s glorious resolution in defence of the Faith with all the
praise that the greatness of the issue demands, we should be found
unequal to the task of giving thanks and celebrating the joy of the
universal Church with our feeble tongue.  But His worthier recompense
awaits your acts and deserts, in whose cause you have shown so excellent
a zeal, and are now triumphing gloriously over the attainment of the
wished-for end.  Your clemency must know therefore that all the churches
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p5.1"></span>God</span> join
in praising you and rejoicing that the unholy parricide has been cast
off from the neck of the Alexandrine church, and that <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p5.2"></span>God’s</span> people, on
whom the abominable robber has been so great a burden, restored to the
ancient liberty of the Faith, can now be recalled into the way of
salvation by the preaching of faithful priests, when it sees the whole
hotbed of pestilence done away with in the person of the originator
himself.  Now therefore, because you have accomplished this by firm
resolution and stedfast will, complete your tale of work for the Faith
by passing such decrees as shall be well-pleasing to <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p5.3"></span>God</span> in favour of
this city’s catholic ruler <span id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633) , who
is tainted by no trace of the heresy <span id="page_113">p. 113</span>
<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-Page_113"></span>now so often condemned:  lest,
perchance, the wound apparently healed but still lurking beneath the
scar should grow, and the Christian laity, which by your public action
has been freed from the perversity of heretics, should again fall a prey
to deadly poison.

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p7"></span>II.  *Good works as well as integrity
of faith is required in a priest.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p8"></span>But you see, venerable Emperor, and
clearly understand, that in the person, whose excommunication is
contemplated, it is not only the integrity of his faith that must be
considered; for even if that could be purged by any punishments and
confessions, and completely restored by any conditions, yet the wicked
and bloody deeds that have been committed can never be done away by the
protestations of plausible words:  because in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p8.1"></span>God’s</span> pontiff, and particularly in
the priest of so great a church, the sound of the tongue and the
utterance of the lips is not enough, and nothing is of avail, if <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p8.2"></span>God</span> makes
proclamation with His voice and the mind is convicted of blasphemy.  For
of such the Holy Ghost speaks by the Apostle, “having an appearance of
godliness, but denying the power thereof,” and again elsewhere, “they
profess that they know <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p8.3"></span>God</span>, but in deeds they deny
Him <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634) .”  And hence, since in
every member of the Church both the integrity of the true Faith and
abundance of good works is looked for, how much more ought both these
things to predominate in the chief pontiff, because the one without the
other cannot be in union with the Body of Christ.

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p10"></span>III.  *Timothy’s request for
indulgence on the score of orthodoxy must not be allowed.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p11"></span>Nor need we now state all that makes
Timothy accursed, since what has been done through him and on his
account, has abundantly and conspicuously come to the knowledge of the
whole world, and whatever has been perpetrated by an unruly mob against
justice, all rests on his head, whose wishes were served by its mad
hands.  And hence, even if in his profession of faith he neglects
nothing, and deceives us in nothing, it best consorts with your glory
absolutely to exclude him from this design of his <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635) , because in the bishop of so great a
city the universal Church ought to rejoice with holy exultation, so that
the true peace of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p12.1"></span>Lord</span> may be glorified not only by
the preaching of the Faith, but also by the example of men’s conduct. 
Dated 17th of June, in the consulship of Magnus and Apollonius (460). 
(By the hand of Philoxenus *agens in rebus* <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636) .)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_633"></span>[112:634](2120173.htm#fr_633) <span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p6"></span> This is another Timothy surnamed
Solophaciolus, supposed to be the same as that *Timotheos presbyter et
œconomus Ecclesiæ*, mentioned among the Egyptian refugees who petitioned
the Emperor against Ælurus.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[113:635](2120173.htm#fr_634) <span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p9"></span> [2 Tim.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005), [Titus
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016)<span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[113:636](2120173.htm#fr_635) <span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p12"></span> Apparently to be allowed to reside
in Constantinople (or perhaps at this stage to remain in Alexandria).

<span id="fn_636"></span>[113:637](2120173.htm#fr_636) <span
id="ii.iv.clxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxiii-p13"></span> See Lett. CLXII. n. 2a.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Gennadius, Bishop of Constantinople.](2120174)
