[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120281)  [Next](2120283) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p2"></span>How sowers of strifes and
peacemakers are to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 24.)  Differently to
be admonished are sowers of strifes and peacemakers.  For sowers of
strifes are to be admonished to perceive whose followers they are.  For
of the apostate angel it is written, when tares had been sown among the
good crop, *An enemy hath done this* ([Matth. xiii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#028)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3.1"></span>).  Of a member of him also it is said
through Solomon, *An apostate person, an unprofitable man, walketh with
a perverse mouth, he winketh with his eyes, he beateth with his foot, he
speaketh with his finger, with froward heart he deviseth mischief
continually, he soweth strifes* ([Prov. vi.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3.2"></span>).  Lo, him whom he would speak of as a
sower of strifes he first named an apostate; since, unless after the
manner of the proud angel he first fell away inwardly by the alienation
of his mind from the face of his Maker, he would not afterwards come to
sow strifes outwardly.  He is rightly described too as winking with his
eyes, speaking with his finger, beating with his foot.  For it is inward
watch that keeps the members outwardly in orderly control.  He, then,
who has lost stability of mind falls off outwardly into inconstancy of
movement, and by his exterior mobility shews that he is stayed on no
root within.  Let sowers of strifes hear what is written, *Blessed are
the peacemakers, far they shall be called the children of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3.3"></span>God</span>* ([Matth. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3.4"></span>).  And on the other hand let them
gather that, if they who make peace are called the children of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3.5"></span>God</span>, without
doubt those who confound it are the children of Satan.  Moreover, all
who are separated by discord from the greenness of loving-kindness are
dried up:  and, though they bring forth in their actions fruits of
well-doing, yet there are in truth no fruits, because they spring not
from the unity of charity.  Hence, therefore, let sowers of strifes
consider how manifoldly they sin; in that, while they perpetrate one
iniquity, they eradicate at the same time all virtues from human
hearts.  For in one evil they work innumerable evils, since, in sowing
discord, they extinguish charity, which is in truth the mother of all
virtues.  But, since nothing is more precious with <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3.6"></span>God</span> than the
virtue of loving-kindness, nothing is more acceptable to the devil than
the extinction of charity.  Whosoever, then, by sowing of strifes
destroy the loving-kindness of neighbours, serve <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p3.7"></span>God’s</span> enemy as his familiar
friend; because by taking away from them this, by the loss of which he
fell, they have cut off from them the road whereby to rise.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p4"></span>But, on the other hand, the
peacemakers are to be admonished that they detract not from the efficacy
of so great an undertaking through not knowing between whom they ought
to establish peace.  For, as there is much harm if unity be wanting to
the good, so there is exceeding harm if it be not wanting to the bad. 
If, then, the iniquity of the perverse is united in peace, assuredly
there is an accession of strength to their evil doings, since the more
they agree among themselves in wickedness, by so much the more stoutly
do they dash themselves against the good to afflict them.  For hence it
is that against the preachers of that vessel of damnation, to wit,
Antichrist, is it said by the divine voice to the blessed Job, *The
members of his flesh stick close to each other* ([Job xli.
14](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#014)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p4.1"></span> <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) ).  Hence, under the figure of
scales, it is said of his satellites, *One is joined to another, and not
even a breathing-hole cometh between them* ([Job
41.7](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span> <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280) ).  For, indeed, his followers,
from being divided by no opposition of discord among themselves, are by
so much the more strongly banded together in the slaughter of the good. 
He then who associates the iniquitous together in peace supplies
strength to iniquity, since they <span id="page_51b">p. 51b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-Page_51b"></span>worse press down the good, whom they
persecute unanimously.  Whence the excellent preacher, being overtaken
by violent persecution from Pharisees and Sadducees, endeavoured to
divide among themselves those whom he saw to be violently united against
himself, when he cried out, saying, *Men, brethren, I am a Pharisee, the
son of Pharisees; of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called
in question* ([Acts xxiii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p6.1"></span>).  And, whereas the Sadducees denied
the hope and resurrection of the dead, which the Pharisees in accordance
with the precepts of Holy Writ believed, a dissension was caused in the
unanimity of the persecutors; and Paul escaped unhurt from the divided
crowd, which before, when united, had savagely assailed him.  Those,
therefore, who are occupied with the desire of making peace, are to be
admonished that they ought first to infuse a love of internal peace into
the minds of the froward, to the end that external peace may afterwards
avail to do them good; so that, while their heart is hanging on
cognition of the former, they be by no means hurried into wickedness
from perception of the latter; and, while they see before them that
which is supernal, they in no way turn that which is earthly to serve to
their own detriment.  But, if any perverse persons are such that they
could not harm the good, even though they lusted to do so, between them,
indeed, earthly peace ought to be established, even before they have
risen to the knowledge of supernal peace; even so that they, whom the
wickedness of their impiety exasperates against the loving-kindness of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p6.2"></span>God</span>, may
at any rate be softened out of love of their neighbour, and, as it were
from a neighbouring position, may pass to a better one, and so rise to
what is as yet far from them, the peace of their Maker.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[50b:1280](2120282.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p5"></span> So Vulgate.  Gregory always takes
Leviathan to signify the devil.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[50b:1281](2120282.htm#fr_1280) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxiv-p6"></span> So Vulgate.  Gregory always takes
Leviathan to signify the devil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the rude in sacred learning, and those who are learned but
not humble, are to be admonished.](2120283)
