[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120338)  [Next](2120340) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p2"></span>*To Symmachus the Defensor* <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) .

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p4"></span>Gregory to Symmachus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p5"></span>My son Boniface the deacon has told
me that thy Experience had written to say that a monastery built by
Labina, a religious lady, is now ready for monks to be settled in it.
 And indeed I praised thy solicitude; but we wish that some other place
than that which has been assigned for the purpose should be provided;
but with the condition, in view of the insecurity of the time, that one
above the sea be looked out for, which is either fortified by its
position, or at all events can be fortified without much labour.  So may
we send monks thither, to the end that the island itself, hitherto
without a monastery, may be improved by having this way of life upon it.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p6"></span>For carrying out and providing for
this business we have given directions to Horosius, the bearer of this
present order, with whom thy Experience must go round the <span
id="page_95b">p. 95b</span> <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-Page_95b"></span>shores of Corsica, and if any more
suitable place in the possession of any private person should be found,
we are prepared to give a suitable price, that we may be able to make
some secure arrangement.  We have enjoined the aforesaid Horosius to
proceed to the island Gorgonia; and let thy Experience accompany him,
and do you so avenge the evils that we have ascertained to have found
entrance there that through the punishment you shall inflict the
aforesaid island may remain corrected for the future also.  Let the same
abbot Horosius set in order the monasteries of this island, and so
hasten to return to us.  Let, then, thy Experience so act that in both
these matters, that is, both in providing for monasteries in Corsica,
and in correcting the monks of Gorgonia, thou mayest make haste to obey,
not our will, but that of Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p7"></span>Moreover we desire that the priests
who abide in Corsica shall be forbidden to have any intercourse with
women, except it may be a mother, or a sister, or a wife, towards whom
chastity should be observed <span id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371)
.  But to the three persons about whom thy Experience has written to my
son the aforesaid deacon Boniface, give whatsoever thou deemest
sufficient for them, since they are in grievous need; and this we will
allow thee afterwards in thy accounts.  Given in the month of July.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[94b:1371](2120339.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p3"></span> I.e. of the Church in Corsica, as
appears from the letter.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[95b:1372](2120339.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxvii-p8"></span> The clergy who had been married
before ordination were not required to put away their wives.  Can.
Apostol. V. expressly forbids their doing so under pain of
excommunication.  The 3rd Nicene Canon, which forbids any bishop,
presbyter, or any of the clergy, to have a woman dwelling with him
except a mother, or sister, or aunt, or such persons only as are above
suspicion, does not touch the case of wives, being directed against the
custom of the clergy having females who where neither wives nor of their
own kindred, to live with them, who were called *synesactæ*, or
*agapetæ*.  Accordingly a law of Honorius and the younger Theodosius,
made in pursuance of the Nicene Canon, adds to the above injunction,
“That those who were married before their husbands were ordained should
not be relinquished upon pretence of chastity, it being reasonable that
those should be joined to the clergy who by their conversation had made
their husbands worthy of the priesthood.”  (*Cod. Theodor. lib*. xvi.
*tit*. ii. *de Episc*. l. xliv.  Also *Cod. Just. lib*. i. *tit*. iii.
*leg*. xix.  See Bingham, Bk. vi. ch. ii. sect. 13).  But in the West it
was now the established rule that neither bishops, priests, nor deacons
should have conjugal intercourse with their wives after ordination:  and
it has been seen under Ep. XLIV. how this rule had been extended to
subdeacons.  Gregory tells us in his Dialogues (*Lib.* iv. cap. 11) of a
holy presbyter in the province of Nursia, who at the time of his
ordination had a wife (*presbyteram suam*), whom he thenceforth loved as
a sister, but avoided as an enemy, never suffering her to come near him
for fear of temptation:  and he adds, “For this is the way of holy men,
that in order to keep far away from what is unlawful they cut themselves
off even from what is lawful.”  Cf. IX. 60.  “Hoc tantummodo adjecto ut
hi, sicut canonica decrevit auctoritas, uxores quas caste debent regere
non relinquant.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LVI](2120340)
