[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120496)  [Next](2120498.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xi-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xi-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of
Constantinople.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xi-p4"></span>As the pravity of heretics is to be
repressed by the zeal of a right faith, so the integrity of a true
confession is to be embraced.  For, if one who declares himself sound in
the faith is scorned, the faith of all is brought into doubt, and fatal
errors are generated from inconsiderate strictness.  And hence not only
are wandering sheep not recalled to their <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xi-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span> folds, but even those that
are within them are exposed to be cruelly torn by the teeth of wild
beasts.  Let us then fully consider this, most dear brother, and not
suffer any one who truly professes the catholic faith to be distressed
under pretext of heresy, nor (which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xi-p4.2"></span>God</span> forbid) allow heresy to grow the
more under shew of correcting it.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xi-p5"></span>But we have wondered much why those who
were deputed by you as judges in a matter of faith against John,
presbyter of the church of Chalcedon, believed report, disregarding
truth, and would not believe him when he distinct professed his faith;
especially as his accusers, when asked what was the heresy of the
Marcionists which they spoke of, and on the ground of which they
endeavoured to make him out guilty, replied by a plain confession that
they did not know.  From which circumstance it evidently comes out that,
without regard to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>God</span>, not justly, but against their
own souls, they were desirous only of injuring him personally of their
own mere will.  We therefore, after Council held (as the tenor of the
proceedings before us shews), having thoroughly examined and considered
all that was necessary. inasmuch as we have been unable to find the
aforesaid presbyter in any respect guilty, and especially as the plea
which he delivered to the judges delegated by you is in entire
accordance with the integrity of a right faith, we I say on this
account, disapproving the sentence of the said judges, through the
revealing grace of Christ our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xi-p5.2"></span>God</span> and Redeemer, pronounce him by
our definite sentence catholic and free from all charge of heresy. 
Seeing, then, that we have sent him back to your Holiness, it is for you
to receive him with the kindness which you shew to all, and bestow on
him your priestly charity, and defend him from all molestation, nor
allow any one to busy himself in causing him trouble:  but, as you
defend others from oppression, so from him ought you not to withhold
your succour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Mauricius, Augustus.](2120498.md)
