[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120247)  [Next](2120249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>That the ruler should be pure in
thought.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>The ruler should always be pure in
thought, inasmuch as no impurity ought to pollute him who has undertaken
the office of wiping away the stains of pollution in the hearts of
others also; for the hand that would cleanse from dirt must needs be
clean, lest, being itself sordid with clinging mire, it soil whatever it
touches all the more.  For on this account it is said through the
prophet, *Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>Lord</span>* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p3.2"></span>).  For they bear the vessels of the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p3.3"></span>Lord</span> who
undertake, on the surety of their own conversation, to conduct the souls
of their neighbours to the eternal sanctuary.  Let them therefore
perceive within themselves how purified they ought to be who carry in
the bosom of their own personal responsibility living vessels to the
temple of eternity.  Hence by the divine voice it is enjoined ([Exod.
xxviii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p3.4"></span>), that on the breast of Aaron the
breastplate <span id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) of judgment
should be closely pressed by binding fillets; seeing that lax
cogitations should by no means possess the priestly heart, but reason
alone constrain it; nor should he cogitate anything indiscreet or
unprofitable, who, constituted as he is for example to others, ought to
shew in the gravity of his life what store of reason he carries in his
breast.  And on this breastplate it is further carefully prescribed that
the names of the twelve patriarchs should be engraved.  For to carry
always the fathers registered on the breast is to think without
intermission on the lives of the ancients.  For the priest then walks
blamelessly when he pores continually on the examples of the fathers
that went before him, when he considers without cease the footsteps of
the Saints, and keeps down unlawful thoughts, lest he advance the <span
id="page_10b">p. 10b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-Page_10b"></span>foot of his conduct beyond the limit
of order.  And it is also well called the breastplate of judgment,
because the ruler ought ever with subtle scrutiny to discern between
good and evil, and studiously consider what things are suitable for
what, and when and how; nor should he seek anything for himself, but
esteem his neighbours’ good as his own advantage.  Hence in the same
place it is written, *But thou shalt put in the breastplate of Aaron
doctrine and truth* <span id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268) *, which
shall be upon Aaron’s breast, when he goeth in before the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, and he
shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his breast in the
sight of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p5.3"></span>Lord</span> continually* ([Exod.
18.30](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#030)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p5.4"></span>).  For the priest’s bearing the judgment
of the children of Israel on his breast before the face of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p5.5"></span>Lord</span> means his
examining the causes of his subjects with regard only to the mind of the
judge within, so that no admixture of humanity cleave to him in what he
dispenses as standing in <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p5.6"></span>God’s</span> stead, lest private vexation
should exasperate the keenness of his censure.  And while he shews
himself zealous against the vices of others, let him get rid of his own
lest either latent grudge vitiate the calmness of his judgment, or
headlong anger disturb it.  But when the terror of Him who presides over
all things is considered (that is to say of the judge within), not
without great fear may subjects be governed.  And such fear indeed
purges, while it humiliates, the mind of the ruler, guarding it against
being either lifted up by presumption of spirit, or defiled by delight
of the flesh, or obscured by importunity of dusty thought through lust
for earthly things.  These things, however, cannot but knock at the
ruler’s mind:  but it is necessary to make haste to overcome them by
resistance, lest the vice which tempts by suggestion should subdue by
the softness of delight, and, this being tardily expelled from the mind,
should slay with the sword of consent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[9b:1268](2120248.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p4"></span> For *breastplate* (A.V.) the LXX.
has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>λογεῖον</span>, and the Vulgate, from
which St. Gregory quotes, *rationale*.  On the significance of this word
the application depends.  Anciently an ornament called the *rationale*
was attached to the vestments of bishops.  “Rationale…Ornamenti genus
quo ornantur casulæ aliaque vestes ecclesiasticæ” (Ducange).  The
vestment itself seems also to have been sometimes called the
*rationale*.  “Vestis episcopalis novæ legis, *le pallium*” (Ib.).

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[10b:1269](2120248.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p5"></span> For Urim and Thummim (as in A.V.,
retaining the Hebrew words), the LXX. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>τὴν δήλωσιν καὶ τὴν ἀλήθειαν</span>, and
the Vulgate, quoted by St. Gregory, *Doctrinam et Veritatem*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the ruler should be always chief in action.](2120249)
