[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120207)  [Next](2120209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p1.1"></span>Sermon LIX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p2.1"></span>(On the Passion, VIII.:  on Wednesday in Holy
Week.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p3"></span>I.  *Christ’s arrest fulfils His own
eternal purpose.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p4"></span>Having discoursed, dearly beloved, in our
last sermon, on the events which preceded the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span> arrest, it now remains, by the
help of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p4.2"></span>God’s</span>
grace, to discuss, as we promised, the details of the Passion itself. 
When the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p4.3"></span>Lord</span>
had made it clear by the words of His sacred prayer that the Divine and
the Human Nature was most truly and fully present in Him, showing that
the unwillingness to suffer proceeded from the one, and from the other
the determination to suffer by the expulsion of all frail fears and the
strengthening of His lofty power, then did He return to His eternal
purpose, and “in the form of a” sinless “slave” encounter the devil who
was savagely attacking Him by the hands of the Jews:  that He in Whom
alone was all men’s nature without fault, might undertake the cause of
all.  The sins of darkness, therefore, assailed the true Light, and, for
all their torches and lanterns <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010) , could not escape the night of
their own unbelief, because they did not recognize the Fount of Light. 
They arrest Him, and He is ready to be seized; they lead Him away, and
He is willing to be led; for though, if He had willed to resist, their
wicked hands could have done Him no harm, yet thereby the world’s
redemption would have been impeded, and He, who was to die for all men’s
salvation, would have saved none at all.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p6"></span>II.  *How great was Pilate’s crime in
allowing himself to be led astray by the Jews.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p7"></span>Accordingly, permitting the infliction on
Himself of all that the people’s fury inflamed by the priests dared do,
He is brought to Annas, father-in-law to Caiaphas, and thence Annas
passes Him on to Caiaphas:  and after the calumniators’ mad accusations,
after the lying falsehoods of suborned witnesses, He is transferred to
Pilate’s hearing by the delegation of the two high-priests, who in
neglecting the Divine law, and exclaiming that they had “no king but
Cæsar,” as if they were devoted to the Roman laws, and had left the
whole judgment in the hands of the governor, really sought for an
accomplisher of their cruelty rather than an umpire of the case.  For
they gave up Jesus, bound in hard bonds, bruised by many buffets and
blows, spat upon, already condemned by their shouts:  so that amidst so
many signs of their own verdict Pilate might not dare to acquit One Whom
all desired to perish.  In fact, the very inquiry shows both that he
found in the Accused no fault and that in his judgment he did not adhere
to his purpose:  for as judge he condemns One Whom he pronounces
guiltless, invoking on the unrighteous people the blood of the Righteous
Man with Whom he felt by his own conviction, and knew from his wife’s
dream <span id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011) , he must have nothing
to do.  That stained soul is not cleansed by the washing of hands, there
is no expiation in water-besprinkled fingers for the crime abetted by
that wicked mind.  Pilate’s fault is indeed, less than the Jews’ crime;
for it was they that terrified him with Cæsar’s name, chode him with
hateful words, and drove him to perpetrate his wickedness.  But he also
did not escape incrimination for playing into the hands of those that
made the uproar, for abandoning his own judgment, and for acquiescing in
the charges of others.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p9"></span>III.  *Yet the Jews’ guilt was infinitely
greater.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p10"></span>In bowing, therefore, dearly-beloved, to
the madness of the implacable people, in permitting Jesus to be
dishonoured by much mocking, and harassed with excessive insults, and in
displaying Him to the eyes of His persecutors lacerated with scourges,
crowned with thorns, and clothed in a robe of scorn, Pilate doubtless
thought to appease the enemies’ minds, so that when they had glutted
their cruel hate, they might cease further to persecute One Whom they
beheld subjected to such a variety of afflictions.  But their wrath was
still in full blaze, and they cried out to him to release Barabbas and
thus, Jesus bear the penalty of the cross, and thus, when with
consenting murmur the crowd said “His blood be on us and on our
sons <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012) ,” those wicked folk
gained, to their own damnation what they had persistently demanded,
“whose teeth,” as the prophet bore witness, “were arms and arrows, and
their tongue a sharp sword <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013)
.”  For in vain did they keep their <span id="page_172">p. 172</span>
<span id="ii.v.xxx-Page_172"></span>own hands from crucifying the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p12.2"></span>Lord</span> of glory when
they had hurled at Him the tongue’s deadly darts and the poisoned
weapons of words.  On you, on you, false Jews and unholy leaders of the
people, falls the full weight of that crime:  and although the enormity
of the guilt involves the governor and the soldiers also, yet you are
the primary and chief offenders.  And in Christ’s condemnation,
whatsoever wrong was done either by Pilate’s judgment or by the cohorts
carrying out of his commands, makes you only the more deserving of the
hatred of mankind, because the impulse of your fury would not let even
those be free from guilt who were displeased at your unrighteous acts.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p13"></span>IV.  *Christ bearing His own cross is an
eternal lesson to the Church.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p14"></span>And so the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p14.1"></span>Lord</span> was handed over to their savage
wishes, and in mockery of His kingly state, ordered to be the bearer of
His own instrument of death, that what Isaiah the prophet foresaw might
be fulfilled, saying, “Behold a Child is born, and a Son is given to us
whose government is upon His shoulders <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) .”  When, therefore, the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p15.3"></span>Lord</span> carried the wood
of the cross which should turn for Him into the sceptre of power, it was
indeed in the eyes of the wicked a mighty mockery, but to the faithful a
mighty mystery was set forth, seeing that He, the glorious vanquisher of
the Devil, and the strong defeater of the powers that were against Him,
was carrying in noble sort the trophy of His triumph, and on the
shoulders of His unconquered patience bore into all realms the adorable
sign of salvation:  as if even then to confirm all His followers by this
mere symbol of His work, and say, “He that taketh not his cross and
followeth Me, is not worthy of Me <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p17"></span>V.  *The transference of the cross from
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p17.1"></span>Lord</span> to
Simon of Cyrene signifies the participation of the Gentiles in His
sufferings.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p18"></span>But as the multitudes went with Jesus to
the place of punishment, a certain Simon of Cyrene was found on whom to
lay the wood of the cross instead of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p18.1"></span>Lord</span>; that even by this act might be
pre-signified the Gentiles’ faith, to whom the cross of Christ was to be
not shame but glory.  It was not accidental, therefore, but symbolical
and mystical, that while the Jews were raging against Christ, a
foreigner was found to share His sufferings, as the Apostle says, “if we
suffer with Him, we shall also reign with Him <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016) ”; so that no Hebrew nor Israelite,
but a stranger, was substituted for the Saviour in His most holy
degradation.  For by this transference the propitiation of the spotless
Lamb and the fulfilment of all mysteries passed from the circumcision to
the uncircumcision, from the sons according to the flesh to the sons
according to the spirit:  since as the Apostle says, “Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us <span id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017)
,” Who offering Himself to the Father a new and true sacrifice of
reconciliation, was crucified not in the temple, whose worship was now
at an end, and not within the confines of the city which for its sin was
doomed to be destroyed, but outside, “without the camp <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018) ,” that, on the cessation of the
old symbolic victims, a new Victim might be placed on a new altar, and
the cross of Christ might be the altar not of the temple but of the
world.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p22"></span>VI.  *We are to see not only the cross
but the meaning of it*.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p23"></span>Accordingly, dearly-beloved, Christ being
lifted up upon the cross, let the eyes of your mind not dwell only on
that sight which those wicked sinners saw, to whom it was said by the
mouth of Moses, “And thy life shall be hanging before thine eyes, and
thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt not be assured of thy
life <span id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019) .”  For in the crucified
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p24.2"></span>Lord</span> they could
think of nothing but their wicked deed, having not the fear, by which
true faith is justified, but that by which an evil conscience is
racked.  But let our understandings, illumined by the Spirit of Truth,
foster with pure and free heart the glory of the cross which irradiates
heaven and earth, and see with the inner sight what the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p24.3"></span>Lord</span> meant when He
spoke of His coming Passion:  “The hour is come that the Son of man may
be glorified <span id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020) :”  and below He
says, “Now is My spirit troubled.  And what shall I say?  Father, save
Me from this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour.  Father,
glorify Thy Son.”  And when the Father’s voice came from heaven, saying,
“I have both glorified it and will glorify it again,” Jesus in reply
said to those that stood by, “This voice came not for Me but for you. 
Now is the world’s judgment, now shall the prince of this world be cast
out.  And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all things unto
Me <span id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p27"></span>VII.  *The power of the cross is
universally attractive.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p28"></span>O wondrous power of the Cross!  O
ineffable <span id="page_173">p. 173</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxx-Page_173"></span>glory of the Passion, in which is
contained the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p28.1"></span>Lord’s</span> tribunal, the world’s judgment,
and the power of the Crucified!  For thou didst draw all things unto
Thee, <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p28.2"></span>Lord</span> and
when Thou hadst stretched out Thy hands all the day, long to an
unbelieving people that gainsaid Thee <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) , the whole world at last was
brought to confess Thy majesty.  Thou didst draw all things unto Thee,
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p29.2"></span>Lord</span>, when all
the elements combined to pronounce judgment in execration of the Jews’
crime, when the lights of heaven were darkened, and the day turned into
night, and the earth also was shaken with unwonted shocks, and all
creation refused to serve those wicked men.  Thou didst draw all things
unto Thee, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p29.3"></span>Lord</span>, for the veil of the temple was
rent, and the Holy of Holies existed no more for those unworthy
high-priests:  so that type was turned into Truth, prophecy into
Revelation, law into Gospel.  Thou didst draw all things unto Thee,
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p29.4"></span>Lord</span>, so that
what before was done in the one temple of the Jews in dark signs, was
now to be celebrated everywhere by the piety of all the nations in full
and open rite.  For now there is a nobler rank of Levites, there are
elders of greater dignity and priests of holier anointing:  because Thy
cross is the fount of all blessings, the source of all graces, and
through it the believers receive strength for weakness, glory for shame,
life for death.  Now, too, the variety of fleshly sacrifices has ceased,
and the one offering of Thy Body and Blood fulfils all those different
victims:  for Thou art the true “Lamb of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p29.5"></span>God</span>, that takest away the sins of the
world <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023) ,” and in Thyself so
accomplishest all mysteries, that as there is but one sacrifice instead
of many victims, so there is but one kingdom instead of many nations.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p31"></span>VIII.  *We must live not for ourselves
but for Christ, who died for us.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p32"></span>Let us, then, dearly-beloved, confess
what the blessed teacher of the nations, the Apostle Paul, confessed,
saying, “Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners <span
id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024) .”  For <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p33.2"></span>God’s</span> mercy towards us is the more
wonderful that Christ died not for the righteous nor for the holy, but
for the unrighteous and wicked; and though the nature of the Godhead
could not sustain the sting of death, yet at His birth He took from us
that which He might offer for us.  For of old He threatened our death
with the power of His death, saying by the mouth of Hosea the prophet,
“O death, I will be thy death, and I will be thy destruction, O
hell <span id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025) .”  For by dying He
underwent the laws of hell, but by rising again He broke them, and so
destroyed the continuity of death as to make it temporal instead of
eternal.  “For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive <span id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026) .”  And so,
dearly-beloved, let that come to pass of which S. Paul speaks, “that
they that live, should henceforth not live to themselves but to Him who
died for all and rose again <span id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027)
.”  And because the old things have passed away and all things are
become new, let none remain in his old carnal life, but let us all be
renewed by daily progress and growth in piety.  For however much a man
be justified, yet so long as he remains in this life, he can always be
more approved and better.  And he that is not advancing is going back,
and he that is gaining nothing is losing something.  Let us run, then,
with the steps of faith, by the works of mercy, in the love of
righteousness, that keeping the day of our redemption spiritually, “not
in the old leaven of malice and wickedness, but in the unleavened bread
of sincerity and truth <span id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028) ,” we
may deserve to be partakers of Christ’s resurrection, Who with the
Father and the Holy Ghost liveth and reigneth for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[171:1011](2120208.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p4.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p5"></span> The allusion doubtless is to the
“lanterns and torches” mentioned by S. [John xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[171:1012](2120208.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p8"></span> Cf. [Matt.
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[171:1013](2120208.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p11"></span> Cf. [Matt.
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#019),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[171:1014](2120208.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p12"></span> [Ps. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#004)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[172:1015](2120208.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p15"></span> [Is. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p15.1"></span>. 
The interpretation is fanciful, but not without some support from the
parallel phrase in [Is. xxii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022)<span
id="ii.v.xxx-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[172:1016](2120208.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p15.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p16"></span> S. [Matt. x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[172:1017](2120208.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p19"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[172:1018](2120208.htm#fr_1017) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p20"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[172:1019](2120208.htm#fr_1018) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p21"></span> [Heb. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[172:1020](2120208.htm#fr_1019) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p24"></span> [Deut. xxviii.
66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[172:1021](2120208.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p24.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p25"></span> [John
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p25.1"></span>. 
The reading *omni* (all things) will not escape notice in [John
12.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)<span
id="ii.v.xxx-p25.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[172:1022](2120208.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p26"></span> [John
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p26.1"></span>. 
The reading *omni* (all things) will not escape notice in [John
12.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)<span
id="ii.v.xxx-p26.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[173:1023](2120208.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p28.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p29"></span> Cf. [Is. lxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[173:1024](2120208.htm#fr_1023) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p29.6"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p30"></span> S. [John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[173:1025](2120208.htm#fr_1024) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p33"></span> [1 Tim. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[173:1026](2120208.htm#fr_1025) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p34"></span> [Hos. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[173:1027](2120208.htm#fr_1026) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p35"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[173:1028](2120208.htm#fr_1027) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p36"></span> [2 Cor. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[173:1029](2120208.htm#fr_1028) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p37"></span> [1 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXII](2120209)
