[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120203)  [Next](2120205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon LI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p2.1"></span>A Homily delivered on the Saturday before the
Second Sunday in Lent—on the Transfiguration, S.</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p2.2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p2.3"></span>[Matt. xvii.
1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p2.4"></span></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p3"></span>I.  *Peter’s confession shown to lead up
to the Transfiguration.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p4"></span>The Gospel lesson, dearly-beloved, which
has reached the inner hearing of our minds through our bodily ears,
calls us to the understanding of a great mystery, to which we shall by
the help of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> grace the better attain, if we
turn our attention to what is narrated just before.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p5"></span>The Saviour of mankind, Jesus Christ, in
founding that faith, which recalls the wicked to righteousness and the
dead to life, used to instruct His disciples by admonitory teaching and
by miraculous acts to the end that He, the Christ, might be believed to
be at once the Only-begotten of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p5.1"></span>God</span> and the Son of Man.  For the one
without the other was of no avail to salvation, and it was equally
dangerous to have believed the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p5.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ to be either only
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p5.3"></span>God</span> without
manhood, or only man without Godhead <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955) , since both had equally to be
confessed, because just as true manhood existed in His Godhead, so true
Godhead existed in His Manhood.  To strengthen, therefore, their most
wholesome knowledge of this belief, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> had asked His disciples, among
the various opinions of others, what they themselves believed, or
thought about Him:  whereat the Apostle Peter, by the revelation of the
most High Father passing beyond things corporeal and surmounting things
human by the eyes of his mind, saw Him to be Son of the living <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p6.2"></span>God</span>, and acknowledged
the glory of the Godhead, because he looked not at the substance of His
flesh and blood alone; and with this lofty faith Christ was so well
pleased that he received the fulness of blessing, and was endued with
the holy firmness of the inviolable Rock on which the Church should be
built and conquer the gates of hell and the laws of death, so that, in
loosing or binding the petitions of any whatsoever, only that should be
ratified in heaven which had been settled by the judgment of Peter.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p7"></span>II.  *The same continued.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p8"></span>But this exalted and highly-praised
understanding, dearly-beloved, had also to be instructed on the mystery
of Christ’s lower substance, lest the Apostle’s faith, being raised to
the glory of confessing the Deity in Christ, should deem the reception
of our weakness unworthy of the impassible <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p8.1"></span>God</span>, and incongruous, and should
believe the human nature to be so glorified in Him as to be incapable of
suffering punishment, or being dissolved in death.  And, therefore, when
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p8.2"></span>Lord</span> said
that He must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and
scribes and chief of the priests, and the third day rise <span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span id="ii.v.xxvi-Page_163"></span>again,
the blessed Peter who, being illumined with light from above, was
burning with the heat of his confession, rejected their mocking insults
and the disgrace of the most cruel death, with, as he thought, a loyal
and outspoken contempt, but was checked by a kindly rebuke from Jesus
and animated with the desire to share His suffering.  For the Saviour’s
exhortation that followed, instilled and taught this, that they who
wished to follow Him should deny themselves, and count the loss of
temporal things as light in the hope of things eternal; because he alone
could save his soul that did not fear to lose it for Christ.  In order,
therefore, that the Apostles might entertain this happy, constant
courage with their whole heart, and have no tremblings about the
harshness of taking up the cross, and that they might not be ashamed of
the punishment of Christ, nor think what He endured disgraceful for
themselves (for the bitterness of suffering was to be displayed without
despite to His glorious power), Jesus took Peter and James and his
brother John, and ascending a very high <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956) mountain with them apart, showed them
the brightness of His glory; because, although they had recognised the
majesty of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p9.4"></span>God</span>
in Him, yet the power of His body, wherein His Deity was contained, they
did not know.  And, therefore, rightly and significantly, had He
promised that certain of the disciples standing by should not taste
death till they saw “the Son of Man coming in His Kingdom <span
id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) ,” that is, in the kingly brilliance
which, as specially belonging to the nature of His assumed Manhood, He
wished to be conspicuous to these three men.  For the unspeakable and
unapproachable vision of the Godhead Itself which is reserved till
eternal life for the pure in heart, they could in no wise look upon and
see while still surrounded with mortal flesh.  The <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> displays His
glory, therefore, before chosen witnesses, and invests that bodily shape
which He shared with others with such splendour, that His face was like
the sun’s brightness and His garments equalled the whiteness of snow.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p11"></span>III.  *The object and the meaning of the
Transfiguration.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p12"></span>And in this Transfiguration the foremost
object was to remove the offence of the cross from the disciple’s heart,
and to prevent their faith being disturbed by the humiliation of His
voluntary Passion by revealing to them the excellence of His hidden
dignity.  But with no less foresight, the foundation was laid of the
Holy Church’s hope, that the whole body of Christ might realize the
character of the change which it would have to receive, and that the
members might promise themselves a share in that honour which had
already shone forth in their Head.  About which the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p12.1"></span>Lord</span> had Himself
said, when He spoke of the majesty of His coming, “Then shall the
righteous shine as the sun in their Father’s Kingdom <span
id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958) ,” whilst the blessed Apostle Paul
bears witness to the self-same thing, and says:  “for I reckon that the
sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the future
glory which shall be revealed in us <span
id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) :”  and again, “for ye are dead, and
your life is hid with Christ in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p14.2"></span>God</span>.  For when Christ our life shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in glory <span
id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) .”  But to confirm the Apostles and
assist them to all knowledge, still further instruction was conveyed by
that miracle.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p16"></span>IV.  *The significance of the appearance
of Moses and Elias.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p17"></span>For Moses and Elias, that is the Law and
the Prophets, appeared talking with the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p17.1"></span>Lord</span>; that in the presence of those
five men might most truly be fulfilled what was said:  “In two or three
witnesses stands every word <span id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) .” 
What more stable, what more steadfast than this word, in the
proclamation of which the trumpet of the Old and of the New Testament
joins, and the documentary evidence of the ancient witnesses <span
id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) combine with the teaching of the
Gospel?  For the pages of both covenants <span
id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) corroborate each other, and He Whom
under the veil of mysteries the types that went before had promised, is
displayed clearly and conspicuously by the splendour of the present
glory.  Because, as says the blessed John, “the law was given through
Moses:  but grace and truth came through Jesus Christ <span
id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) ,” in Whom is fulfilled both the
promise of prophetic figures and the purpose of the legal ordinances: 
for He both teaches the truth of prophecy by His presence, and renders
the commands possible through grace.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p22"></span>V.  *S. Peter’s suggestion contrary to
the Divine order.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p23"></span>The Apostle Peter, therefore, being
excited by the revelation of these mysteries, despising <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span id="ii.v.xxvi-Page_164"></span>things
mundane and scorning things earthly, was seized with a sort of frenzied
craving for the things eternal, and being filled with rapture at the
whole vision, desired to make his abode with Jesus in the place where he
had been blessed with the manifestation of His glory.  Whence also he
says, “<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p23.1"></span>Lord</span>,
it is good for us to be here:  if thou wilt let us make three
tabernacles <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) , one for Thee, one
for Moses, and one for Elias.”  But to this proposal the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p24.1"></span>Lord</span> made no answer,
signifying that what he wanted was not indeed wicked, but contrary to
the Divine order:  since the world could not be saved, except by
Christ’s death, and by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p24.2"></span>Lord’s</span> example the faithful were
called upon to believe that, although there ought not to be any doubt
about the promises of happiness, yet we should understand that amidst
the trials of this life we must ask for the power of endurance rather
than the glory, because the joyousness of reigning cannot precede the
times of suffering.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p25"></span>VI.  *The import of the Father’s voice
from the cloud.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p26"></span>And so while He was yet speaking, behold
a bright cloud overshadowed them, and behold a voice out of the cloud,
saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye
Him.”  The Father was indeed present in the Son, and in the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p26.1"></span>Lord’s</span> brightness,
which He had tempered to the disciples’ sight, the Father’s Essence was
not separated from the Only-begotten:  but, in order to emphasize the
two-fold personality, as the effulgence of the Son’s body displayed the
Son to their sight, so the Father’s voice from out the cloud announced
the Father to their hearing.  And when this voice was heard, “the
disciples fell upon their faces, and were sore afraid,” trembling at the
majesty, not only of the Father, but also of the Son:  for they now had
a deeper insight into the undivided Deity of Both:  and in their fear
they did not separate the One from the Other, because they doubted not
in their faith <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) .  That was a
wide and manifold testimony, therefore, and contained a fuller meaning
than struck the ear.  For when the Father said, “This is My beloved Son,
in Whom, &c.,” was it not clearly meant, “This is My Son,” Whose it is
to be eternally from Me and with Me? because the Begetter is not
anterior to the Begotten, nor the Begotten posterior to the Begetter. 
“This is My Son,” Who is separated from Me, neither by Godhead, nor by
power, nor by eternity.  “This is My Son,” not adopted, but true-born,
not created from another source, but begotten of Me:  nor yet made like
Me from another nature, but born equal to Me of My nature.  “This is My
Son,” “through Whom all things were made, and without Whom was nothing
made <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) ” because all things that I
do He doth in like manner:  and whatever I perform, He performs with Me
inseparably and without difference:  for the Son is in the Father and
the Father in the Son <span id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) , and Our
Unity is never divided:  and though I am One Who begot, and He the Other
Whom I begot, yet is it wrong for you to think anything of Him which is
not possible of Me.  “This is My Son,” Who sought not by grasping, and
seized not in greediness <span id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969) , that
equality with Me which He has, but remaining in the form of My glory,
that He might carry out Our common plan for the restoration of mankind,
He lowered the unchangeable Godhead even to the form of a slave.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p31"></span>VII.  *Who it is we have to hear.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p32"></span>“Hear ye Him,” therefore,
unhesitatingly, in Whom I am throughout well pleased, and by Whose
preaching I am manifested, by Whose humiliation I am glorified; because
He is “the Truth and the Life <span id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970) ,”
He is My “Power and Wisdom <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) .” 
“Hear ye Him,” Whom the mysteries of the Law have foretold, Whom the
mouths of prophets have sung.  “Hear ye Him,” Who redeems the world by
His blood, Who binds the devil, and carries off his chattels, Who
destroys the bond of sin, and the compact of the transgression.  Hear ye
Him, Who opens the way to heaven, and by the punishment of the cross
prepares for you the steps of ascent to the Kingdom?  Why tremble ye at
being redeemed? why fear ye to be healed of your wounds?  Let that
happen which Christ wills and I will.  Cast away all fleshly fear, and
arm yourselves with faithful constancy; for it is unworthy that ye
should fear in the Saviour’s Passion what by His good gift ye shall not
have to fear even at your own end.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p35"></span>VIII.  *The Father’s words have a
universal application to the whole Church.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p36"></span>These things, dearly-beloved, were said
not for their profit only, who heard them with their own ears, but in
these three Apostles the whole Church has learnt all that their eyes saw
and their ears heard.  Let all men’s faith then be established,
according to the preaching of the most holy Gospel, and let no one <span
id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span id="ii.v.xxvi-Page_165"></span>be
ashamed of Christ’s cross, through which the world was redeemed.  And
let not any one fear to suffer for righteousness’ sake, or doubt of the
fulfilment of the promises, for this reason, that through toil we pass
to rest and through death to life; since all the weakness of our
humility was assumed by Him, in Whom, if we abide in the acknowledgment
and love of Him, we conquer as He conquered, and receive what he
promised, because, whether to the performance of His commands or to the
endurance of adversities, the Father’s fore-announcing voice should
always be sounding in our ears, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in Whom
I am well pleased; hear ye Him:”  Who liveth and reigneth, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_955"></span>[162:956](2120204.htm#fr_955) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p5.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p6"></span> The same words are used in Lett. XXVIII.
(Tome), chap. 5.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[163:957](2120204.htm#fr_956) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p9"></span> *Præcelso* (Vulg. *excelso*):  possibly
the form of the adjective supports *Codex Bezæ* (D) in adding <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p9.1"></span>λίαν</span> after <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p9.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxvi-p9.3"></span>ψηλόν</span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[163:958](2120204.htm#fr_957) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p9.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p10"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p10.1"></span>. 
Leo’s application of the prophesy is almost too fanciful to be the true
one, though he stands by no means alone among commentaters (ancient and
modern) in so applying it.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[163:959](2120204.htm#fr_958) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p13"></span> S. [Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[163:960](2120204.htm#fr_959) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p14"></span> [Rom. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[163:961](2120204.htm#fr_960) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p15"></span> [Col. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[163:962](2120204.htm#fr_961) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p18"></span> [Deut. xix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[163:963](2120204.htm#fr_962) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p19"></span> *Antiquarum protestationum
instrumenta*.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[163:964](2120204.htm#fr_963) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p20"></span> *Utriusque* fœderis *paginæ* (instead
of the more usual *Testamenti*).

<span id="fn_964"></span>[163:965](2120204.htm#fr_964) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p21"></span> S. [John i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[164:966](2120204.htm#fr_965) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p24"></span> Sc. booths or tents.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[164:967](2120204.htm#fr_966) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p27"></span> *Quia in fide non fuit hæsitatio, non
fuit in timore discretio*.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[164:968](2120204.htm#fr_967) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p28"></span> [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [John
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038), [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[164:969](2120204.htm#fr_968) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p29"></span> [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [John
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038), [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[164:970](2120204.htm#fr_969) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p30"></span> [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [John
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038), [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[164:971](2120204.htm#fr_970) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p33"></span> S. [John
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006), [1 Cor.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[164:972](2120204.htm#fr_971) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p34"></span> S. [John
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006), [1 Cor.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p34.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LIV](2120205)
