[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120541)  [Next](2120543.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.x-p1.1"></span>Epistle XVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.x-p2"></span>To Sabinianus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.x-p3"></span>Gregory to Sabinianus, Bishop of
Jadera <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692.md) .

<span id="iii.v.vii.x-p5"></span>If thou hadst been at pains to weigh
with careful consideration the rule of ecclesiastical administration and
the order of ancient custom, neither would any fault of unlawful
presumption have crept in upon thee, nor would others have incurred
danger by occasion of thy sin.  Now there is no doubt that thou wast
aware how that, certain things having come to our ears about Maximus
which were no slight bar to his advancement to the priesthood, we had
not given our assent to it, and that it was our will that he should not
attain to what he strove after till there had been adequate satisfaction
concerning the things that were said.  But, when thou oughtest by all
means to have observed this, it came rather to pass that he, snatching
at the episcopate with the greediness of a blind mind, inclined thee
unwarily to favour him in spite of our prohibition.  But, lest even then
the things that had been reported to us should remain unexamined, he was
summoned to come hither by letters from us.  And, when he was so
perversely inclined as to defer doing so, we took care to admonish him
in repeated letters, under pain of interdiction from communion, to make
haste to come to us for his purification, putting aside all excuses: 
but he chose rather to submit to excommunication than to evince
obedience.  Whence the result is (awful to be said), that the pravity of
his perverse disposition involves others in his own perdition.  Now
however, inasmuch as we have learnt that thou dissentest from his
wickedness, we exhort thee by the present writing (that so it may profit
thy soul to have severed thyself, even though late, from him) that thou
henceforth neither communicate with him nor make mention of his name in
the sacred solemnities of mass; and also that thou defer not coming to
us without delay, yea and bring others with thee too, such as thou
canst, whether bishops or other religious persons, so that (the cause
being thoroughly examined), both your absolution, should the case
require it, may fittingly and decently ensue, and that those who have
fallen into the sin of the like temerity may be recalled to the way of
salvation, with the help of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles,
by an arrangement well-pleasing to Christ.  Moreover, let any bishop or
religious person that may come to us know that he will sustain no
prejudice or injustice, but that all will be arranged so as to please
our Redeemer after full ascertainment of the truth; to the end that even
from our way of ordering the matter, with the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.x-p5.1"></span>Lord’s</span> approval, it may appear to
all that we are not moved by private grudge against any man, but by zeal
for <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.x-p5.2"></span>God</span> and
for the adjustment of ecclesiastical order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[217b:1693](2120542.htm#fr_1692.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.x-p4"></span> See VI. 27, note 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XIX](2120543.md)
