[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120573)  [Next](2120575) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xiii-p2"></span>To John, Bishop of Syracuse.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xiii-p3"></span>Gregory to John, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xiii-p4"></span>Felix, the bearer of these
presents, has complained to us that, being born of Christian parents, he
was given (i.e. *as a slave*) by a certain Christian to a Samaræan <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) , which is an atrocious thing to be
said.  And, though neither order of law nor reverence for religion allow
men of such like superstition in any way whatever to possess Christian
slaves, yet he asserts that he remained for eighteen years in that man’s
service.  But he says that, when your predecessor Maximianus of holy
memory became aware of the fact, he was freed by him, moved, as was
becoming, by priestly zeal, from the service of that Samaræan.  But,
inasmuch as the son of the said Samaræan is said after five years to
have become a Christian, and certain persons are trying to reclaim the
aforesaid Felix, according to his own account, to his service, let your
Holiness enquire diligently into the facts that we have been informed
of, and, if they should be found true, study to protect him, and allow
him on no pretext whatever to be aggrieved by any one, seeing that,
while the laws plainly forbid slaves of that superstitious sect who are
before their masters in coming to the faith being reclaimed to their
service, how much more ought not this man—born of Christian parents, and
a Christian from his childhood—to be subjected in any wise to this
contention; especially as neither could be the slave of that other man’s
father, who it is clear was rather liable to punishment by law for his
wicked presumption?  And so, as we have said, let the defence of your
Holiness so protect him reasonably that no one may be at liberty, under
any pretence whatever, in any degree to afflict him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[237b:1744](2120574.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xiii-p5"></span> *Samaræo*, meaning apparently a
Samaritan, and as such incapable, as Jews were, of holding Christian
slaves.  See *Prolegom*., p. xxi., and references there.  In the case
before us here the Samaritan claimant had himself become a Christian;
and an attempt had been made on this plea to recover for him the
Christian slave who had been emancipated from his father.  But this
Gregory will by no means allow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Rusticiana, Patrician.](2120575)
