[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120554)  [Next](2120556) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiii-p2"></span>To Dominicus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiii-p3"></span>Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of
Carthage.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiii-p4"></span>Though we believe that thy
Fraternity gives attention with pastoral vigilance to the care of
monasteries, yet we think it necessary to inform you of what we have
learnt about a monastery in the African province.  Now the abbot
Cumquodeus, the bearer of these presents, complaints that, if at any
time he wishes to restrain under regular discipline the monks over whom
he presides, they at once leave the monastery, and are allowed to wander
wherever they will.  Seeing, then, that this is both altogether
pernicious to themselves and also sets an example of perdition to
others, we exhort your Fraternity that, if it <span id="page_228b">p.
228b</span> <span id="iii.v.vii.xxiii-Page_228b"></span>is so, you
should bring ecclesiastical censure to bear upon them, and withhold them
by suitable punishment from such undoubted presumption; and that you
should so bring them to obedience by salubrious provision, subduing
their proud minds to the yoke of discipline, that correction may recall
from guilt others whom their example might have provoked to similar
transgression, and teach them to obey their superiors, as is fit.  But,
since he tells us that stray monks are defended by some bishops, let
your Fraternity give careful attention to this, and restrain them by
your menaces in all ways from such defence.  The month of July,
Indiction 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXVIII](2120556)
