[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120414)  [Next](2120416.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Epistle LVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p2"></span>*From John, Bishop of Ravenna to
Pope Gregory* <span id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506.md) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p4"></span>My most reverend fellow-servant
Castorius, notary of your Apostolical See, has delivered to me my <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span> epistle,
compounded of honey and of venom; which has yet so infixed its stings as
still to leave place for healing appliances.  For my <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p4.2"></span>Lord</span>, while he
reproves pride and speaks of divine judgment following it, in a certain
way professes himself with reason to be mild and placid.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p5"></span>You have alleged, then, that I,
ambitious of novelty, have usurped the use of the pallium beyond what
had been indulged to my predecessors.  This let not the conscience of my
own lord, which is governed by the divine right hand, in any way allow
itself to believe; nor let him open his most sacred ears to the
uncertainty of common report.  First, because I, though a sinner, still
know how grave a thing it is to transgress the limits assigned to us by
the Fathers, and that all elation leads to nothing but a fall.  For, if
our ancestors did not tolerate pride in kings, how much more is it not
to be endured in priests!  Then, I remember how I was nourished in the
lap and in the bosom of your most holy Roman Church, and therein by the
aid of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p5.1"></span>God</span>
advanced.  And how should I be so daring as to presume to oppose that
most holy see, which transmits its laws to the universal Church, for
maintaining whose authority, as <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p5.2"></span>God</span> knows, I have seriously
excited the ill-will of many enemies <span id="page_139b">p. 139b</span>
<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-Page_139b"></span>against myself?  But let not
my most blessed lord suppose that I have attempted anything contrary to
ancient custom, as is attested by many and nearly all the citizens of
this city, and as the above-written most reverend notary, even though he
had taken no part in the proceedings, might have testified, inasmuch as
it was not till the sons of the Church were descending from the
sacristy <span id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507.md) , and the deacons
were coming in for proceeding immediately \[to the altar\] that the
first deacon has been accustomed to invest the bishop of the Church of
Ravenna with the pallium, which he has also been accustomed in like
manner to use in solemn litanies.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p7"></span>Wherefore let no one endeavour to
insinuate anything against me to my lord, since if any one wishes to do
so, he cannot prove that any novelty has been introduced by me.  For in
what manner I have obeyed your commands and served your interests when
cause required, may Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p7.1"></span>God</span> make manifest to your most
sincere heart:  and I attribute it to my sins that after so many labours
and difficulties which I endure within and without I should deserve to
experience such a change.  But again this among other things consoles
me, that most holy fathers sometimes chastise their sons for the purpose
only of advancing them the more, and that, after this devotion and
satisfaction, you will not only conserve to the holy Church of Ravenna
her ancient privileges, but even confer greater ones in your own times.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p8"></span>For with respect to the napkins, the
use of which by my presbyters and deacons your Apostleship alleges to be
a presumption, I confess in truth that it irks me to say anything on the
subject, since the truth by itself, which alone prevails with my lord,
is sufficient.  For this being allowed to the smaller churches
constituted around the city, the apostleship of my lord will also be
able in all ways to find, if he deigns to enquire of the venerable
clergy of his own first Apostolical See, that as often as priests or
levites of the Church of Ravenna have come to Rome for the ordination of
bishops or for business, they all have *proceeded* <span
id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508.md) with napkins before the eyes of
your most holy predecessors without any blame.  Wherefore also at the
time when I, sinner as I am, was ordained there by your predecessor, all
my presbyters and deacons used them while *proceeding* <span
id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509.md) in attendance on the lord pope. 
And since our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p10.1"></span>God</span> in His providence has placed
all things in your hand and most pure conscience, I adjure you by the
very Apostolical See, which you formerly adorned by your character, and
now govern with due dignity, that you in no respect diminish on account
of my deservings the privileges of the Church of Ravenna, which is
intimately yours; but, even according to the voice of prophecy, let it
be laid upon me and upon my father’s house, according to its deserving. 
I have, therefore, for your greater satisfaction, subjoined all the
privileges which have been indulged by your predecessors to the holy
Church of Ravenna, though none the less finding assurance in your
venerable archives in reference to the times of the consecration of my
predecessors.  But now whatever, after ascertaining the truth, you may
command to be done, is in <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p10.2"></span>God’s</span> power and yours; since I,
desiring to obey the commands of my lord’s Apostleship, have taken care,
notwithstanding ancient custom, to abstain till I receive further
orders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[138b:1507](2120415.htm#fr_1506.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p3"></span> See *Ep*. 56.  John of Ravenna,
notwithstanding his obsequious language in this letter, appears to have
been by no means disposed to give way.  For see Gregory’s subsequent
letter to him (V. 15), in which he is sharply accused of duplicity.  And
not only he, but his successor in the see also, appear to have continued
the practice of wearing the pallium in public processions.  What he says
in the letter before us of his having incurred odium by his defence of
the authority of the Roman See may be noted as significant of some
jealousy of such authority at Ravenna.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[139b:1508](2120415.htm#fr_1507.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p6"></span> *Ut mox procedatur*.  The word
*procedere* is used here, and elsewhere, for approaching the altar for
celebration.  Cf. below, and VII. 34.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[139b:1509](2120415.htm#fr_1508.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p9"></span> *Procedebant*.  See last note.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[139b:1510](2120415.htm#fr_1509.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxix-p10"></span> *Procedebant*.  See last note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LIX](2120416.md)
