[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120052)  [Next](2120054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p1.1"></span>Letter XLIII <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p3.1"></span>To Theodosius Augustus.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p4"></span>To the most glorious and serene Emperor
Theodosius, Leo the bishop.

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p5"></span>I.  *He complains of the conduct of
Dioscorus at the Council of Ephesus*.

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p6"></span>Already and from the beginning, in the
synods which have been held, we have received such freedom of speech
from the most holy Peter, chief of the Apostles, as to have the power
both to maintain the Truth in the cause of peace, and to allow no one to
disturb it in its firm position, but at once to repel the mischief. 
Since then the council of bishops which you ordered to be held in the
city of Ephesus on account of Flavian, does mischief to the Faith itself
and inflicts wounds on all the churches—— <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) ; and this has been brought to our
knowledge not by some untrustworthy messenger, but by the most reverend
bishops <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) themselves who were sent
by us and by the most trusty Hilarus our deacon, who have narrated to us
what took place.  And the occurrences are to be put down to the fault of
those who met, not having, as is customary, with a pure conscience and
right judgment made a definite statement about the faith and those who
erred therefrom.  For we have learnt that all did not come together in
the conference who ought, some being ejected and others received:  who
were ensnared into an ungodly act of subscription by the designs of the
aforesaid priest <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) .  For the
declaration effected by him is of such a nature as to injure all the
churches.  For when those who were sent by us saw how exceedingly
impious and hostile to the Faith it was, they notified it to us.

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p10"></span>II.  *He asks him to restore the
ancient catholic doctrine.*

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p11"></span>Wherefore, most peace-loving prince,
vouchsafe for the Faith’s sake to avert this danger from your Godly
conscience, and let not man’s presumption use violence upon Christ’s
Gospel.  In my sincere desire, which is shared by the bishops that are
with me, that you, most Christian and revered prince, should before all
things please <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p11.1"></span>God</span>, to whom the prayers of the
whole Church are poured with one accord for your empire, I give you
counsel, for fear lest, if we keep silence on so great a matter, we
incur punishment before the tribunal of Christ.  I entreat you therefore
before the undivided Trinity of the one Godhead, which is injured by
these evil doings, and which is the guardian of your kingdom, and before
Christ’s holy angels that all things remain intact as they were before
the judgment, and that they await the weightier decision of the Synod at
which the whole number of the bishops in the whole world is gathered
together:  and do not allow yourselves to bear the weight of others’
misdoing.  We are constrained to say this plainly by the fear of a
constraining necessity <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) .  But
keep before your eyes the blessed Peter’s glory, and the crowns which
all the Apostles have in common with him, and the joys of the martyrs
who had no other incentive to suffering but the confession of the true
Godhead and the perfect continuance in Christ <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) .

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p14"></span>III.  *And asks for another Synod to
be summoned.*

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p15"></span>And now that this confession is being
godlessly <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-Page_53"></span>impugned by some few men, all the
churches of our parts and all the priests implore your clemency with
tears in accordance with the request which Flavian makes in his appeal,
to command the assembling together of a special Synod in Italy, in order
that all opposition may be expelled or pacified, and that there may be
no deviation from or ambiguity in the Faith:  and to it should also come
the bishops of all the Eastern provinces, that, if any have wandered out
of the way of Truth, they may be recalled to their allegiance by
wholesome remedies, and they who are under a more grievous charge may
either be reduced to submission by counsel or cut off from the one
Church.  So that we are bound to preserve both what the Nicene canon
enjoins and what the definitions of the bishops of the whole world
enjoin according to the custom of the catholic Church, and also (to
maintain) the freedom of our fathers’ Faith, on which your tranquillity
rests.  For we pray that when those who harm the Church are driven out,
and your provinces enjoy the possession of justice, and vengeance has
been executed on these heretics your royal power also may be defended by
Christ’s right hand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_365"></span>[52:366](2120053.htm#fr_365) <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p2"></span> No satisfactory conclusion can be
reached about this letter as it has come down to us, the Ballerinii not
thinking that the Latin version extant is the original on which the Gk.
version is based.  On the whole I have thought it safer to make my
translation chiefly from the Gk., though I am not at all sure that there
is sufficient ground for the Ballerinii’s suspicion of the Latin.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[52:367](2120053.htm#fr_366) <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p7"></span> A *lacuna* is here visible in the
sense though not in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_367"></span>[52:368](2120053.htm#fr_367) <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p8"></span> The Gk. and the Lat. both read plural
here <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p8.2"></span>πισκόπων</span> (*episcopis*) which the
Ballerinii alter to the singular.  As far as we know, Julius was the
only bishop in the party, but the greater includes the less.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[52:369](2120053.htm#fr_368) <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p9"></span> Viz., Dioscorus, who must have been
mentioned in the *lacuna* above, if anywhere.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[52:370](2120053.htm#fr_369) <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p12"></span> The old Lat. version has here
something very different *quia quod necesse est nos dicere, veremur ne
cuius religio dissipatur, indignatio provocetur* (for we are bound to
say we fear lest He whose religion is being undermined, should have His
wrath aroused).

<span id="fn_370"></span>[52:371](2120053.htm#fr_370) <span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xliii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p13.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p13.2"></span>ἐν Χριστῷ τελεία διαμονή</span>:  here
again the Latin Version diverges, reading *veræ humanitatis* (sc.
*confessio*) *in Christo*.  So too the next sentence begins with *cui
sacramento*, instead of the Gk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p13.3"></span>ἦ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p13.4"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xliii-p13.5"></span>τινος ὁμολογίας</span>, and elsewhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theodosius Augustus.](2120054)
