[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120408)  [Next](2120410.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>*To the Clergy of the Church of
Salona* <span id="fr_1494"></span>[1495](#fn_1494.md) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p5"></span>Gregory to the clergy, &c.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p6"></span>Having read your letter, beloved,
we learn <span id="page_133b">p. 133b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-Page_133b"></span>that you have made choice of
Honoratus your archdeacon; and know ye that it is altogether pleasing to
us that you have chosen for the order of episcopacy a man tried of old
and of grave manner of life.  We too join with you in approbation of his
personal character, inasmuch as it is already known to us; and it has
been our own wish also that he should be ordained as your priest
according to your desire.  For which cause we exhort you to persist in
his election without any ambiguity.  Nor ought any circumstances to
disincline you from his person, since, as this laudable choice is now
approved, so it will impose both a burden on your souls and a stain of
unfaithfulness on your reputation, if any one should seduce you (which
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>God</span>
forbid) to turn aside your love from him.  But as to those who are not
at one with you in this desired election, we have caused them to be
admonished by Antoninus our subdeacon, that they may be able to agree
with you.  To him also we have already given our injunctions as to what
ought to be done with respect to the person of our brother and
fellow-bishop Malchus <span id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495.md) .  But,
inasmuch as we have ourselves also written to him, we believe that he
will without delay keep himself quiet from disquieting you.  If by any
chance he should in any way whatever neglect to obey, his contumacy will
in every way be mulcted with the utmost rigour of canonical punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[132b:1495](2120409.htm#fr_1494.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p3"></span> For notice of the Metropolitan See
of Salona, and Gregory’s dealings with its former bishop Natalis, see
II. 18, note 3.  The appointment of a successor to Natalis engaged
Gregory in a long struggle for maintenance of his authority over the
Illyrican churches, which on this occasion seems to have been, for some
time at least, slightly regarded.  What took place, as gathered from his
extant letters, may be thus summarised.  Immediately on hearing of the
death of Natalis he wrote to Antoninus, the *rector patrimonii* in
Dalmatia, charging him to see to the canonical election of a successor
and to its notification, when made, to himself, that it might be
approved, as was customary, by the See of Rome (III. 22).  This was in
the 11th Indiction, i.e. between Sept. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 592 and Sept. <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 593. 
Subsequently. having been informed that the clergy of Salona had elected
their archdeacon Honoratus, he wrote to them in the letter before us
approving their choice, and exhorting them to stick to it, being
evidently aware of a party opposed to it.  This Honoratus was the man
whom he had previously supported against Bishop Natalis, who had
attempted to deprive him of his archdeaconry.  See II. 18, 19, 20; III.
32.  Hence it was not improbable that the election of Honoratus would be
opposed by the partizans of the late bishop who, as appears from his
correspondence with Gregory, had been a convivial man, with a pleasant
vein of wit, and thus likely to be popular with many.  But, whatever the
cause, Gregory before long received the startling intelligence that not
only had the election of Honoratus, confirmed by himself, been set
aside, but that another candidate, one Maximus, had been actually
ordained under the alleged authority of an order from the Emperor.  This
defiance of his authority was the more offensive as he had already,
having apparently got wind of the candidature of Maximus, prohibited his
ordination under pain of excommunication of both him and his ordainers
(IV. 10).  He accordingly wrote a strongly-worded letter (IV. 20), dated
May, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span>
594, prohibiting Maximus from undertaking any episcopal functions, and
from officiating at the altar, till it should be ascertained whether the
emperor had really ordered his consecration.  But Maximus treated this
prohibition with contempt and appealed against the Pope to the Emperor,
who thereupon wrote to Gregory, requesting him to condone the fact of
the ordination having taken place without his assent, and bidding him
receive Maximus with honour if he should resort to Rome, as he was
apparently desired to do.  This was at the time when John Jejunator, the
patriarch of Constantinople, had recently incensed Gregory by his
assumption of the title of Universal Bishop, and when the latter was
urging the Emperor to disallow the title.  Writing on this subject to
the Empress Constantina, he alludes also to the case of Maximus, hoping
through her whose religious reverence for St. Peter he appeals to, to
move the Emperor.  In his letter to her (V. 72), written in the 13th
Indiction (594–5), he consents, in deference to the Emperor’s wish, to
look over the fact of Maximus having been ordained without his leave;
but he insists on his appearing at Rome to answer to other charges,
including especially that of simony, and his having disregarded the
excommunication pronounced against him.  He also protests strongly
against his bishops being allowed to appeal to the secular power in
ecclesiastical causes.  But he did not thus move the Emperor, who
appears from one of Gregory’s letters to Maximus (VI. 25) to have
directed any charges against the latter to be entertained in his own
locality rather than at Rome.  Meanwhile Maximus continued to disregard
Gregory’s repeated letters summoning him to Rome, being apparently
supported by a majority of his own people and of his suffragan bishops. 
For in a letter to the Salonitans (VI. 26), written in the 14th
Indiction (395–6), Gregory expresses his surprise that Honoratus alone
among the clergy of Salona, and one only of the suffragan bishops, had
refused to communicate with Maximus, notwithstanding his
excommunication.  However, as time went on, Gregory’s persistence seems
to have had some effect.  In the 15th Indiction (596–7) one of the
suffragan bishops, Sabinianus of Jadera, who had previously communicated
with Maximus, deserts him, and is invited by Gregory to come to Rome to
be absolved, and to bring with him any other whom he could persuade to
come (VII. 15).  Sabinianus did not go, but retired for a time to a
monastery by way of expressing penitence, after which Gregory in the
following year granted him full absolution (VIII. 10, 24).  Perhaps
about a year later, in the 2nd Indiction (IX. 5), we find Gregory
writing to Marcellus, the proconsul of Dalmatia, in reply to a letter
from him in which he had expressed his regret for being apparently out
of favour with the pope, and his wish to be reconciled.  This Marcellus
had been, according to what Gregory says in his reply, the prime and
original abettor of Maximus; and it would seem that he had now become
desirous of coming to terms with the pope.  In the same year we find a
letter to one Julianus, described as *Scribo*, at Salona, who had
addressed Gregory with a view to peace, asserting that Maximus enjoyed
both the affection of his people and the favour of the court (IX. 41).

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p4"></span>In replying to both these
correspondents Gregory shews no signs of giving way:  but in the same
Indiction (588–9) he did give way to an extent that seems at first sight
surprising, considering the resolute tone of his previous
correspondence.  He may have been partly moved to make some concession
by such letters as those from Marcellus and Julianus, testifying to the
character of Maximus and to the support he continued to receive; but the
intercessor who really prevailed with him at last appears evidently to
have been Callinicus, Exarch of Italy, resident at Ravenna, to whom
Maximus had applied after failing to induce the Emperor himself to
interfere.  In one of his letters (IX. 67), Gregory says that Maximus,
having failed to influence “the greater powers of the world” in his
behalf, had betaken himself to the lesser ones, and implies that it was
to their intercession that the concession he was prepared to make was
due.  It may be supposed that by “the greater power” are meant the
imperial family, and that among “the lesser” Callinicus was at any rate
the most influential:  for in writing to the latter (IX. 9) he says, “In
the cause of Maximus we can no longer resist the importunity of thy
Sweetness;” and again to Marinianus, bishop of Ravenna, “I have received
repeated and pressing letters from my most excellent son the lord exarch
Callinicus in behalf of Maximus.  Overcome by his importunity, &c.” (IX.
10).  Nor is the reason far to seek why the intercession of Callinicus
should at that particular time prevail.  For Gregory was in
correspondence with him, and most anxious to secure his co-operation, in
the reconciliation to the Roman Church of the Istrian bishops, who had
so far been out of communion with Rome in the matter of “the Three
Chapters” and was therefore likely to wish to oblige him.  However
induced, he now consented that Maximus should appear not before himself
at Rome as he had before so resolutely insisted, but before Marinianus,
bishop of Ravenna, and promised to accede to whatever the latter might
determine (IX. 10).  Nay, he even accepted the proposal of Marinianus
that the charges against Maximus should not be investigated at all, but
that a declaration on oath by the accused of his own innocence should be
accepted as a sufficient purgation; requiring only that he should do
such penance as the bishop of Ravenna might impose for having
disregarded the excommunication pronounced at Rome (IX. 79, 80).  He
wrote also to Constantius, bishop of Milan, requesting him to proceed to
Ravenna in order to act in concert with Marinianus in case of Maximus
not having confidence in the latter (IX. 67).  But the bishop of Ravenna
appears to have acted alone:  and the result was that Maximus was
acquitted of simony and all other charges, and, after doing the penance
assigned by Marinianus at Ravenna, was, seven years after his
ordination, cordially received by Gregory into communion, and had the
pallium sent him (IX. 81, 82, 125).  The epistles to be consulted for a
view of the whole proceedings are III. 22, 47; IV. 10, 20, 47; V. 21;
VI. 3, 25, 26, 27; VII. 17; VIII. 10, 24; IX. 5, 10, 41, 67, 79, 80, 81,
82, 125.

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[133b:1496](2120409.htm#fr_1495.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxiii-p7"></span> See III. 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Columbus, Bishop.](2120410.md)
