[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120054)  [Next](2120056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xlv-p1.1"></span>Letter XLV.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xlv-p2.1"></span>To Pulcheria Augusta.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop, and the holy Synod which
is assembled in the City of Rome to Pulcheria Augusta.

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p4"></span>I.  *He sends a copy of the former letter
which failed to reach her.*

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p5"></span>If the letters respecting the Faith which
were despatched to your Grace by the hands of our clergy had reached
you, it is certain you would have been able, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xlv-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> helping you, to provide a remedy
for these things which have been done against the Faith.  For when have
you failed either the priests or the religion or the Faith of Christ? 
But when those who were sent were so completely hindered from reaching
your clemency that only one of them, namely Hilary our deacon, with
difficulty fled and returned, we thought it necessary to rewrite our
letter:  and that our prayers may deserve to receive more weight, we
have subjoined a copy of the very document which did not reach your
clemency, entreating you even more earnestly than before to take under
protection that religion in which you excel which will win you the
greater glory in proportion to the heinousness of the crimes against
which your royal faith requires you to proceed, lest the integrity of
the Christian Faith be violated by any plot of man’s devising.  For the
things which were believed to require setting at rest and healing by the
meeting of a Synod at Ephesus, have not only resulted in still greater
disturbances of peace but, which is the more to be regretted, even in
the overthrow of the very Faith whereby we are Christians.

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p6"></span>II.  *He also sends a copy of his letter
to the Emperor and explains its contents.*

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p7"></span>And they indeed, who were sent, and one
of whom, escaping the violence of the bishop of Alexandria who claims
everything for himself, faithfully reported to us what took place in the
Synod, opposed, as it became them, what I will call the frenzy not the
judgment of one man, protesting that those things which <span
id="page_55">p. 55</span> <span id="ii.iv.xlv-Page_55"></span>were being
carried through by violence and fear could not reverse the mysteries of
the Church and the Creed itself composed by the Apostles, and that no
injuries could sever them from that Faith which they had brought fully
set forth and expounded from the See of the blessed Apostle Peter to the
holy synod.  And since this statement was not allowed to be read out at
the bishop’s request, in order forsooth that by the rejection of that
Faith which has crowned patriarchs, prophets, apostles and martyrs, the
birth according to the flesh of Jesus Christ our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xlv-p7.1"></span>Lord</span> and the confession of His true
Death and Resurrection (we shudder to say it) might be overthrown, we
have written <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) on this matter
according to our ability, to our most glorious and (what is far greater)
our Christian Prince, and at the same time have subjoined a copy of the
letter to you to the end that he may not allow the Faith, in which he
was re-born and reigns through <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xlv-p8.1"></span>God’s</span> grace, to be corrupted by any
innovation, since Bishop Flavian continues in communion with us all, and
that which has been done without regard to justice and contrary to all
the teaching of the canons can, under no consideration, be held valid. 
And because the Synod of Ephesus has not removed but increased the
scandal of disagreement (I have asked him) to appoint a place and time
for holding a council within Italy, all quarrels and prejudices on both
sides being suspended, that everything which has engendered offence may
be the more diligently reconsidered and without wounding the Faith,
without injuring religion those priests may return into the peace of
Christ, who through irresolution were forced to subscribe, and only
their errors be removed.

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p9"></span>III.  *He asks her to assist his petition
with the Emperor.*

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p10"></span>And that we may be worthy to obtain
this, let your well-tried faith and protection, which has always helped
the Church in her labours, deign to advance our petition with our most
clement Prince, under a special commission so to act from the blessed
Apostle Peter; so that before this civil and destructive war gains
strength within the Church, he may grant opportunity of restoring unity
by <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xlv-p10.1"></span>God’s</span> aid,
knowing that the strength of his empire will be increased by every
extension of catholic freedom that his kindly will affects.

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p11"></span>Dated 13th of October in the consulship
of the illustrious Asturius and Protogenes (449).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_373"></span>[55:374](2120055.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ii.iv.xlv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xlv-p8"></span> This is, of course, Letter XLIV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Hilary, then Deacon (afterwards Bishop of Rome) to Pulcheria
Augusta.](2120056)
