[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120475)  [Next](2120477) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p2"></span>To Eulogius and Anastasius, Bishops.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of
Alexandria, and Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p4"></span>When the excellent preacher says, *As
long as I am the apostle of the Gentiles I will honour my ministry*
([Rom. xi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p4.1"></span>); saying again in another place, *We
became as babes among you* ([1 Thess. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p4.2"></span>), he undoubtedly shews an example to us
who come after him, that we should retain humility in our minds, and yet
keep in honour the dignity of our order, so that neither should our
humility be timid nor our elevation proud.  Now eight years ago, in the
time of my predecessor of holy memory Pelagius, our brother and
fellow-bishop John in the city of Constantinople, seeking occasion from
another cause, held a synod in which he attempted to call himself
Universal Bishop.  Which as soon as my said predecessor knew, he
despatched letters annulling by the authority of the holy apostle Peter
the acts of the said synod; of which letters I have taken care to send
copies to your Holiness.  Moreover he forbade the deacon who attended us
the most pious Lords for the business of the Church to celebrate the
solemnities of mass with our aforesaid fellow-priest.  I also, being of
the same mind with him, have sent similar letters to our aforesaid
fellow-priest, copies of which I have thought it right to send to your
Blessedness, with this especial purpose, that we may first assail with
moderate force the mind of our before-named brother concerning <span
id="page_179b">p. 179b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-Page_179b"></span>this matter, wherein by a new act of
pride, all the bowels of the Universal Church are disturbed.  But, if he
should altogether refuse to be bent from the stiffness of his elation,
then, with the succour of Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p4.3"></span>God</span>, we may consider more
particularly what ought to be done.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p5"></span>For, as your venerable Holiness knows,
this name of Universality was offered by the holy synod of Chalcedon to
the pontiff of the Apostolic See which by the providence of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p5.1"></span>God</span> I serve <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611) .  But no one of my predecessors
has ever consented to use this so profane a title; since, forsooth, if
one Patriarch is called Universal, the name of Patriarch in the case of
the rest is derogated.  But far be this, far be it from the mind of a
Christian, that any one should wish to seize for himself that whereby he
might seem in the least degree to lessen the honour of his brethren. 
While, then, we are unwilling to receive this honour when offered to us,
think how disgraceful it is for any one to have wished to usurp it to
himself perforce.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p7"></span>Wherefore let not your Holiness in
your epistles ever call any one Universal, lest you detract from the
honour due to yourself in offering to another what is not due.  Nor let
any sinister suspicion make your mind uneasy with regard to our most
serene lords, inasmuch as he fears Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p7.1"></span>God</span>, and will in no way consent to
do anything against the evangelical ordinances, against the most sacred
canons.  As for me, though separated from you by long spaces of land and
sea, I am nevertheless entirely conjoined with you in heart.  And I
trust that it is so in all respects with your Blessedness towards me;
since, when you love me in return, you are not far from me.  Hence we
give thanks the more to that grain of mustard seed ([Matt.
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p7.2"></span>), for that from what appeared a small and
despicable seed it has been so spread abroad everywhere by branches
rising and extending themselves from the same root that all the birds of
heaven may make their nests in them.  And thanks be to that leaven
which, in three measures of meal, has leavened in unity the mass of the
whole human race ([Matth. xiii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p7.3"></span>); and to the little stone, which, cut out
of the mountain without hands, has occupied the whole face of the earth
([Dan. ii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p7.4"></span>), and which to this end everywhere
distends itself, that from the human race reduced to unity the body of
the whole Church might be perfected, and so this distinction between the
several members might serve for the benefit of the compacted whole.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p8"></span>Hence also we are not far from you,
since in Him who is everywhere we are one.  Let us then give thanks to
Him who, having abolished enmities, has caused that in His flesh there
should be in the whole world one flock, and one sheepfold under Himself
the one shepherd; and let us be ever mindful how the preacher of truth
admonishes us, saying, *Be careful to keep the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace* ([Ephes. iv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p8.1"></span>), and, *Follow peace with all men, and
holiness, without which no man shall see <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p8.2"></span>God</span>* ([Hebr. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p8.3"></span>).  And he says also to other disciples,
*If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, having peace with all men*
([Rom. xii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#018)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p8.4"></span>).  For he sees that the good cannot have
peace with the bad; and therefore, as ye know, he premised, *If it be
possible.*

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p9"></span>But, because peace cannot be
established except on two sides, when the bad fly from it, the good
ought to keep it in their inmost hearts.  Whence also it is admirably
said, *As much as lieth in you;* meaning that it should remain in us
even when it is repelled from the hearts of evil men.  And such peace we
truly keep, when we treat the faults of the proud at once with charity
and with persistent justice, when we love them and hate their vices. 
For man is the work of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p9.1"></span>God</span>; but vice is the work of man. 
Let us then distinguish between what <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p9.2"></span>God</span> and what man has made, and
neither hate the man on account of his error nor love the error on
account of the man.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p10"></span>Let us then with united mind attack
the evil of pride in the man, that from his enemy, that is to say his
error, the man himself may first be freed.  Our Almighty Redeemer will
supply strength to charity and justice; He will supply to us, though
placed far from each other, the unity of His Spirit; even He by whose
workmanship the Church, having been constructed as it were after the
manner of the ark with the four sides of the world, and bound together
with the compacture of incorruptible planks and the pitch of charity, is
disturbed by no opposing winds, by the swelling of no billow coming from
without.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p11"></span>But inasmuch as, with His grace
steering us, we ought to seek that no wave coming upon us from without
may throw us into confusion, so ought we to pray with all our hearts,
dearest brethren, that the right hand of His providence may draw out the
accumulation of internal bilgewater within us.  For indeed our adversary
the devil, who, in his rage against the humble, as a roaring lion
walketh about seeking whom he may devour ([1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p11.1"></span>), no longer, as we perceive, walks about
the folds but so resolutely fixes his teeth in certain necessary members
of the Church that, unless with the favour of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p11.2"></span>Lord</span>, the heedful crowd <span
id="page_180b">p. 180b</span> <span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-Page_180b"></span>of shepherds unanimously run to the
rescue, no one can doubt that he will soon tear all the sheepfold; which
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p11.3"></span>God</span>
forbid.  Consider, dearest brethren, who it is that follows close at
hand, of whose approach such perverse beginnings are breaking out even
in priests.  For it is because he is near of whom it is written, *He is
king over all the sons of pride* ([Job xli.
25](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p11.4"></span>)—not without sore grief I am compelled
to say it—that our brother and fellow-bishop John, despising the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p11.5"></span>Lord’s</span> commands,
apostolical precepts, and rules of Fathers, attempts through elation to
be his forerunner in name.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p12"></span>But may Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p12.1"></span>God</span> make known to
your Blessedness with what sore groaning I am tormented by this
consideration; that he, the once to me most modest man, he who was
beloved of all, he who seemed to be occupied in alms, deeds, prayers,
and fastings, out of the ashes he sat in, out of the humility he
preached, has grown so boastful as to attempt to claim all to himself,
and through the elation of a pompous expression to aim at subjugating to
himself all the members of Christ, which cohere to one Head only, that
is to Christ.  Nor is it surprising that the same tempter who knows
pride to be the beginning of all sin, who used it formerly before all
else in the case of the first man, should now also put it before some
men at the end of virtues, so as to lay it as a snare for those who to
some extent seemed to be escaping his most cruel hands by the good aims
of their life, at the very goal of good work, and as it were in the very
conclusion of perfection.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p13"></span>Wherefore we ought to pray earnestly,
and implore Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p13.1"></span>God</span> with continual supplications,
that He would avert this error from that man’s soul, and remove this
mischief of pride and confusion from the unity and humility of the
Church.  And with the favour of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p13.2"></span>Lord</span> we ought to concur, and make
provision with all our powers, lest in the poison of one expression the
living members in the body of Christ should die.  For, if this
expression is suffered to be allowably used, the honour of all
patriarchs is denied:  and while he that is called Universal perishes
per chance in his error, no bishop will be found to have remained in a
state of truth.

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p14"></span>It is for you then, firmly and
without prejudice, to keep the Churches as you have received them, and
not to let this attempt at a diabolical usurpation have any countenance
from you.  Stand firm; stand secure; presume not ever to issue or to
receive writings with the falsity of the name Universal in them.  Bid
all the bishops subject to your care abstain from the defilement of this
elation, that the Universal Church may acknowledge you as Patriarchs not
only in good works but also in the authority of truth.  But, if
perchance adversity is the consequence, we ought to persist unanimously,
and show even by dying that in case of harm to the generality we do not
love anything of our own especially.  Let us say with Paul, *To me to
live is Christ, and to die is gain* ([Philip. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p14.1"></span>).  Let us hear what the first of all
pastors says; *If ye suffer anything for righteousness’ sake, happy are
ye* ([1 Pet. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014)<span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p14.2"></span>).  For believe me that the dignity which
we have received for the preaching of the truth we shall more safely
relinquish than retain in behalf of the same truth, should case of
necessity require it.  Finally, pray for me, as becomes your most dear
Blessedness, that I may shew forth in works what I am thus bold to say
to you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[179b:1612](2120476.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="iii.v.v.xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xxii-p6"></span> Cf. V. 18, and note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLVIII](2120477)
