[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120538)  [Next](2120540.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.vii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.vii-p2"></span>To Respecta, Abbess.

<span id="iii.v.vii.vii-p3"></span>Gregory to Respecta, Abbess of
Massilia (*Marseilles*) in Gaul.

<span id="iii.v.vii.vii-p4"></span>The demand of a pious wish ought to
be accomplished by a consequent result, that so the benefit demanded may
be validly attained, and sincerity of devotion may laudably shine
forth.  Accordingly to the monastery consecrated to the honour of Saint
Cassian wherein you are selected to preside—in accordance with the
petition of our children Dynamius and Aureliana, who are shewn, in their
religious devotion, to have united it to the house in their possession
by connecting the buildings—we have seen fit to allow these
privileges:—We appoint that on the death of the abbess of the aforesaid
monastery, not a stranger, but one whom the congregation may choose for
itself from among its own members, shall be ordained; whom (provided
however that she be judged worthy of this ministry) the bishops of the
same place shall ordain.  Further, with regard to the property and
management of the same monastery, we decree that neither bishop nor any
ecclesiastic shall have any power; but appoint that these things shall
in all respects pertain to the charge of thy Solicitude, or of her who
may be abbess in the same place after thee.  If on the day of the
Saint’s anniversary, or of the dedication, <span id="page_216b">p.
216b</span> <span id="iii.v.vii.vii-Page_216b"></span>of the aforesaid
monastery the bishop should resort thither for celebrating the sacred
solemnities of mass, still his office must be so executed that his chair
be not placed there, except on the aforesaid days while he is
celebrating there the solemnities of mass.  And when he departs, let his
chair be at the same time removed from the same oratory.  But on all
other days let the offices of mass be performed by the presbyter whom
the same bishop may appoint

<span id="iii.v.vii.vii-p5"></span>Furthermore, with regard to the life
and deeds of the handmaidens of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.vii-p5.1"></span>God</span>, or of the abbess who may be
constituted in the above-written monastery, we enjoin on the bishop, in
the fear of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.vii-p5.2"></span>God</span>, to devote careful attention
to them; so that, if any of those who dwell there, her fault demanding
it, ought to be subjected to punishment, he may himself visit the
offence according to the vigour of the sacred canons.  These things,
then, being by us ordained and granted, do thou, in the ordering of thy
congregation, study to shew thyself so earnestly attentive in all
respects that the malice of the malignant foe may find nothing there
that can be contaminated.  All these things, therefore, embraced in this
paper of injunctions, we ordain to be observed, under Christ’s
protection, in all respects and by all persons for ever in thy
monastery, to the end that the benefits of the privileges allowed may
always continue firm and inviolate.  The month of November, Indict. 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Fortunatus, Bishop.](2120540.md)
