[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120210)  [Next](2120212.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXVII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>(On the Passion, XVI.:  delivered on the
Sunday.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p3"></span>I.  *The contemplation of the
prophecies of Christ’s suffering are a great source of pious delight.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p4"></span>The minds of the faithful, beloved,
ought indeed always to be occupied with wonder at God’s works and their
reasoning faculties devoted particularly to those reflexions by which
they may gain increase of faith.  For so long as the pious heart’s
attention is directed either to the benefits which all enjoy, or to
special gifts of His grace, it keeps aloof from many vanities and
retires from bodily cares into a spiritual seclusion.  But this must be
the more eagerly and thoroughly done at the season of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> Passion, that
what is then read in the sacred lections may surely be received with the
ears of understanding, and that the themes which are great in word may
be seen to be yet greater from the mysterious realities which underlie
them.  For the first reason for our lifting up our hearts <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064.md) is that the voices of the prophets
have sung of the things which the truth of the Gospel has also narrated,
not as destined to happen, but as having happened, and that what man’s
ears had not yet learnt was to be <span id="page_178">p. 178</span>
<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-Page_178"></span>accomplished, was already being
proclaimed as fulfilled by the (Holy <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065) .md) Spirit.  For King David, whose
seed according to the flesh is Christ, completed his lifetime more than
1,100 <span id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066.md) years before the day of
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
Crucifixion, and endured none of those punishments which he relates as
inflicted upon himself.  But because by his mouth One spoke Who was to
take suffering flesh of his stock, the story of the cross is rightly
anticipated in the person of him who was the bodily ancestor of the
Saviour.  For David truly suffered in Christ, because Jesus was truly
crucified in the flesh which He had from David.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p8"></span>II.  *The Divine foreknowledge does not
account for the Jews’ wickedness so as to excuse them.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p9"></span>Since then all things which Jewish
ungodliness committed against the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> of Majesty were foretold so
long before <span id="fr_1067"></span>[1068](#fn_1067.md) , and the
language of the prophets is concerned not so much with things to come as
with things past, what else is thereby revealed to us but the
unchangeable order of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>God’s</span> eternal decrees, with Whom
the things which are to be decided are already determined, and what will
be is already accomplished?  For since both the character of our actions
and the fulfilment of all our wishes are fore-known to <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p10.2"></span>God</span>, how much
better known to Him are His own works?  And He was rightly pleased that
things should be recorded as if done which nothing could hinder from
being done.  And hence when the Apostles also, being full of the Holy
Ghost, suffered the threats and cruelty of Christ’s enemies, they said
to <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p10.3"></span>God</span> with
one consent, “For truly in this city against Thy holy Servant Jesus,
Whom Thou hast anointed, Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
the peoples of Israel were gathered together to do what Thy hand and Thy
counsel ordained to come to pass <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[1069](#fn_1068.md) .”  Did then the wickedness of
Christ’s persecutors spring from <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p11.2"></span>God’s</span> plan, and was that
unsurpassable crime prefaced and set in motion by the hand of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p11.3"></span>God</span>?  Clearly we
must not think this of the highest Justice:  that which was fore-known
in respect of the Jews’ malice is far different, indeed quite contrary
to what was ordained in respect of Christ’s Passion.  Their desire to
slay Him did not proceed from the same source as His to die:  nor were
their atrocious crime and the Redeemer’s endurance the offspring of One
Spirit.  The <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p11.4"></span>Lord</span> did not incite but permit
those madmen’s naughty hands:  nor in His foreknowledge of what must be
accomplished did He compel its accomplishment, even though it was in
order to its accomplishment that He had taken flesh.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p12"></span>III.  *Christ was in no sense the
Author of His murderer’s guilt.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p13"></span>In fact, the case of the Crucified is
so different from that of His crucifiers that what Christ undertook
could not be reversed, while what they did could be wiped out.  For He
Who came to save sinners did not refuse mercy even to His murderers, but
changed the evil of the wicked into the goodness of the believing, that
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>God’s</span> grace
might be the more wonderful, being mercifully put in force, not
according to men’s merits, but according to the multitude of the riches
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p13.2"></span>God’s</span>
wisdom and knowledge, seeing that they also who had shed the Saviour’s
blood were received into the baptismal flood.  For, as says the
Scripture, which contains the Apostles’ acts when the preaching of the
blessed Apostle Peter pierced the hearts of the Jews, and they
acknowledged the iniquity of their crime, saying, “what shall we do,
brethren?” the same Apostle said, “Repent and be baptized, each one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of your sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.  For to you is the promise,
and to your sons, and to all that are afar off, whomsoever our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p13.3"></span>Lord</span> <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p13.4"></span>God</span> has called,”
and soon after the Scripture goes on to say:  “they therefore that
received his word were baptized, and there were added on that day about
3,000 souls <span id="fr_1069"></span>[1070](#fn_1069.md) .”  And so, in
being willing to suffer their furious rage, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ was in no way the
Author of their crimes; nor did He force them to desire this, but
permitted them to be able, and used the madness of the blinded people
just as He did also the treachery of His betrayer, whom by kindly acts
and words He vouchsafed to recall from the awful crime he had conceived,
by taking him for a disciple, by promoting him to be an apostle, by
warning him with signs, by admitting him to the revelation of holy
mysteries <span id="fr_1070"></span>[1071](#fn_1070.md) , that one who had
lacked no degree of kindness to correct him, might have no pretext for
his crime at all.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p16"></span> <span id="page_179">p. 179</span>
<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-Page_179"></span>IV.  *The enormity of Judas’
crime is set forth.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p17"></span>But O ungodliest of men, “thou seed of
Chanaan and not of Juda <span id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071.md) ,”
and no longer “a vessel of election,” but “a son of perdition” and
death, thou didst think the devil’s instigations would profit thee
better, so that, inflamed with the torch of greed, thou wert ablaze to
gain 30 pieces of silver and sawest not what riches thou wouldst lose. 
For even if thou didst not think the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p18.3"></span>Lord’s</span> promises were to be
believed, what reason was there for preferring so small a sum of money
to what thou hadst already received?  Thou wast wont to command the evil
spirits, to heal the sick, to receive honour with the rest of the
apostles, and that thou mightest satisfy thy thirst for gain, it was
open to thee to steal from the box that was in thy charge <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[1073](#fn_1072.md) .  But thy mind, which lusted after
forbidden things, was more strongly stimulated by that which was less
allowed:  and the amount of the price pleased thee not so much as the
enormity of the sin.  Wherefore thy wicked bargain is not so detestable
merely because thou countedst the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p19.2"></span>Lord</span> so cheap, but because thou
didst sell Him Who was the Redeemer, yea, even thine, and hadst no pity
on thyself <span id="fr_1073"></span>[1074](#fn_1073.md) .  And justly was
thy punishment put into thine own hands because none could be found more
cruelly bent on thy destruction than thyself.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p21"></span>V.  *Christ’s Passion was for our
Redemption by mystery and example.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p22"></span>The fact, therefore, that at the time
appointed, according to the purpose of His will, Jesus Christ was
crucified, dead, and buried was not the doom necessary to His own
condition, but the method of redeeming us from captivity.  For “the Word
became flesh” in order that from the Virgin’s womb He might take our
suffering nature, and that what could not be inflicted on the Son of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p22.1"></span>God</span> might be
inflicted on the Son of Man.  For although at His very birth the signs
of Godhead shone forth in Him, and the whole course of His bodily growth
was full of wonders, yet had He truly assumed our weaknesses, and
without share in sin had spared Himself no human frailty, that He might
impart what was His to us and heal what was ours in Himself.  For He,
the Almighty Physician, had prepared a two-fold remedy for us in our
misery, of which the one part consists of mystery and the other of
example <span id="fr_1074"></span>[1075](#fn_1074.md) , that by the one
Divine powers may be bestowed, by the other human weaknesses driven
out <span id="fr_1075"></span>[1076](#fn_1075.md) .  Because as <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p24.1"></span>God</span> is the Author
of our justification, so man is a debtor to pay Him devotion.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p25"></span>VI.  *We can only attain to Christ’s
perfection by following in His steps*.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p26"></span>Therefore, dearly-beloved, by this
unspeakable restoration of our health no place is left us for pride or
for idleness:  because we have nothing which we did not receive <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076.md) , and we are expressly warned not
to treat the gifts of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p27.2"></span>God’s</span> grace with negligence <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077.md) .  For He that comes so timely to
our aid justly urges us with precept, and He that leads us to glory
mercifully incites us to obedience.  Wherefore the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p28.2"></span>Lord</span> Himself is
rightly made our way, because save through Christ there is no coming to
Christ.  But through Him and to Him does he take his way who treads the
path of His endurance and humiliation, and on that road you may be sure
there are not wanting the heats of toil, the clouds of sadness, the
storms of fear.  The snares of the wicked, the persecutions of the
unbelieving, the threats of the powerful, the insults of the proud are
there; and all these things the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p28.3"></span>Lord</span> of hosts and King of glory
passed through in the form of our weakness and in the likeness of sinful
flesh, to the end that amid the danger of this present life we might
desire not so much to avoid and escape them as to endure and overcome
them.

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p29"></span>VII.  *Christ cry of “Forsaken” on the
cross was to teach us the insufficiency of the human nature without the
Divine.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p30"></span>Hence it is that the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p30.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ,
our Head, representing all the members of His body in Himself, and
speaking for those whom He was redeeming in the punishment of the cross,
uttered that cry which He had once uttered in the psalm, “O <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p30.2"></span>God</span>, My <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p30.3"></span>God</span>, look upon
Me:  why hast Thou forsaken Me <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078.md) ?”  That cry, dearly-beloved, is a
lesson, not a complaint.  For since in Christ there is one person of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p31.2"></span>God</span> and man,
and He could not have been forsaken by Him, from Whom He could not be
separated, it is on behalf of us, trembling and weak ones, that He asks
why the flesh that is afraid to suffer has not been heard.  For when the
Passion was beginning, to cure and correct our weak fear He had said,
<span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-Page_180"></span>“Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from Me:  nevertheless not as I will but as Thou;” and again,
“Father, if this cup cannot pass except I drink it, Thy will be
done <span id="fr_1079"></span>[1080](#fn_1079.md) .”  As therefore He had
conquered the tremblings of the flesh, and had now accepted the Father’s
will, and trampling all dread of death under foot, was then carrying out
the work of His design, why at the very time of His triumph over such a
victory does He seek the cause and reason of His being forsaken, that
is, not heard, save to show that the feeling which He entertained in
excuse of His human fears is quite different from the deliberate choice
which, in accordance with the Father’s eternal decree, He had made for
the reconciliation of the world?  And thus the very cry of “Unheard” is
the exposition of a mighty Mystery, because the Redeemer’s power would
have conferred nothing on mankind if our weakness in Him had obtained
what it sought.  Let these words dearly-beloved, suffice to-day, lest we
burden you by the length of our discourse:  let us put off the rest till
Wednesday.  The <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p32.2"></span>Lord</span> shall hear you if you pray
that we may keep our promise through the bounty of Him Who lives and
reigns for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[177:1065](2120211.htm#fr_1064.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p5"></span> *Erigendi sursum nostri cordis* the
liturgical allusion is the same as that noticed in Sermon LXXIV. 5, n.
6.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[178:1066](2120211.htm#fr_1065.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p6"></span> The epithet *sanctus* is of doubtful
genuineness here.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[178:1067](2120211.htm#fr_1066.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p7"></span> This calculation is based apparently
on that of Prosper’s *Chronicon*, which again, follows that of Eusebius.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[178:1068](2120211.htm#fr_1067.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p10"></span> There is another reading here, *ut*
(for *et*) *non tam de futuris quam de præsentibus* (for *præteritis*) ,
&c., which the Ballerinii probably do right to reject.  Trans. “foretold
so long before *that* the language of the prophets is concerned not so
much with the future as *with the present*.”

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[178:1069](2120211.htm#fr_1068.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p11"></span> [Acts
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>; it is perhaps worth noticing that Leo
does not strictly follow the Biblical account in saying that the
Apostles were “full of the Holy Ghost” *at the time* of uttering this
prayer:  v. 31 says they were so filled *afterwards*.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[178:1070](2120211.htm#fr_1069.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p14"></span> [Acts ii.
37-41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[178:1071](2120211.htm#fr_1070.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p15"></span> *Consecrando mysteriis* I think he
has, as so often, the institution of the Holy Eucharist especially in
his mind together, of course, with other sacramental ordinances (such as
Holy Baptism and matrimony) which our Saviour blessed with His sanction
and made the means of holiness to His disciples.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[179:1072](2120211.htm#fr_1071.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p18"></span> Apocrypha, [Sus.
56](../../../bib/apo/sus001.htm#056.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>:  said by Daniel to one of the two
elders; cf. also [Acts 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015.md), [John
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p18.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[179:1073](2120211.htm#fr_1072.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p19"></span> This last privilege which Leo, with
curious sarcasm, co-ordinates with the other three is spoken of twice by
S. John, viz. [John 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006.md), [John
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[179:1074](2120211.htm#fr_1073.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p20"></span> *Redemptorem etiam tuum ne tibi
parceres, vendidisti*.  It seems to me that Leo’s preaching power is
nowhere better shown than in the passages where he draws out the
heinousness of Judas’ guilt:  cf. Sermon LVIII. chaps. 3 and 4, and
Sermon LXII. chap. 4.

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[179:1075](2120211.htm#fr_1074.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p23"></span> *Aliud est in sacramento, aliud in
exemplo*, cf. Serm. LXIII chap. 4, n. 7.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[179:1076](2120211.htm#fr_1075.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p24"></span> *Exigantur*:  another reading perhaps
more in keeping with the context and Leo’s usual language is *erigantur*
(raised):  cf. Lett. XXVIII. (Tome), chap. 3, *humana augens, divina non
minuens*, *etc*.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[179:1077](2120211.htm#fr_1076.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p27"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md), [1 Tim.
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[179:1078](2120211.htm#fr_1077.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p28"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md), [1 Tim.
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[179:1079](2120211.htm#fr_1078.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p30.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p31"></span> [Ps. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[180:1080](2120211.htm#fr_1079.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxiii-p32"></span> S. [Matt.
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039.md),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxiii-p32.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXVIII](2120212.md)
