[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120332)  [Next](2120334.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p2"></span>To Peter, Subdeacon of Sicily.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p3"></span>Gregory to Peter, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p4"></span>With regard to our having so long
delayed sending off thy messenger, we have been so occupied with the
engagements of the Paschal festival that we have been unable to let him
go sooner.  But, with regard to the questions on which thou hast desired
instruction, thou wilt learn below how, after fully considering them
all, we have determined them.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p5"></span>We have ascertained that the
peasants <span id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342.md) of the Church are
exceedingly aggrieved in respect of the prices of corn, in that the sum
appointed them to pay is not kept in due proportion in times of plenty. 
And it is our will that in all times, whether the crops of corn be more
or less abundant, the measure of proportion be according to the market
price <span id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343.md) .  It is our will also
that corn which is <span id="page_89b">p. 89b</span> <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-Page_89b"></span>lost by shipwreck be fully accounted
for; but on condition that there be no neglect on thy part in
transmitting it; lest, the proper time for transmitting it being allowed
to pass by, loss should ensue from your fault <span
id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344.md) .  Moreover, we have seen it to be
exceedingly wrong and unjust that anything should be received from the
peasants of the Church in the way of *sextariatics* <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345.md) , or that they should be compelled
to give a larger *modius* than is used in the granaries of the Church. 
Wherefore we enjoin by this present warning that corn may never be
received from the peasants of the Church in *modii* of more than
eighteen *sextarii*; unless perchance there be anything that the sailors
are accustomed to receive over and above, the consumption of which on
board ship they themselves attest.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p10"></span>We have also ascertained that on some
estates <span id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346.md) of the Church a most
unjust exaction is practised, in that three and a half \[*modii*\] in
seventy are demanded by the farmers <span
id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347.md) ;—a thing shameful to be spoken
of.  And yet even this is not enough; but something besides is said to
be exacted according to a custom of many years.  This practice we
altogether detest, and desire it to be utterly extirpated from the
patrimony.  But, whether in this or in other minute imposts, let thy
Experience consider what is paid too much per pound, and what is in any
way unfairly received from the peasants; and reduce all to a fixed
payment, and, so far as the powers of the peasants go, let them make a
payment in gross amounting to seventy-two <span
id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348.md) :  and let neither grains <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349.md) beyond the pound, nor an excessive
pound, nor any further imposts beyond the pound, be exacted; but,
through thy valuation, according as there is ability to pay, let the
payment be made up to a certain sum, that so there may be in no wise any
shameful exaction.  But, lest after my death these very imposts, which
we have disallowed as extras but allowed in augmentation of the regular
payments, should again in any way be put on additionally, and so the sum
of the payment should be found to be increased and the peasants be
compelled to pay additional charges over and above what is due, we
desire thee to draw up charters of security, to be signed by thee,
declaring that each person is to pay such an amount, to the exclusion of
grains (*siliquæ*), imposts, or granary dues.  Moreover, whatever out of
these several items used to accrue to the rector \[sc. *patrimonii*\],
we will that by virtue of this present order it shall accrue to thee out
of the total sum paid.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p15"></span>Before all things we desire thee
carefully to attend to this; that no unjust weights be used in exacting
payments.  If thou shouldest find any, break them and cause true ones to
be made.  For my son the servant of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p15.1"></span>God</span>, Diaconus, has already found
such as displeased him; but he had not liberty to change them.  We will,
then, that, saving excepted *cibaria* of small value <span
id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350.md) , nothing else beyond the just
weights be exacted from the husbandmen <span
id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351.md) of the Church.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p18"></span>Further, we have ascertained that the
first charge of *burdatio* <span id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352.md)
exceedingly cripples our peasants, in that before they can sell the
produce of their labour they are compelled to pay taxes; and, not having
of their own to pay with, they borrow from public pawnbrokers <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353.md) , and pay a heavy consideration for
the accommodation; whence it results that they are crippled by heavy
expenses.  Wherefore we enjoin by this present admonition that thy <span
id="page_90b">p. 90b</span> <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-Page_90b"></span>Experience advance to them from the
public fund all that they might have borrowed from strangers, and that
it be repaid by the peasants of the Church by degrees as they may have
wherewith to pay, lest, while for a time in narrow circumstances, they
should sell at too cheap a rate what might afterwards have sufficed for
the payment of the due, and even so not have enough.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p21"></span>It has come to our knowledge also
that immoderate fees <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354.md) are
received on the marriages of peasants:  concerning which we order that
no marriage fees shall exceed the sum of one *solidus.*  If any are
poor, they should give even less; but if any are rich, let them by no
means exceed the aforesaid sum of a *solidus*.  And we desire no part of
these marriage fees to be credited to our account, but that they should
go to the benefit of the farmer (*conductorem*).

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p23"></span>We have also ascertained that when
some farmers die their relatives are not allowed to succeed them, but
that their goods are withdrawn to the uses of the Church:  with regard
to which thing we decree that the relatives of the deceased who live on
the property of the Church shall succeed them as their heirs, and that
nothing shall be withdrawn from the substance of the deceased.  But, if
any one should leave young children, let discreet persons be chosen to
take charge of their parents’ goods, till they come to such an age as to
be able to manage their own property.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p24"></span>We have ascertained also that, if any
one of a family has committed a fault, he is required to make amends,
not in his own person, but in his substance:  concerning which practice
we order that, whosoever has committed a fault, he shall be punished in
his own person as he deserves <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355.md)
.  Moreover, let no present (*commodum*) be received from him, unless
perchance it be some trifle which may go to the profit of the officer
who may have been sent to him.  We have ascertained also that, as often
as a farmer has taken away anything unjustly from his husbandman, it is
indeed required from the farmer, but not restored to him from whom it
was taken:  concerning which thing we order that whatever may have been
taken away by violence from any one of a family be restored to him from
whom it was taken away, and not accrue to our profit, lest we ourselves
should seem to be abettors of violence.  Furthermore, we will that, if
thy Experience should at any time despatch those who are under thy
command in causes that arise beyond the limits of the patrimony, they
may indeed receive small gratuities from those to whom they are sent;
yet so that they themselves may have the advantage of them:  for we
would not have the treasury of the Church defiled by base gains.  We
also command thy Experience to see to this:  that farmers never be
appointed on the estates of the Church for a consideration (*commodum*);
lest, a consideration being looked for, the farmers should be frequently
changed; of which changing what else is the result but that the Church
farms are never cultivated?  But lest also the leases \[i.e. by the
Church to the farmers\] be adjusted according to the sum of the payments
due.  We desire thee to receive no more from the estates of the Church
on account of the store-houses and stores beyond what is customary; but
let thine own stores which we have ordered to be procured be procured
from strangers.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p26"></span>It has come to our ears that three
pounds of gold have been unjustly taken away from Peter the farmer of
Subpatriana; concerning which matter examine closely Fantinus the
guardian (*defensorem* <span id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) .md);
and, if they have manifestly been unjustly and improperly taken, restore
them without any delay.  We have also ascertained that the peasants have
paid a second time the *burdation* <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357.md) which Theodosius had exacted from
them but had failed to pay over, so that they have been taxed twice. 
This was done because his substance was not sufficient for meeting his
debt to the Church.  But, since we are informed through our son, the
servant of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p28.1"></span>God</span> Diaconus, that this deficiency
can be made good out of his effects, we will that fifty-seven *solidi*
be repaid to the peasants without any abatement, lest they should be
found to have been taxed twice over.  Moreover, if it is the case that
forty *solidi* of his effects remain over and above what will indemnify
the peasants (which sum thou art said also to have in thy hands), we
will that they be given to his daughter, to enable her to recover her
effects which she had pawned.  We desire also her father’s goblet
(*batiolam*) to be restored to her.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p29"></span>The glorious *magister militum*
Campanianus had left twelve *solidi* a year out of the Varronian estate
to his notary John; and this we order thee to pay every year without any
hesitation to the granddaughter of Euplus the farmer, although she may
have received all the <span id="page_91b">p. 91b</span> <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-Page_91b"></span>chattels of the said Euplus, except
perhaps his cash; and we desire thee also to give her out of his cash
five-and-twenty *solidi*.  A silver saucer <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358.md) is said to have been pawned for one
*solidus*, and a cup for six *solidi*.  After interrogating Dominicus
the secretary, or others who may know, redeem the pledge, and restore
the aforesaid little vessels.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p31"></span>We thank thy Solicitude for that,
after I had enjoined thee, in the business of my brother, to send him
back his money, thou hast so consigned the matter to oblivion as if
something had been said to thee by the last of thy slaves.  But now let
even thy Negligence—I cannot say thy Experience—study to get this done;
and whatever of his thou mayest find to be in the hands of Antoninus
send back to him with all speed.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p32"></span>In the matter of Salpingus the Jew a
letter has been found which we have caused to be forwarded to thee, in
order that, after reading it and becoming fully acquainted with his case
and that of a certain widow who is said to be implicated in the same
business, thou mayest make answer as may appear to thee just concerning
the fifty-one *solidi* which are known to be returnable, so that the
creditors may in no way be defrauded unjustly of the debts due to them.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p33"></span>A moiety of his legacy has been given
to Antoninus; a moiety will be redeemed:  which moiety we desire to be
made up to him out of the common substance; and not to him only, but
also to the guardians (*defensoribus*) and strangers (*pergrinis*) to
whom he \[the testator\] has left anything under the title of a legacy. 
To the family (*familiæ*) also we desire the legacy to be paid; which,
however, is our concern.  Having, then, made up the account for our
part, that is for three-quarters, make the payment <span
id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359.md) .

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p35"></span>We desire thee to give something out
of the money of the Church of Canusium to the clergy of the same Church,
to the end that they who now suffer from want may have some sustenance;
and that, if it should please <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p35.1"></span>God</span> that a bishop should be
ordained, he may have a maintenance.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p36"></span>As to lapsed <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360.md) priests, or any others of the
clergy, we desire thee in dealing with their property to keep free from
any contamination.  But seek out the poorest regular monasteries which
know how to live according to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p37.1"></span>God</span>, and consign the lapsed to
penance in these monasteries; and let the property of the lapsed go to
the benefit of the place in which they are consigned to penance, to the
end that those who have the care of their correction may have aid
themselves from their means.  But, if they have relations, let their
property be given to their legitimate relations; yet so that an
allowance for those to whom they have been consigned for penance be
sufficiently provided.  But, if any of an ecclesiastical community,
whether priests, levites, or monks, or clerics, or any others, shall
have lapsed, we will that they be consigned to penance, but that the
Church shall retain its claim to their property.  Yet let them receive
for their own use enough to maintain them during their penance, lest, if
left destitute, they should be burdensome to the places whereto they
have been consigned.  If any have relations on the ecclesiastical
domain, let their property be delivered to them, that it may be
preserved in their hands subject to the Church’s claim.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p38"></span>Three years ago the subdeacons of all
the churches in Sicily, in accordance with the custom of the Roman
Church, were forbidden all conjugal intercourse with their wives.  But
it appears to me hard and improper that one who has not been accustomed
to such continency, and has not previously promised chastity, should be
compelled to separate himself from his wife, and thereby (which <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p38.1"></span>God</span> forbid) fall
into what is worse.  Hence it seems good to me that from the present day
all bishops should be told not to presume to make any one a subdeacon
who does not promise to live chastely; that so what was not of set
purpose desired in the past may not be forcibly required, but that
cautious provision may be made for the future.  But those who since the
prohibition of three years ago have lived continently with their wives
are to be praised and rewarded, and exhorted to continue in their good
way.  But, as for those who since the prohibition have been unwilling to
abstain from intercourse with their wives, we desire them not to be
advanced to a sacred order; since no one ought to approach the ministry
of the altar but one who has been of approved chastity before
undertaking the ministry.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p39"></span>For Liberatus the tradesman, who has
commended himself to the Church, dwelling on the Cincian estate, we
desire thee to make an annual provision; which provision do thou
estimate thyself as to what it ought to be, that it may be reported to
me and charged in thy accounts.  With regard to the present indiction I
have already got information from our son the servant of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p39.1"></span>God</span> Diaconus.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p40"></span> <span id="page_92b">p. 92b</span>
<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-Page_92b"></span>One John, a monk, has died and
left Fantinus the guardian (*defensorem*) his heir to the extent of one
half.  Hand over to the latter what has been left him, but charge him
not to presume to do the like again.  But appoint what he should receive
for his work, so that it be not fruitless to him; and let him remember
that one who lives on the pay of the Church should not pant after
private gains.  But, if anything should accrue to the Church, without
sin and without the lust of concupiscence, through those who transact
the business of the Church, it is right that these should not be without
fruit of their labour.  Still let it be reserved for our judgment how
they should be remunerated <span id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361.md) .

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p42"></span>As to the money of Rusticianus, look
thoroughly into the case, and carry out what appears to thee to be
just.  Admonish the magnificent Alexander <span
id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362.md) to conclude the cause between
himself and holy Church; which if he peradventure shall neglect to do,
do thou, in the fear of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p43.1"></span>God</span> and with honour preserved,
bring this same cause to an issue as thou art able.  We desire thee also
to expend something in this business; and, if it can be done, let him be
spared the cost of what has to be given to others, provided he
terminates the cause which he has with us.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p44"></span>Restore without any delay the
donation of the handmaiden of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p44.1"></span>God <span
id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363.md) </span> who has lapsed and been
sent into a monastery, to the end that (as I have said above) the same
place that bears the toil of attending to her may have provision for her
from what she has.  But recover also whatever of hers is in the hands of
others, and hand it over to the aforesaid monastery.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p46"></span>Send to us the payments of
Xenodochius of Via Nova to the amount thou hast told us of, since thou
hast them by thee.  But give something, according to thy discretion, to
the agent whom thou hast deputed in the same patrimony.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p47"></span>Concerning the handmaiden of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p47.1"></span>God</span> who was with
Theodosius, by name Extranea, it seems to me that thou shouldest give
her an allowance, if thou thinkest it advantageous, or at any rate
return to her the donation which she made.  The house of the monastery
which Antoninus had taken from the monastery, giving thirty *solidi* for
it, restore thou without the least delay, the money being repaid.  After
thoroughly investigating the truth restore the onyx phials <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364.md) , which I send back to thee by the
bearer of these presents.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p49"></span>If Saturninus is at liberty and not
employed with thee, send him to us.  Felix, a farmer under the lady
Campana, whom she had left free and ordered to be exempt from
examination, said that seventy-two *solidi* had been taken from him by
Maximus the sub-deacon, for paying which he asserted that he sold or
pledged all the property that he had in Sicily.  But the lawyers said
that he could not be exempt from examination concerning acts of fraud. 
However, when he was returning to us from Campania, he perished in a
storm.  We desire thee to seek out his wife and children, to redeem
whatever he had pledged, repay the price of what he had sold, and
moreover provide them with some maintenance; seeing that Maximus had
sent the man into Sicily and there taken from him what he alleged. 
Ascertain, therefore, what has been taken from him, and restore it
without any delay to his wife and children.  Read all these things over
carefully, and put aside all that familiar negligence of thine.  My
writings which I have sent to the peasants cause thou to be read over
throughout all the estates, that they may know in what points to defend
themselves, under our authority, against acts of wrong; and let either
the originals or copies be given them.  See that thou observe everything
without abatement:  for, with regard to what I have written to thee for
the observance of justice, I am absolved; and, if thou art negligent,
thou art guilty.  Consider the terrible Judge who is coming:  and let
thy conscience now anticipate His advent with fear and trembling, lest
it should then fear \[not?\] without cause, when heaven and earth shall
tremble before Him.  Thou hast heard what I wish to be done:  see that
thou do it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[88b:1343](2120333.htm#fr_1342.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p6"></span> *Rusticos ecclesiæ*; i.e. the native
cultivater of the land, called elsewhere *coloni*, and by Cicero (*In
Verrem*), *aratores*.  See *Proleg*.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[88b:1344](2120333.htm#fr_1343.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p7"></span> It appears from Cicero that, when the
Romans annexed Sicily, they found the greater part of the land subject
by ancient custom to a tithe of the corn and other produce, and that
such tithe continued to be enacted by the Roman government, which
derived thence its main revenue from the island:  further, that the
custom had grown up of allowing a pecuniary composition for the tithe,
and that this custom, intended originally for the accommodation of the
tithe payers, had been abused to their detriment by over valuation in
years when corn was cheap.  One of the charges against Verres was that
this had been done under him as Prætor.  When wheat was selling in
Sicily for two or at the most three sesterces per *modius*, the peasants
had been made to compound for their tithes at the rate of three
*denarii*, i.e. twelve secterces.  (*Cic. in Verr. Divin*. 10; *Act* II.
*Lib*. iii. 6, 18).  The Roman Church having succeeded the Roman
Government in the lordship of the “Patrimony of St. Peter,” it appears
that the Church officials had not been guiltless of similar unfair
exactions.  Hence the direction here in this Epistle that the valuations
of the tithe in successive years should follow the market price.

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[89b:1345](2120333.htm#fr_1344.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p8"></span> This refers to the corn which was
sent annually in large quantities to Rome, and on which the Romans were
in a great measure dependent for their supply.  Those in Sicily who
furnished it were, it seems, responsible for its delivery, taking the
risk of loss by sea.  But it rested with the Church officials to provide
for its being shipped; and, if any loss on the voyage ensued from their
delay, the parties otherwise responsible were to be indemnified.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[89b:1346](2120333.htm#fr_1345.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p9"></span> *Ex sextariaticis*.  This appears to
have been a technical term, denoting unjust exaction of the following
kind.  The peasants (*rustici*) on an estate had to supply, let us say,
so many *modii* of corn to be shipped for Rome.  But the *modius* varied
in capacity.  It is said originally to have contained sixteen
*sextarii*, a sextarius being between a pint and a quart.  But it
appears below that one of eighteen *sextarii* was in use in the time of
Gregory, and by him allowed.  This limit, however, seems to have been
sometimes exceeded, and herein consisted the abuse complained of.  In a
subsequent epistle (XIII. 34) a *modius* of even twenty-five *sextarii*
is spoken of as having been in one case used:—“We understand that the
*modius* by which the husbandmen (*coloni*) were compelled to give their
corn was one of twenty-five *sextarii*.”

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[89b:1347](2120333.htm#fr_1346.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p11"></span> *Massis*.  These *massæ* might
include several farms (*fundi*, or *prædia*), and were let or leased to
farmers (*conductores*), who made their profit out of them.  Cf. xiv.
14, “Massam quæ Aquas Salvias nuncupatur cum omnibus fundis suis;” also
v. 31, “Conductoribus massarum per Galliam.”

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[89b:1348](2120333.htm#fr_1347.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p12"></span> *Conductores*.  See last note.

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[89b:1349](2120333.htm#fr_1348.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p13"></span> *Pensantem ad septuagena bina*.  It
would seem that, in addition to the abuse of using *modii* of too large
capacity, there was the additional one of exacting more *modii* than
were legally due, three and a half being added to every seventy; i.e.
one to every twenty.  Cf. *Cicero in Verrem*, “Ab Siculis aratoribus,
præter decumam, ternæ quinquagesimæ (i.e. three for every fifty)
exigebantur.”  If the reading *septuagena bina* be correct, it would
seem that Gregory allowed two to be added to every seventy perhaps on
the ground of long-established custom.  The readings, however, vary; and
what was meant is uncertain.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[89b:1350](2120333.htm#fr_1349.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p14"></span> *Siliquæ*.  In Roman weights the
*uncia* contained 144 *siliquæ*, and the *as* or *libra* 12 *unciæ*. 
The reference seems to be to cases in which the grain or other produce
was rendered by weight.  The just pound was not to be exceeded.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[89b:1351](2120333.htm#fr_1350.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p16"></span> *Præter excepta et vilia cibaria*. 
Cibaria bears the general sense of victuals or provender; and
specifically, “Cibarium, teste, Plin. I. 18, c. 9, ubi de siligine agit,
dicitur farina quæ post pollinem seu florem excussum restat, postquam
nihil aliud remanet nisi furfures:  *the second sort of flour*.  Eadem
dicitur secundarium.  Ex ea qui conficitur vocatur panis cibarius, quia
solet esse communis vulgi cibus.”  Facciolati.  The adjective *cibarius*
is applied to provisions generally, wine, oil, bread, &c., of a common
and inferior kind, and consumed by the common people.  The reference in
the text may be to refuse and inferior grain or other breadstuff, of
which an excessive weight might be exacted to make up for its inferior
quality.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[89b:1352](2120333.htm#fr_1351.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p17"></span> *Colonis*, meaning the same as
*rustici*.  See note 1.

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[89b:1353](2120333.htm#fr_1352.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p19"></span> *Burdationis*.  This appears to have
been a kind of land tax, payable in the first instance, before the
peasants had been able to convert their produce into money.  “Burdatio
est pensio quæ a rusticis præstatur prædii nomine, quod Burdam vocant,
nostri Borde.”  Alteserra.

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[89b:1354](2120333.htm#fr_1353.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p20"></span> *Auctionariis*.  “Mercator qui res
suas auget; et proprie dicitur ille qui hic vel illic res parvas et
veteres et tritas eruit, ut postea carius vendat.”  Du Cange.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[90b:1355](2120333.htm#fr_1354.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p22"></span> *Commoda*.  The word *commodum*
denotes properly a bounty (as to soldiers over and above their pay), a
gratuity, a voluntary offering, though used also for a stipend, or
payment generally.  The peasants (*rustici*) might not marry without
permission.  Cf. xii. 25, “ut eum districte debeas commonere ne filios
suos quolibet ingenio vel excusatione foris alicubi in conjugio, sociare
præsumat, sed in ea massa cui lege et conditione ligati sunt
socientur.”  For such permission they were, it seems, accustomed to pay
a fee, in theory perhaps voluntary, but virtually exacted as a due.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[90b:1356](2120333.htm#fr_1355.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p25"></span> Because a fine would have to be paid
out of the common substance of the family, and so all would be punished
for the offence of one.

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[90b:1357](2120333.htm#fr_1356.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p27"></span> On the office of *defensores*, see
Proleg.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[90b:1358](2120333.htm#fr_1357.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p28"></span> See note 2.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[91b:1359](2120333.htm#fr_1358.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p30"></span> *Suppositorium*.  The word itself
might denote anything put under another, or supporting another.  Here
its being associated with a cup (*calix*), and both being called small
vessels (*vascula*), suggests the translation in the text.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[91b:1360](2120333.htm#fr_1359.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p34"></span> The meaning of these directions is
obscure owing to our ignorance of the circumstances.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[91b:1361](2120333.htm#fr_1360.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p37"></span> The word *lapsi* was the regular one
for denoting clergy or others, who had fallen into sin rendering them
liable to excommunication.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[92b:1362](2120333.htm#fr_1361.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p41"></span> It was against monastic rule for
monks or nuns to retain property of their own after profession, or the
power of disposing of it by will.  It became the common property of the
monastery.  Cf. *Justinian, Novell*. V. c. 38.  See also what was said
above about the goods of lapsed members of religious communities.  In a
subsequent Epistle (IX. 7), Gregory annulls a will that had been made by
an abbess Sirica.  The case of one Probus, an abbot (Appendix, *Ep*.
IX.), who was allowed to make a will, is no real exception to the rule. 
For Gregory gave him special permission to do so on his own petition, on
the equitable ground that at the time of his hasty ordination as abbot,
not having been a monk previously, he had neglected to make provision
for his son by will, as he had intended to do, and as he had then a
right to do.  In the case before us Gregory acts with lenient
consideration.  Though condemning the bequest of the monk John to the
guardian Fantinus, he allows the latter to take it on the ground that he
deserved, but had not so far received, a proper remuneration for his
services.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[92b:1363](2120333.htm#fr_1362.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p43"></span> *Magnificum virum*.  Who this
Alexander was is not known.  His designation implies a position of
rank.  An Alexander appears afterwards as Prætor of Sicily (VI. 8):  but
the Prætor of this year was Justinus (see above, Ep. II.), who was
apparently succeeded by Libertinus (III. 38).

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[92b:1364](2120333.htm#fr_1363.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p45"></span> *Ancillæ Dei*.  So were called, not
professed nuns only, but also others who devoted themselves to virginity
and religious lives.  Gregory’s own aunts, Tarsilla and Æmiliana, who
lived as dedicated virgins in their own home, were instances.  See
*Proleg*. p. xiv.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[92b:1365](2120333.htm#fr_1364.md) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxi-p48"></span> *Amulas*.  “Amula, minor ama, vas
vinarium, in quo sacra oblatio continetur.”  Du Cange.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLVI](2120334.md)
