[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120186)  [Next](2120188) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Sermon XIX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>On the Fast of the Ten Month, VIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p3"></span>I.  *Self-restraint leads to higher
enjoyments.*

<span id="ii.v.ix-p4"></span>When the Saviour would instruct His
disciples about the Advent of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> Kingdom and the end of the world’s
times, and teach His whole Church, in the person of the Apostles, He
said, “Take heed lest haply your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, and care of this life <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) .”  And assuredly, dearly beloved, we
acknowledge that this precept applies more especially to us, to whom
undoubtedly the day denounced is near, even though hidden.  For the
advent of which it behoves every man to prepare himself, lest it find
him given over to gluttony, or entangled in cares of this life.  For by
daily experience, beloved, it is proved that the mind’s edge is blunted
by over-indulgence of the flesh, and the heart’s vigour is dulled by
excess of food, so that the delights of eating are even opposed to the
health of the body, unless reasonable moderation withstand the
temptation and the consideration of future discomfort keep from the
pleasure.  For although the flesh desires nothing without the soul, and
receives its sensations from the same source as it receives its motions
also, yet it is the function of the same soul to deny certain things to
the body which is subject to it, and by its inner judgment to restrain
the outer parts from things unseasonable, in order that it may be the
oftener free from bodily lusts, and have leisure for Divine wisdom in
the palace of the mind, where, away from all the noise of earthly cares,
it may in silence enjoy holy meditations and eternal delights.  And,
although this is difficult to maintain in this life, yet the attempt can
frequently be renewed, in order that we may the oftener and longer be
occupied with spiritual rather than fleshly cares; and by our spending
ever greater portions of our time on higher cares, even our temporal
actions may end in gaining the incorruptible riches.

<span id="ii.v.ix-p6"></span>II.  *The teaching of the four yearly fasts
is that spiritual self-restraint is as necessary as corporeal.*

<span id="ii.v.ix-p7"></span>This profitable observance, dearly beloved,
is especially laid down for the fasts of the Church, which, in
accordance with the Holy Spirit’s teaching, are so distributed over the
whole year that the law of abstinence may be kept before us at all
times.  Accordingly we keep the spring fast in Lent, the summer fast at
Whitsuntide, the autumn fast in the seventh month, and the winter fast
in this which is the tenth month, knowing that there is nothing
unconnected with the Divine commands, and that all the elements serve
the Word of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p7.1"></span>God</span>
to our instruction, so that from the very hinges on which the world
turns, as if by four gospels we learn unceasingly what to preach and
what to do.  For, when the prophet says, “The heavens declare the glory
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p7.2"></span>God</span>, and the
firmament showeth His handiwork:  day unto day uttereth speech, and
night showeth knowledge <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) ,” what
is there by which the Truth does not speak to us?  By day and by night
His voices are heard, and the beauty of the things made by the
workmanship of the One <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p8.2"></span>God</span> ceases not to instil the teachings
of Reason into our hearts’ ears, so that “the invisible things of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p8.3"></span>God</span> may be perceived
and seen through the things which are made,” and men may serve the
Creator of all, not His creatures <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720) .  Since therefore all vices are
destroyed by self-restraint, and whatever avarice thirsts for, pride
strives for, luxury lusts after, is overcome by the solid force of this
virtue, who can fail to understand the aid which is given us by
fastings? for therein we are bidden to restrain ourselves, not only in
food, but also in all carnal desires.  Otherwise it is lost labour to
endure hunger and yet not put away wrong wishes; to afflict oneself by
curtailing food, and yet not to flee from sinful thoughts.  That is a
carnal, not a spiritual fast, where the body only is stinted, and those
things persisted in, <span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="ii.v.ix-Page_128"></span>which are more harmful than all delights. 
What profit is it to the soul to act outwardly as mistress and inwardly
to be a captive and a slave, to issue orders to the limbs and to lose
the right to her own liberty?  That soul for the most part (and
deservedly) meets with rebellion in her servant, which does not pay to
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p9.2"></span>God</span> the service
that is due.  When the body therefore fasts from food, let the mind fast
from vices, and pass judgment upon all earthly cares and desires
according to the law of its King

<span id="ii.v.ix-p10"></span>III.  *Thus fasting in mind as well as
body, and giving alms freely, we shall win <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p10.1"></span>God’s</span> highest favour.*

<span id="ii.v.ix-p11"></span>Let us remember that we owe love first to
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p11.1"></span>God</span>, secondly to
our neighbour, and that all our affections must be so regulated as not
to draw us away from the worship of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p11.2"></span>God</span>, or the benefiting our fellow
slave.  But how shall we worship <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p11.3"></span>God</span> unless that which is pleasing to
Him is also pleasing to us?  For, if our will is His will, our weakness
will receive strength from Him, from Whom the very will came; “for it is
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p11.4"></span>God</span>,” as the
Apostle says, “who worketh in us both to will and to do for (His) good
pleasure <span id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721) .”  And so a man will
not be puffed up with pride, nor crushed with despair, if he uses the
gifts which <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p12.2"></span>God</span>
gave to His glory, and withholds his inclinations from those things,
which he knows will harm him.  For in abstaining from malicious envy,
from luxurious and dissolute living, from the perturbations of anger,
from the lust after vengeance, he will be made pure and holy by true
fasting, and will be fed upon the pleasures of incorruptible delights,
and so he will know how, by the spiritual use of his earthly riches, to
transform them into heavenly treasures, not by hoarding up for himself
what he has received, but by gaining a hundred-fold on what he gives. 
And hence we warn you, beloved, in fatherly affection, to make this
winter fast fruitful to yourselves by bounteous alms, rejoicing that by
you the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.ix-p12.3"></span>Lord</span>
feeds and clothes His poor, to whom assuredly He could have given the
possessions which He has bestowed on you, had He not in His unspeakable
mercy wished to justify them for their patient labour, and you for your
works of love.  Let us therefore fast on Wednesday and Friday, and on
Saturday keep vigil with the most blessed Apostle Peter, and he will
deign to assist with his own prayers our supplications and fastings and
alms which our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p12.4"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ presents, Who with
the Father and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_718"></span>[127:719](2120187.htm#fr_718) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p5"></span> S. [Luke xxi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034)<span id="ii.v.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[127:720](2120187.htm#fr_719) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p8"></span> [Ps.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[127:721](2120187.htm#fr_720) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p9"></span> Cf. [Rom.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="ii.v.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[128:722](2120187.htm#fr_721) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p11.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p12"></span> [Phil. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="ii.v.ix-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXI](2120188)
