[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120503)  [Next](2120505.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p2"></span>To the Salonitans.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p3"></span>Gregory to his most beloved sons,
the clergy and nobles dwelling at Salona <span
id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649.md) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p5"></span>It has come to my ears, that certain
men of perverse disposition, in order to poison your minds, beloved,
have tried to insinuate to you that I am moved by some grudge against
Maximus, and that I am desiring to carry out not so much what is
canonical as what anger dictates.  But far, far be it from the priestly
mind to be moved in any cause by private feeling.  It is on the contrary
as taking thought for you, beloved, and as fearing the judgment of
Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p5.1"></span>God</span> on my own soul, that I desire
the case of this same Maximus to be thoroughly investigated, as to
whether he is burdened by no such crimes as are a bar to ordination, and
makes no attempt to attain to the priestly office through simoniacal
heresy; that is by giving bribes to some of his electors.  He will then
be a free intercessor for you before the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, if he shall come to the
place of intercession bound by no sins of his own.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p6"></span>And yet his sin of pride is already
manifestly shewn, in that, having been summoned to come to us, he
resists under various excuses, shuns coming, is afraid to come.  What
then is he afraid of, if his conscience does not accuse him with respect
to the things he is charged with?  Lo, beloved, ye have now been long
without a pastor, and may Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p6.1"></span>God</span> make known to you how
earnestly and from the bottom of my heart I sympathize with you in your
destitution.  For I hear what ravages are being made in the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p6.2"></span>Lord’s</span> flock. 
But, when there is no shepherd, who may watch against the wolves? 
Wherefore urge ye the aforesaid Maximus to come hither to us, to the end
that we may confirm him if we are able to find him innocent; but, if the
things that are said of him should turn out to be true, that you,
beloved, may be no longer left destitute through the interposition of
his person.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p7"></span>For as to me, be assured that I am
not moved against him by any grudge or any animosity of private feeling;
but whatever may be canonical and just with the help of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p7.1"></span>God</span> I will
determine.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p8"></span> <span id="page_197b">p. 197b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-Page_197b"></span>But I have been greatly
astonished that among so many clergy and people of the Church of Salona
hardly two in sacred orders have been found—to wit our brother and
fellow-bishop Paulinus and my most beloved son Honoratus, archdeacon of
the same Church—who refused to communicate with Maximus when he seized
the priesthood, and who remembered that they were Christians.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p9"></span>For you ought, most dear sons, to
have considered your own orders, and recognized as rejected him whom the
Apostolical See rejected, that he might first be purged, if he could be,
from the charges brought against him, and that then your Love might
communicate with him without being partakers in his liability.  We
however are bound to your Charity in the bowels of loving-kindness; and,
since we have learnt that some of you were pressed by force to accept
him and communicate with him, we implore Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p9.1"></span>God</span> to absolve you from all guilt
of your own sins and from all implication in the liability of others,
and to give you the grace of His protection in the present life, and
grant to us to rejoice for you in the eternal country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[196b:1650](2120504.htm#fr_1649.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xviii-p4"></span> See III. 47, note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Clergy and People of Jadera.](2120505.md)
