[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120040)  [Next](2120042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Letter XXXI.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p2.1"></span>To Pulcheria Augusta <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p4"></span>Leo to Pulcheria Augusta.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p5"></span>I.  *He reminds Pulcheria of her former
services to the Church, and suggests her interference in the Eutychian
controversy.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p6"></span>How much protection the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> has extended to
His Church through your clemency, we have often tested by many signs. 
And whatever stand the strenuousness of the priesthood has made in our
times against the assailers of the catholic Truth, has redounded chiefly
to your glory:  seeing that, as you have learnt from the teaching of the
Holy Spirit, you submit your authority in all things to Him, by whose
favour and under whose protection you reign.  Wherefore, because I have
ascertained from my brother and fellow-bishop Flavian’s report, that a
certain dispute has been raised through the agency of Eutyches in the
church of Constantinople against the integrity of the Christian faith
(and the text of the synod’s minutes has shown me the exact nature of
the whole matter), it is worthy of your great name that the error which
in my opinion proceeds rather from ignorance than ingenuity, should be
dispelled before, with the pertinacity of wrong-headedness, it gains any
strength from the support of the unwise.  Because even ignorance
sometimes falls into serious mistakes, and very frequently the
simple-minded rush through unwariness into the devil’s pit:  and it is
thus, I believe, that the spirit of falsehood has crept over Eutyches: 
so that, whilst he imagines himself to appreciate the majesty of the Son
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p6.2"></span>God</span> more
devoutly, by denying in Him the real presence of our nature, he came to
the conclusion that the whole of that Word which “became flesh” was of
one and the same essence.  And greatly as Nestorius fell away from the
Truth, in asserting that Christ was only born man of His mother, this
man also departs no less far from the catholic path, who does not
believe that our substance was brought forth from the same Virgin: 
wishing it of course to be understood as belonging to His Godhead only;
so that that which took the form of a slave, and was like us and of the
same form <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) , was a kind of image,
not the reality of our nature.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p8"></span>II.  *Man’s salvation required the union
of the two natures in Christ*.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p9"></span>But it is of no avail to say that our
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p9.1"></span>Lord</span>, the Son
of the blessed Virgin Mary, was true and perfect man, if He is not
believed to be Man of that stock which is attributed to Him in the
Gospel.  For Matthew says, “The book of the generation of Jesus Christ,
the son of David, the son of Abraham <span
id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) :”  and follows the order of His human
origin, so as to bring the lines of His ancestry down to Joseph to whom
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.2"></span>Lord’s</span>
mother was espoused.  Whereas Luke going backwards step by step traces
His succession to the first of the human race himself, to show that the
first Adam and the last Adam were of the same nature.  No doubt the
Almighty Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.3"></span>God</span> could have appeared for the
purpose <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-Page_45"></span>of teaching, and justifying men in
exactly the same way that He appeared both to patriarchs and prophets in
the semblance of flesh <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) ; for
instance, when He engaged in a struggle, and entered into conversation
(with Jacob), or when He refused not hospitable entertainment, and even
partook of the food set before Him.  But these appearances were
indications of that Man whose reality it was announced by mystic
predictions would be assumed from the stock of preceding patriarchs. 
And the fulfilment of the mystery of our atonement, which was ordained
from all eternity, was not assisted by any figures because the Holy
Spirit had not yet come upon the Virgin, and the power of the Most High
had not over-shadowed her:  so that “Wisdom building herself a
house <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) ” within her undefiled
body, “the Word became flesh;” and the form of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p12.2"></span>God</span> and the form of a slave coming
together into one person, the Creator of times was born in time; and He
Himself through whom all things were made, was brought forth in the
midst of all things.  For if the New Man had not been made in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and taken on Him our old nature, and being
consubstantial with the Father, had deigned to be consubstantial with
His mother also, and being alone free from sin, had united our nature to
Him the whole human race would be held in bondage beneath the Devil’s
yoke <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) , and we should not be able
to make use of the Conqueror’s victory, if it had been won outside our
nature.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p14"></span>III.  *From the union of the two
natures flows the grace of baptism.  He makes a direct appeal to
Pulcheria for her help.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p15"></span>But from Christ’s marvellous sharing of
the two natures, the mystery of regeneration shone upon us that through
the self-same spirit, through whom Christ was conceived and born, we
too, who were born through the desire of the flesh, might be born again
from a spiritual source:  and consequently, the Evangelist speaks of
believers as those “who were born not of bloods, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p15.1"></span>God <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321)
</span>.”  And of this unutterable grace no one is a partaker, nor can
be reckoned among the adopted sons of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p16.2"></span>God</span>, who excludes from his faith
that which is the chief means of our salvation.  Wherefore, I am much
vexed and saddened that this man, who seemed before so laudably disposed
towards humility, dares to make these empty and stupid attacks on the
one Faith of ourselves and of our fathers.  When he saw that his
ignorant notion offended the ears of catholics, he ought to have
withdrawn from his opinion, and not to have so disturbed the Church’s
rulers, as to deserve a sentence of condemnation:  which, of course, no
one will be able to remit, if he is determined to abide by his notion. 
For the moderation of the Apostolic See uses its leniency in such a way
as to deal severely with the contumacious, while desiring to offer
pardon to those who accept correction.  Seeing then that I possess great
confidence in your lofty faith and piety, I entreat your illustrious
clemency, that, as the preaching of the catholic Faith has always been
aided by your holy zeal, so now, also, you will maintain its free
action.  Perchance the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p16.3"></span>Lord</span> allowed it to be thus assailed
for this reason that we might discover what sort of persons lurked
within the Church.  And clearly, we must not neglect to look after such,
lest we be afflicted with their actual loss.

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p17"></span>IV.  *His personal presence at the
council must be excused.  The question at issue is a very grave one.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p18"></span>But the most august and Christian
Emperor, being anxious that the disturbances may be set at rest with all
speed, has appointed too short and early a date for the council of
bishops, which he wishes held at Ephesus, in fixing the first of August
for the meeting:  for from the fifth of May, on which we received His
Majesty’s letter, most of the time remaining has to be spent in making
complete arrangements for the journey of such priests as are competent
to represent me.  For as to the necessity of my attending the council
also, which his piety suggested, even if there were any precedent for
the request, it could by no means be managed now:  for the very
uncertain state of things at present would not permit my absence from
the people of this great city:  and the minds of the riotously-disposed
might be driven to desperate deeds, if they were to think that I took
occasion of ecclesiastical business to desert my country <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) and the Apostolic See.  As then you
recognize that it concerns the public weal that with your merciful
indulgence I should not deny myself to the affectionate prayers of my
<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-Page_46"></span>people, consider that in these my
brethren, whom I have sent in my stead, I also am present with the rest
who appear:  to them I have clearly and fully explained what is to be
maintained in view of the satisfactory exposition of the case which has
been given me by the detailed report, and by the defendant’s own
statement to me.  For the question is not about some small portion of
our Faith on which no very distinct declaration has been made:  but the
foolish opposition that is raised ventures to impugn that which our
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p19.1"></span>Lord</span> desired
no one of either sex in the Church to be ignorant of.  For the short but
complete confession of the catholic creed which contains the twelve
sentences of the twelve apostles <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323)
is so well furnished with the heavenly panoply, that all the opinions of
heretics can receive their death-blow from that one weapon.  And if
Eutyches had been content to receive that creed in its entirety with a
pure and simple heart, he would at no point go astray from the decrees
of the most sacred council of Nicæa, and he would understand that the
holy Fathers laid this down, to the end that no mental or rhetorical
ingenuity should lift itself up against the Apostolic Faith which is
absolutely one.  Deign then, with your accustomed piety to do your best
endeavour, that this blasphemous and foolish attack upon the one and
only sacrament of man’s salvation may be driven from all men’s minds. 
And if the man himself, who has fallen into this temptation, recover his
senses, so as to condemn his own error by a written recantation, let him
not be denied communion with his order <span
id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) .  Your clemency is to know that I
have written in the same strain to the holy bishop Flavian also:  that
loving-kindness be not lost sight of, if the error be dispelled.  Dated
13 June in the consulship of the illustrious Asturius and Protogenes
(449).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_315"></span>[44:316](2120041.htm#fr_315) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p3"></span> This was the Emperor Theodosius the
younger’s sister, a woman of noted zeal in the cause of the Church:  for
many years she had practically ruled the empire owing to her brother’s
youthfulness.  When the intrigues of Chrysaphius had brought about a
quarrel between brother and sister, she retired for a time from public
life.  But becoming the virgin wife of Marcian, she, through him, helped
to effect the victory of the Catholic cause at the Council of Chalcedon
(451).

<span id="fn_316"></span>[44:317](2120041.htm#fr_316) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p7"></span> *Quod nostri similis fuit atque
conformis*.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[44:318](2120041.htm#fr_317) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10"></span> S. [Matt. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[45:319](2120041.htm#fr_318) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p11"></span> [Gen.
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024), [Gen.
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p11.1"></span>.  It will be noticed that Leo
unhesitatingly pronounces these and similar appearances to be
manifestations of the Second Person in the Trinity.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[45:320](2120041.htm#fr_319) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p12"></span> [Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p12.1"></span>. 
Cf. Letter XXVIII. (The Tome), chap. ii., towards the end.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[45:321](2120041.htm#fr_320) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p13"></span> *Sub iugo diaboli generaliter
teneretur humana captivitas*:  for the word *generaliter*, cf. Letter
XVI., chap. iv., no. 3.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[45:322](2120041.htm#fr_321) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p16"></span> S. [John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[45:323](2120041.htm#fr_322) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p19"></span> *Patriam*.  I can see very little
ground for pressing this quite general expression to mean that he was a
native of Rome, or even a native of Italy.  The most that can be said is
that it does not forbid the supposition.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[46:324](2120041.htm#fr_323) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p20"></span> Let the reader beware of accepting the
plausible account here suggested of the formation of the Apostles’
Creed, and still more so of accepting the popular derivation of the word
*symbolum* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p20.1"></span>σύμβολον</span>) as the twelve Apostles’
twelve “contributions” (one each) to the Church’s rule of faith.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[46:325](2120041.htm#fr_324) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxi-p21"></span> *Communio sui ordinis*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Archimandrites of Constantinople.](2120042)
