[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120417)  [Next](2120419.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p2"></span>*To Mauricius Augustus* <span
id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513.md) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p4"></span>Gregory to Mauricius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p5"></span>He is guilty before Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p5.1"></span>God</span> who is not
pure of offence towards our most serene lords in all he does and says. 
I, however, unworthy servant of your Piety, speak in this my
representation neither as a bishop, nor as your servant in right of the
republic, but as of private right, since, most serene <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, you have
been mine since the time when you were not yet lord of all.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p6"></span>On the arrival here of the most
illustrious Longinus, the equerry (*stratore*), I received the law of my
lords, to which, being at the time worn out by bodily sickness, I was
unable to make any reply.  In it the piety of my lords has ordained that
it shall not be lawful for any one who is engaged in any public
administration to enter on an ecclesiastical office.  And this I greatly
commended, knowing by most evident proof that one who is in haste to
desert a secular condition and enter on an ecclesiastical office is not
wishing to relinquish secular affairs, but to change them.  But, at its
being said in the same law that it should not be lawful for him to
become a monk, I was altogether surprised, seeing that his accounts can
be rendered through a monastery, and it can be arranged for his debts
also to be recovered from the place into which he is received.  For with
whatever devout intention a person may have wished to become a monk, he
should first restore what he has wrongly gotten, and take thought for
his soul all the more truly as he is the more disencumbered.  It is
added in the same law that no one who has been marked on the hand <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514.md) may become a monk.  This ordinance,
I confess to my lords, has alarmed me greatly, since by <span
id="page_141b">p. 141b</span> <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-Page_141b"></span>it the way to heaven is closed
against many, and what has been lawful until now is made unlawful.  For
there are many who are able to live a religious life even in a secular
condition:  but there are very many who cannot in any wise be saved with
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p7.1"></span>God</span>
unless they give up all things.  But what am I, in speaking thus to my
lords, but dust and a worm?  Yet still, feeling that this ordinance
makes against <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p7.2"></span>God</span>, who is the Author of all, I
cannot keep silence to my lords.  For power over all men has been given
from heaven to the piety of my lords to this end, that they who aspire
to what is good may be helped, and that the way to heaven may be more
widely open, so that an earthly kingdom may wait upon the heavenly
kingdom.  And lo, it is said in plain words that one who has once been
marked to serve as an earthly soldier may not, unless he has either
completed his service or been rejected for weakness of body, serve as
the soldier of our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p7.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p8"></span>To this, behold, Christ through me
the last of His servants and of yours will answer, saying; From a notary
I made thee a Count of the bodyguard; from Count of the bodyguard I made
thee a Cæsar; from a Cæsar I made thee Emperor; and not only so, but
also a father of emperors.  I have committed my priests into thy hand;
and dost thou withdraw thy soldiers from my service?  Answer thy
servant, most pious lord, I beseech thee; what wilt thou answer to thy
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p8.1"></span>Lord</span> when
He comes and thus speaks?

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p9"></span>But peradventure it is believed
that no one among them turns monk with a pure motive.  I, your unworthy
servant, know how many soldiers who have become monks in my own days
have done miracles, have wrought signs and mighty deeds.  But by this
law it is forbidden that even one of such as these should become a monk.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p10"></span>Let my <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> enquire, I beg, what
former emperor ever enacted such a law, and consider more thoroughly
whether it ought to have been enacted.  And indeed it is a very serious
consideration, that now at this time any are forbidden to leave the
world; a time when the end of the world is drawing nigh.  For lo! there
will be no delay:  the heavens on fire, the earth on fire, the elements
blazing, with angels and archangels, thrones and dominions,
principalities and powers, the tremendous Judge will appear.  Should He
remit all sins, and say only that this law has been promulged against
Himself, what excuse, pray, will there be?  Wherefore by the same
tremendous Judge I beseech you, that all those tears, all those prayers,
all those fasts, all those alms of my <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p10.2"></span>Lord</span>, may not on any ground
lose their lustre before the eyes of Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p10.3"></span>God</span>:  but let your Piety,
either by interpretation or alteration, modify the force of this law,
since the army of my lords against their enemies increases the more when
the army of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p10.4"></span>God</span> has been increased for
prayer.

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p11"></span>I indeed, being subject to your
command, have caused this law to be transmitted through various parts of
the world; and, inasmuch as the law itself is by no means agreeable to
Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p11.1"></span>God</span>, lo, I have by this my
representation declared this to my most serene lords.  On both sides,
then, I have discharged my duty, having both yielded obedience to the
Emperor, and not kept silence as to what I feel in behalf of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p11.2"></span>God</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[140b:1514](2120418.htm#fr_1513.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p3"></span> This letter is supposed to have
been written in the third Indiction (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 592–3); the law complained
of having been issued in the previous year.  The epistle, which follows,
to the Emperor’s physician on the same subject, shews how much Gregory
had it at heart.  Some five years later it appears from a letter to
divers metropolitans, dated December, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 597 (VIII. 5), that an
amicable agreement had meanwhile been come to, both the Emperor and the
Pope having made some concessions.  Cf. also the end of *Ep*. 24 in Book
X.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[140b:1515](2120418.htm#fr_1514.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.xxxii-p7"></span> Cf. below, “in terrena militia
signatus.”  It appears that not slaves only, but soldiers also, were
sometime marked on the hand.  Cf. Cyprian, *Ad Donatum*, “Te quem jam
spiritualibus castris militia signavit.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theodorus, Physician.](2120419.md)
