[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120097)  [Next](2120099.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p1"></span> <span id="page_70">p. 70</span>
<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-Page_70"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p1.1"></span>Letter XCIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p2.1"></span>To the Synod of Chalcedon.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p3"></span>Leo, the bishop of the city of Rome,
to the holy Synod, assembled at Nicæa <span
id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426.md) .

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p5"></span>I.  *He excuses his absence from the
Synod, and introduces his representatives.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p6"></span>I had indeed prayed, dearly beloved,
on behalf of my dear colleagues that all the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p6.1"></span>Lord’s</span> priests would persist in
united devotion to the catholic Faith, and that no one would be misled
by favour or fear of secular powers into departure from the way of
Truth; but because many things often occur to produce penitence and
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p6.2"></span>God’s</span>
mercy transcends the faults of delinquents, and vengeance is postponed
in order that reformation may have place, we must make much of our most
merciful prince’s piously intentioned Council, in which he has desired
your holy brotherhood to assemble for the purpose of destroying the
snares of the devil and restoring the peace of the Church, so far
respecting the rights and dignity of the most blessed Apostle Peter as
to invite us too by letter to vouchsafe our presence at your venerable
Synod.  That indeed is not permitted either by the needs of the times or
by any precedent.  Yet in these brethren, that is Paschasinus and
Lucentius, bishops, Boniface and Basil, presbyters, who have been
deputed by the Apostolic See, let your brotherhood reckon that I am
presiding <span id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427.md) at the Synod; for my
presence is not withdrawn from you, who am now represented by my vicars,
and have this long time been really with you in the proclaiming of the
catholic Faith:  so that you who cannot help knowing what we believe in
accordance with ancient tradition, cannot doubt what we desire.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p8"></span>II.  *He entreats them to re-State
the Faith as laid down in the Tome.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p9"></span>Wherefore, brethren most dear, let
all attempts at impugning the Divinely-inspired Faith be entirely put
down, and the vain unbelief of heretics be laid to rest:  and let not
that be defended which may not be believed:  since in accordance with
the authoritative statements of the Gospel, in accordance with the
utterances of the prophets, and the teaching of the Apostles, with the
greatest fulness and clearness in the letter which we sent to bishop
Flavian of happy memory, it has been laid down what is the loyal and
pure confession upon the mystery of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ’s Incarnation.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p10"></span>III.  *The ejected bishops must be
restored, and the Nestorian canons retain their force.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p11"></span>But because we know full well that
through evil jealousies the state of many churches has been disturbed,
and a large number of bishops have been driven from their Sees for not
receiving the heresy and conveyed into exile, while others have been put
into their places though yet alive, to these wounds first of all must
the healing of justice be applied, nor must any one be deprived of his
own possession that some one else may enjoy it:  for if, as we desire,
all forsake their error, no one need lose his present rank, and those
who have laboured for the Faith ought to have their rights restored with
every privilege.  Let the decrees specially directed against Nestorius
of the former Synod of Ephesus, at which bishop Cyril of holy memory
presided, still retain their force, lest the heresy then condemned
flatter itself in aught because Eutyches is visited with condign
execration.  For the purity of the Faith and doctrine which we proclaim
in the same spirit as our holy Fathers, equally condemns and impugns the
Nestorian and the Eutychian misbelief with its supporters.  Farewell in
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p11.1"></span>Lord</span>,
brethren most dear.  Dated 26th <span id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md)
of June, in the consulship of the illustrious Adelfius (451).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_426"></span>[70:427](2120098.htm#fr_426.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p4"></span> In accordance with instructions,
the bishops, to the number of 529, first met at Nicæa, in Bithynia, the
scene of the famous First General Council:  but the Emperor Marcian was
afraid to go so far from Constantinople, and so they were summoned to
Chalcedon, which was much nearer, on the eastern shore of the Bosporus. 
There the Council opened on Oct. 8, 451.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[70:428](2120098.htm#fr_427.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p7"></span> The right of presiding, which he
here virtually claims for his delegates, seems actually to have been
accorded to them by the council.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[70:429](2120098.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxxviii-p12"></span> The Ball. think the date should be
the 27th.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Marcian Augustus.](2120099.md)
