[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120035)  [Next](2120037.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Letter XXVI <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235.md) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p3.1"></span>A Second One from Flavian to Leo.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p4"></span>To the most holy and blessed father and
fellow-minister Leo, Flavian greeting in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p4.1"></span>Lord</span>.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p5"></span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-Page_37"></span>I.  *Eutyches’ heresy restated*.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p6"></span>Nothing, as you know, most beloved of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p6.1"></span>God</span>, is more
precious to priests than piety and the right dividing of the word of
truth.  For all our hope and safety, and the recompense of promised good
depend thereon.  For this reason we must take all pains about the true
Faith, and those things which have been set forth and decreed by the
holy Fathers, that always, and in all circumstances, they may be kept
and guarded whole and uninjured.  And so it was necessary on the present
occasion for us, who see the orthodox Faith suffering harm, and the
heresy of Apollinaris and Valentinus being revived by the wicked monk
Eutyches, not to overlook it, but publicly to disclose it for the
people’s safety.  For this man:  this Eutyches, keeping his diseased and
sickly opinion hid within him, has dared to attack our gentleness, and
unblushingly and shamelessly to instil his own blasphemy into many
minds:  saying that before the Incarnation indeed, our Saviour Jesus
Christ had two natures, Godhead and manhood:  but that after the union
they became one nature; not knowing <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236.md) what he says, or on what he is
speaking so decidedly.  For even the union of the two natures that came
together in Christ did not, as your piety knows, confuse their
properties in the process:  but the properties of the two natures remain
entire even in the union.  And he added another blasphemy also, saying
that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p7.1"></span>Lord’s</span> body which sprang from Mary
was not of our substance, nor of human matter:  but, though he calls it
human, he refuses to say it was consubstantial with us or with her who
bare him, according to the flesh <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md)
.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p9"></span>II.  *The means Eutyches has taken to
circumvent the Synod*.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p10"></span>And this notwithstanding that the acts
of Ephesus <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md) , in the letter
written by the holy and ecumenical synod to the wicked and deposed
Nestorius, contain these express words:  “the natures which came
together to form true unity are indeed different:  and yet from them
both there is but one Christ and Son.  Not as if the difference between
the two natures was done away with through the union, but rather that
these same natures, His Godhead and His Manhood perfected for us one
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p11.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus
Christ, through an ineffable and incomprehensible meeting which resulted
in unity.”  And this does not escape your holiness, who have no doubt
read the record of what was done at Ephesus.  Yet this same Eutyches
attaching no weight to these words, thinks he is not liable to the
penalties fixed by that holy and ecumenical synod.  For this reason,
finding that many of the simpler-minded folk were injured in their faith
by his contention, upon his being accused by the devout Bishop Eusebius,
and upon his attending at the holy council, and with his own mouth
declaring what he thought to the members of the synod, we have deposed
him for his estrangement from the true Faith, as your holiness will
learn from the resolutions passed about him:  which we have sent with
this our letter.  Moreover, it is fair in my opinion that you should be
told this also that this same Eutyches, after suffering just and
canonical deposition, instead of making amends for his earlier by his
later conduct <span id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) , and appeasing
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p12.2"></span>God</span> by
careful penitence and many tears, and by a true repentance, comforting
our heart which was greatly saddened at his fall:  not only did not do
so, but even made every effort to throw the most holy church of this
place into confusion:  setting up in public placards full of insults and
maledictions, and beyond this addressing his entreaties to our most
religious and Christ-loving Emperor, and these too over-flowing with
arrogance and sauciness, whereby he tried to override the divine canons
in everything.

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p13"></span>III.  *He acknowledges the receipt of
Leo’s letter.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p14"></span>But after all this had occurred, your
holiness’ letter was conveyed to us by the most honourable count
Pansophius:  and from it we learnt that the same Eutyches had sent you a
letter full of falsehood and cunning, saying that at the time of trial
he had presented letters of appeal to us, and to the holy synod of
bishops who were then present, and had appealed to your holiness:  this
he certainly never did, but in this matter, too, he has been guilty of
deceit, like the father of lies, thinking to gain your ear.  Therefore,
most holy father, being stirred by all that he has ventured, and by what
has been done, and is being done against us and the most holy Church,
use your accustomed promptitude as becomes the priesthood, and in
defending the commonweal and peace of the holy churches, consent by your
own letter <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) to endorse the
resolution that has been <span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-Page_38"></span>canonically passed against him, and to
confirm the faith of our most religious and Christ-loving Emperor.  For
the matter only requires your weight and support, which through your
wisdom will at once bring about general peace and quietness.  For thus
both the heresy which has arisen, and the disorder it has excited, will
easily be appeased by God’s assistance through a letter from you:  and
the rumoured synod will also be prevented, and so the most holy churches
throughout the world need not be disturbed.  I and all that are with me
salute all the brethren that are with you.  May you be granted to us
safe in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p15.1"></span>Lord</span>, and still praying for us, O
most <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p15.2"></span>God-</span>Loving and Holy Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[36:236](2120036.htm#fr_235.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p2"></span> In reading the Tome (Lett. XXVIII.) the
reader is warned to remember that he must take no account of this
letter, which did not reach Leo until later, and which is acknowledged
in Lett. XXXVI. dated a week after the Tome.  Bright (n. 139).  There
are two versions of this letter also, the ancient one and a modern one
by Joannes Cotelerius, which latter, as being a more exact reproduction
of the Gk. original, we have taken as the basis of our English
translation.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[37:237](2120036.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p7"></span> *Ignarus*:  it will be remembered that
in the Tome (chap. i.) this is the chief fault which Leo also has to
find with Eutyches, calling him *multum imprudens et nimis imperitis*,
&c.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[37:238](2120036.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p8"></span> So in Lett. XXII., chap. iii., *Domini
corpus non esse quidem corpus hominis, humanum autem corpus esse quod ex
Virgine est*.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[37:239](2120036.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p11"></span> The date of this Council is 431 <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p11.1"></span>b.c.</span>

<span id="fn_239"></span>[37:240](2120036.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p12"></span> *Saltem secundis curare priora* (Gk.
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p12.1"></span>κἂν τοῖς
δευτέροις ἰάσασθαι τὰ πρότερα</span>).

<span id="fn_240"></span>[37:241](2120036.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvi-p15"></span> Cf. Lett. XXVII., n. 7, where the
difference between Flavian’s request here and in Lett. XXII., chap iv.,
is pointed out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Flavian, Bishop of Constantinople.](2120037.md)
