[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120365)  [Next](2120367) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xi-p2"></span>*To all the Bishops of
Illyricum.* <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408)

<span id="iii.v.ii.xi-p4"></span>Gregory to all the bishops, &c.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xi-p5"></span>It both affords us joy for your
carefulness, and makes your Fraternity safe in your own ordination, if
the order of ancient custom is maintained.  Since, then, we have learnt
from the letters which you have sent to us through the presbyter
Maximianus and the deacon Andreas that the consent of all of you and the
will of the most serene Prince have concurred in the person of our
brother and fellow-bishop John, we feel great exultation that, under
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>God’s</span>
direction, such a one has been advanced to the office of
priesthood <span id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409) as the judgment of
all has approved as worthy.  Wherefore, in accordance with your request,
we confirm our aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop by the authority of
our assent in the order of priesthood wherein he has been constituted,
and declare our ratification of his consecration by sending him the
pallium.  And since, according to custom, we have committed to him
vicariate jurisdiction in our stead, we must of necessity take the
precaution of exhorting your Fraternity that you in no wise hesitate to
obey him in matters pertaining to ecclesiastical order and the right
course of discipline, or in other things not precluded by canonical
decrees; that the soundness of your judgment in electing him may be
declared by the obedience which you shew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[105b:1409](2120366.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xi-p3"></span> This Epistle, as appears from the
following one, was on the occasion of the election of John to the See of
Justiniana Prima in Eastern Illyricum, which, though annexed by the
Emperor Gratian (379) to the Eastern Empire, had remained under the
spiritual control of the Roman See.  Accordingly Pope Damasus had
assigned to the bishop of Thessalonica vicariate jurisdiction under Rome
over the new præfecture:  and this arrangement had continued to the time
of Pope Vigilius, when the Emperor Justinian assigned to Achrida, called
by him Justiniana Prima, Metropolitan jurisdiction over the five
provinces of the Dacian civil diocese with the two Pannonias in the
diocese of Illyricum Occidentale (*Justin. Novell*. cxxxi. c. iii.). 
Hence Justiniana Prima became the seat thenceforth of the ecclesiastical
Vicariate also.  The election to the See, being a metropolitan one,
appears to have been made in this instance by the suffragan bishops with
the concurrence of the Emperor; after which the Bishop of Rome was
applied to for confirmation.  In the case before us it was readily
given, the pallium sent, and the vicariate jurisdiction renewed.  A case
will appear below in which such confirmation was refused, but dispensed
with by the Emperor, who supported the elected bishop against the Pope. 
See III. 47, note 1.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[105b:1410](2120366.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xi-p6"></span> *Sacerdotii*, meaning here
episcopacy.  See I. 78, note 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop.](2120367)
