[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120309)  [Next](2120311.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.viii-p1.1"></span>Epistle IX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.viii-p2"></span>To Peter the Subdeacon.

<span id="iii.v.i.viii-p3"></span>Gregory to Peter, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.viii-p4"></span>Gregory, a servant of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.viii-p4.1"></span>God</span>, presbyter and
abbot of the monastery of Saint Theodore in the province of Sicily
constituted in the territory of Panormus, has given us to understand
that men of the farm of Fulloniacus, which belongs to the holy Roman
Church, are endeavouring to encroach on the boundaries of the farm of
Gerdinia, bordering on the said farm of the holy Roman Church, which
they \[*i.e. monks of St. Theodore*\] have possessed without dispute for
innumerable years.  And for this cause we desire you to go to the city
of Panormus, and investigate the question in such sort (with the view of
the right of possession remaining with those who have had it heretofore)
that, if you shall find that the aforesaid monastery of Saint Theodore
has possessed the boundaries concerning which the dispute has arisen
without disturbance for forty years, you shall not allow it to suffer
any damage, even though it were to the advantage of the holy Roman
Church, but provide in all ways for its undisturbed security.  But, if
the agents of the holy Roman Church should shew that the monastery has
not been in possession without dispute of its right for forty years, but
that any question has been raised within that time concerning the said
boundaries, let it be set at rest peaceably and legally by arbitrators
chosen for the purpose.  For not only do we wish that questions of
wrong-doing that have never yet been mooted should be raised, but also
that such as have been raised by others than ourselves should be
speedily set at rest.  Let thy experience, therefore, cause all to be so
effectively adjusted, that no question relating to this matter may be
hereafter referred to us again.  Further, we desire that the testament
of Bacauda, late *Xenodochus*, continue valid as when first made.

<span id="iii.v.i.viii-p5"></span>The month of November:  ninth
Indiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Bacauda and Agnellus, Bishops.](2120311.md)
