[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120569)  [Next](2120571) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p2"></span>To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p3"></span>Gregory to Marinianus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p4"></span>How necessary it is to provide for
the quiet of monasteries <span id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738) ,
and to take measures for their perpetual security, you are aware from
the office you formerly filled in government of a monastery.  And so,
seeing that we have learnt how the monastery of the blessed John and
Stephen in the city of Classis, over which our common son, the abbot
Claudius, is known to preside, has suffered many prejudices and
grievances from your predecessors, it is right that the provision of
your Fraternity should make salutary arrangements for the quiet of its
inmates in future; to the end that living there in the service of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p5.1"></span>God</span>, His grace
also assisting them, they may persevere with free mind.  But lest, owing
to the custom which ought rather to be amended, any one at any time
should presume to cause any annoyance there, it is necessary that the
points which we have taken care to enumerate below be so guarded by the
careful attention of your Fraternity that no occasion of causing them
disquiet may possibly be found in future.  Let no one, then, any more
dare, by any kind of inquisition whatever, to diminish anything from the
revenues or charters of the aforesaid monastery, or of any place that in
any manner whatever pertains to it, or to attempt any kind of
usurpations or stratagems.  But if perchance any matter of dispute
should arise between the Church of Ravenna and the aforesaid monastery,
and it cannot be settled amicably, let it be concluded without voluntary
delay before men who fear <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.ix-p5.2"></span>God</span> chosen by the parties, oath
being made upon the most holy Gospels.  Further, on the death of an
abbot, let not a stranger be ordained, but one whom the congregation may
choose of its own free will for itself from the same congregation, and
who shall have been chosen without any fraud or venality.  But, if they
should be unable to find a suitable person among themselves, let them
<span id="page_236b">p. 236b</span> <span
id="iii.v.viii.ix-Page_236b"></span>in like manner wisely choose for
themselves for ordination one from some other monastery.  And, when an
abbot comes, let no person whatever on any occasion whatever be put over
him in his own monastery, unless perchance in the case (which <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p5.3"></span>God</span> forbid) of
crimes which are shewn to be punishable by the sacred canons.  This rule
also must be no less carefully observed; that against the will of the
abbot of such monastery monks be not removed thence for furnishing other
monasteries, or for sacred orders, or for any clerical office.  But in
cases of there being monks in abundance, sufficient for celebrating
praises to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.ix-p5.4"></span>God</span> and for satisfying the
requirements of monasteries, let the abbot offer with devotion of those
who are to spare, such as he may be able to find worthy in the sight of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p5.5"></span>God</span>.  But
if, while having a sufficient number he should refuse to give any, then
let the bishop of Ravenna take of such as are to spare for furnishing
other monasteries.  Nevertheless, let no one be taken out thence for an
ecclesiastical office, except such as the abbot of the place, on having
notice given him, may offer of his own accord.  Whosoever also from the
aforesaid monastery shall have attained to any ecclesiastical order, let
him thenceforth have neither any power there nor leave to dwell
there <span id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739) .

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p7"></span>It is to be observed also that no
schedule of the property and charters of this monastery must be made by
ecclesiastics, if ever circumstances require one:  but let the abbot of
the place with other abbots make an inventory of the property.

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p8"></span>Further, as often as the abbot may
perchance wish to go or send to the Roman pontiff in the interest of his
monastery, let him have entire liberty to do so.

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p9"></span>Furthermore, though the visits of
bishops should be looked for with desire by monasteries, yet, seeing
that it has been reported to us that the aforesaid monastery in the
times of your predecessor was burdened by occasion of entertainment, it
is right that your Holiness should regulate this in a becoming manner,
so that the prelate of the city may have access to the monastery as
often as he pleases for the sake of visiting and exhorting.  But let the
bishop so fulfil the office of charity there that the monastery incur
not any burden.  Now the aforesaid abbot not only does not fear your
Fraternity’s frequent access to the monastery, but even longingly
desires it, knowing that it is quite impossible that the substance of
the monastery should be burdened through you.  Given in the month of
April, first Indiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[235b:1739](2120570.htm#fr_1738) <span
id="iii.v.viii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p5"></span> For other Epistles in which bishops
are forbidden to interfere, except in the case of need, with
monasteries, see Index under *monasteries*.  Also *Prolegom*., p. xx.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[236b:1740](2120570.htm#fr_1739) <span
id="iii.v.viii.ix-p5.6"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.ix-p6"></span> This is among the many evidences
found in Gregory’s Epistles that monks in his day were essentially
laymen.  The active duties incumbent on the clergy were held to be
inconsistent with monastic life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XVII](2120571)
