[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120325)  [Next](2120327) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p1"></span> <span id="page_84b">p. 84b</span>
<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-Page_84b"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p2"></span>*To Venantius, Ex-Monk, Patrician of
Syracuse* <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) .

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p5"></span>Gregory to Venantius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6"></span>Many foolish men have supposed that,
if I were advanced to the rank of the episcopate, I should decline to
address thee, or to keep up communication with thee by letter.  But this
is not so; since I am compelled by the very necessity of my position not
to hold my peace.  For it is written, *Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy
voice like a trumpet* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000),
[Isa. 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)<span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.1"></span>).  And again it is written, *I have given
thee for a watchman unto the house of Israel, thou shalt hear the word
at my mouth, and declare it to them from me* ([Ezek. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.2"></span>).  And what follows to the watchman or to
the hearer from such declaration being kept back or uttered is forthwith
intimated; *If, when I say to the wicked, Thou shalt surely die, thou
declare it not to him, nor speak to him, that he may turn from his
wicked way and live, the wicked man himself shall die in his iniquity;
but his blood will I require at thine hand.  Yet if thou declare it to
the wicked, and he turn not from his iniquity and from his wicked way,
he himself indeed shall die in his iniquity, but thou hast delivered thy
soul.*  Hence also Paul says to the Ephesians, *My hands are pure this
day from the blood of all of you.  For I have not shunned to declare
unto you all the counsel of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.3"></span>God</span>* ([Acts
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#027)<span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.4"></span>).  He would not, then, have been pure
from the blood of all, had he refused to declare unto them the counsel
of <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.5"></span>God</span>.  For
when the pastor refuses to rebuke those that sin, there is no doubt that
in holding his peace he slays them.  Compelled, therefore, by this
consideration, I will speak whether you will or no; for with all my
powers I desire either thee to be saved or myself to be rescued from thy
death.  For thou rememberest in what state of life thou wast, and
knowest to what thou hast fallen without regard to the animadversion of
supernal strictness.  Consider, then, thy fault while there is time;
dread, while thou canst, the severity of the future judge; lest thou
then find it bitter, having shed no tears to avoid it now.  Consider
what is written; *Pray that your flight be not in the winter, neither on
the Sabbath day* ([Matth. xxiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#020)<span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.6"></span>).  For the numbness of cold impedes
walking in the winter, and, according to the ordinance of the law, it is
not lawful to walk on the Sabbath day.  He, then, attempts to fly in the
winter or on the Sabbath day, who then wishes to fly from the wrath of
the strict Judge when it is no longer allowed him to walk.  Wherefore,
while there is time, while it is allowed, fly thou from the
animadversion which is of so great dreadfulness:  consider what is
written; *Whatsoever thine hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for
there is neither work, nor device, nor wisdom, in the grave whither thou
hastenest* ([Eccles. ix. 10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#010)<span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.7"></span>).  By the witness of the Gospel thou
knowest that divine severity accuses us for idle talk, and demands a
strict account of an unprofitable word ([Matth. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.8"></span>).  Consider, then, what it will do for
perverse doing, if in its judgment it reprobates some for talking. 
Ananias had vowed money to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.9"></span>God</span> ([Acts v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#002)<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.10"></span>
*seq.*), which, afterwards, overcome by diabolical persuasion, he
withheld.  But by what death he was <span id="page_85b">p. 85b</span>
<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-Page_85b"></span>mulcted thou knowest.  If then
he was deserving of the penalty of death who withdrew the money which he
had given to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.11"></span>God</span>, consider of how great penalty
thou wilt be deserving in the divine judgment, who hast withdrawn, not
money, but thyself, from Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.12"></span>God</span>, to whom thou hadst devoted
thyself in the monastic state of life.  Wherefore, if thou wilt hear the
words of my rebuke so as to follow them, thou wilt come to know in the
end how kind and sweet they are.  Lo, I confess it, I speak mourning and
constrained by sorrow for what thou hast done.  I scarce can utter
words; and yet thy mind, conscious of guilt, is hardly able to bear what
it hears, blushes, is confounded, remonstrates.  If, then, it cannot
bear the words of dust, what will it do at the judgment of the Creator? 
And yet I acknowledge the exceeding mercy of heavenly grace, in that it
beholds thee flying from life, and nevertheless still reserves thee for
life; that it sees thee acting proudly, and still bears with thee; that
through its unworthy servants it administers to thee words of rebuke and
admonition.  So great a thing is this that thou oughtest anxiously to
ponder on what Paul says; *We exhort you, brethren that ye receive not
the grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.13"></span>God</span> in vain:  for he saith, I have
heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I
succoured thee.  Behold now is the acceptable time, behold now is the
day of salvation* ([2 Cor. vi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p6.14"></span> *seq*.).

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p7"></span>But I know that, when my letter is
received, forthwith friends come about thee, thy literary clients are
called in, and advice about the purpose of life is sought from the
promoters of death; who, loving not thee, but what belongs to thee, tell
thee nothing but what may please thee at the time.  For such, as thou
thyself rememberest, were those thy former counsellors, who drew thee on
to the perpetration of so great a sin.  To quote to thee something from
a secular author <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331) , “All
things should be considered with friends, but the friends themselves
should be considered first.”  But, if in thy case thou seekest an
adviser, take me, I pray thee, as thy adviser.  For no one can be more
to be relied on for advice than one who loves not what is thine, but
thee.  May Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p8.1"></span>God</span> make known to thy heart with
what love and with what charity my heart embraces thee, though so far
only as not to offend against divine grace.  For I so attack thy fault
as to love thy person; I so love thy person as not to embrace the
viciousness of thy fault.  If, therefore, thou believest that I love
thee, approach the threshold of the apostles, and use me as an adviser. 
But if perchance I am supposed to be too keen in the cause of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p8.2"></span>God</span>, and am
suspected for the ardour of my zeal, I will call the whole Church
together into counsel on this question, and whatever all are of opinion
should be done for good, this I will in no wise contradict, but gladly
fulfil and subscribe to what is decided in common.  May Divine grace
keep thee while accomplishing what I have warned thee to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[84b:1331](2120326.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p3"></span> The relations of Gregory to this
Venantius are interesting; other letters throwing light on them being
III. 60; VI. 43, 44; IX. 123; XI. 30, 35, 36, 78.  Venantius was a
patrician, resident in Sicily, who, having become a monk, had discovered
that he had mistaken his vocation and returned to secular life.  In the
letter before us he is kindly, but very earnestly, written to, in the
hope of inducing him to retrace a step which, from Gregory’s point of
view, was so dangerous to his friend’s soul.  But the remonstrance was
in vain.  Venantius appears, from an allusion in the letter, to have
been associated with a literary set of friends who took a view of the
purpose of life not in accordance with the monastic theory:  and other
motives may have disposed him to listen to their advice, since we find
him afterwards married to a lady called Italica.  She appears to have
been, like Venantius of patrician rank, and resident in Sicily and to
have possessed property there; for see III. 60, an epistle addressed to
“Italica Patricia,” remonstrating with her for her alleged harsh
treatment of certain poor people, who were under the protection of the
Church.  It appears from this letter that Gregory had known her
previously, and it is observable that he makes allusion to her personal
charms (*pulchritudo in superficie corporis*).  There being no allusion
in this letter to any husband, it cannot be concluded that she was, at
the time when it was written, married to Venantius:  but we may
reasonably suppose her to have been the same Italica who was
subsequently addressed as his wife, for see IX. 123, “Domno Venantio
patricio et Italicæ jugalibus.”  The marriage may possibly have taken
place soon after Gregory’s first letter to Venantius, which, if the date
assigned be correct, was written in the 9th Indiction (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 590–l).  It
cannot well have been much later, since in the 4th Indiction, i.e. <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 600–1 (still
supposing the assigned dates correct) there were two girls, the issue of
the marriage, who were also written to by Gregory after their father’s
death, and seem then to have been already old enough to be betrothed. 
See XI. 35, 36, 78.  At some time subsequent to his marriage we find a
letter of serious admonition addressed to Venantius (VI. 43), who had
quarrelled with his bishop on some matters of business, and acted
violently.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p4"></span>But, notwithstanding all such causes
for displeasure, Gregory continued on terms of cordial friendship with
the married couple, and took a warm interest in their children.  Having
heard of Venantius being dangerously ill, he wrote a letter of sympathy,
addressed to him and his wife jointly, and at the end sent greetings to
his “most sweet daughters, the lady Barbara and the lady Antonina” (IX.
123).  Subsequently, when Venantius was suffering from gout, he
addressed him earnestly, but kindly; and, when he was on his death-bed,
and the inheritance of the daughter was in jeopardy owing to certain
claims made by certain persons on their father’s estate, he wrote a
short kind letter to the little ladies, bidding them keep up their
spirits so as to comfort their father, assuring them that he himself
would protect them after their father’s death, and speaking of the debt
of gratitude he owed for the goodness to himself of both their parents. 
The mother not being written to, or alluded to as alive, may be supposed
to have died previously.  At the same time he wrote to John, bishop of
Syracuse (the same bishop with whom Venantius had been once for a time
at variance), urging him to do what he could to induce Venantius, even
in his last moments, to resume the monastic habit for the safety of his
soul and no less urgently charging him to take up the cause of the
orphan girls.  Lastly (XI. 87), the girls are once more addressed by
Gregory in a kind letter, from which it seems, that, young as they must
have been, marriage was already in contemplation for them, and in which
he expresses his hope of seeing them at Rome.  The correspondence thus
summarised is peculiarly interesting, as shewing both Gregory’s strong
sense of the sin and danger to the soul of returning to the world from
the monastic life, and also the continuance of his friendship and
affection to one who had thus sinned, and the interest he could still
take in his domestic happiness and the welfare of his family.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[85b:1332](2120326.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxiv-p8"></span> Seneca, *Epist*. 3:  “Tu omnia cum
amico delibera, sed de ipso prius.  Post amicitiam credendum est; ante
amicitiam judicandum.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Peter, Bishop of Terracina.](2120327)
