[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120390)  [Next](2120392.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Epistle VI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.v-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iii.v-p3"></span>Gregory to John, bishop of Prima
Justiniana <span id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471.md) .

<span id="iii.v.iii.v-p5"></span> <span id="page_124b">p. 124b</span>
<span id="iii.v.iii.v-Page_124b"></span>After the long afflictions which
Adrian, bishop of the city of Thebæ, has endured from his
fellow-priests, as though they had been his enemies, he has fled for
refuge to the Roman city.  And though his first representation had been
against John, bishop of Larissa, to wit that in pecuniary causes he had
given judgment without regard to the laws, yet after this he complained
most grievously rather against the person of thy Fraternity, accusing
thee of having deposed him unjustly from the degree of priesthood.  But
we, giving no credence to petitions that have not been enquired into,
perused the acts of the proceedings, whether before our brother and
fellow-bishop John, or before thy Fraternity.  And indeed concerning the
judgment of the above-named John, bishop of Larissa, which was suspended
on appeal, both the most pious emperors, in their orders sent to the
bishop of Corinth, have sufficiently decreed, and we have decreed also,
Christ helping us, in our letters directed through the bearers of these
presents to the aforesaid John of Larissa.  But having ventilated the
conflicting judgments, the examination of which the imperial commands
had committed to thee, and inspected the series of proceedings held
before the bishop John concerning the incriminated persons, we find that
thou hast investigated almost nothing pertaining to the questions named
and assigned to thee for decision, but by certain machinations hast
produced witnesses against the deacon Demetrius, who were to allege with
a view to the condemnation of this same bishop, that they had heard this
Demetrius bearing testimony concerning the said bishop;—a thing not even
lawful to be heard of.  And when Demetrius in person denied having done
so, it appears that, contrary to the custom of the priesthood and
canonical discipline, thou gavest him into the hands of the prætor of
the province as a deacon deposed from his dignity <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472.md) .  And when, mangled by many
stripes, he might perchance have said some things falsely against his
bishop under the pressure of torment, we find that to the very end of
the business he confessed absolutely nothing of the things about which
he was interrogated.  Neither do we find anything else in the
proceedings themselves, whether in the depositions of witnesses or in
the declaration of Adrian, to his disadvantage.  But it is only that thy
Fraternity, I know not with what motive, in contempt of law, human and
divine, has pronounced an abrupt sentence against him; which, even
though it had not been suspended on appeal, being pronounced in
contravention of the laws and canons, could not rightly in itself have
stood.  Further, after, as is abundantly evident, the appeal had been
handed to thee, we wonder why thou hast not sent thy people to us to
render an account of thy judgment according to the undertaking delivered
to our deacon Honoratus by the representatives of thy church.  This
omission convicts thee either of contumacy or of trepidation of
conscience.  If, then, these things which have been brought before us
have the rampart of truth, inasmuch as we consider that, taking
advantage of your vicariate jurisdiction under us, you are presuming
unjustly, we will, with the help of Christ, decree further concerning
these things, according to the result of our deliberations.

<span id="iii.v.iii.v-p7"></span>But as regards the present, by the
authority of the blessed Peter, Prince of the apostles, we decree that,
the decrees of thy judgment being first annulled and made of none
effect, thou be deprived of holy communion for the space of thirty days,
so as to implore pardon of our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iii.v-p7.1"></span>God</span> for so great transgression with
the utmost penitence and tears.  But, if we should come to know that
thou hast been remiss in carrying out this our sentence, know thou that
not the injustice only, but also the <span id="page_125b">p. 125b</span>
<span id="iii.v.iii.v-Page_125b"></span>contumacy, of thy Fraternity
will have to be more severely punished.  But, as to our aforesaid
brother and fellow-bishop Adrian, condemned by thy sentence, which, as
we have said, was consistent with neither canons nor laws, we order that
he be restored, Christ being with him, to his place and rank; so that
neither may he be injured by the sentence of thy Fraternity pronounced
in deviation from the path of justice, nor may thy Charity remain
uncorrected; that so we may appease the indignation of the future judge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[123b:1472](2120391.htm#fr_1471.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.v-p4"></span> As to the See of Prima Justiniana, the
Metropolitan jurisdiction assigned to it by the Emperor Justinian, and
the vicariate jurisdiction that had been transferred to it from
Thessalonica by the popes, see note on *Lib*. II., *Ep*. 22.  The
circumstances referred to in this and the following letter are
interesting as shewing, among other things, the relations of the See of
Rome to the Church in Illyricum, and the action of the Emperors with
regard to it.  They may be epitomized as follows.  Thebæ Phthioticæ was
a See in the province of Thessalia, of which Larissa was the
Metropolis.  But, as appears from what Gregory says in Epistle VII.,
Thebæ had been for some reason exempted from the metropolitan
jurisdiction of the bishop of Larissa by pope Pelagius II.  John and
Cosmas, two deposed deacons of the Church of Thebæ, had sent a
representation to the Emperor, accusing their bishop, Adrian, of
defalcations in money matters, and also of certain misdemeanours; the
latter being that he had retained in office one of his deacons, Stephen,
whose shameful life was notorious, and that he had ordered baptism to be
refused to certain infants, who had consequently died unbaptized.  The
Emperor (Mauricius) referred the matter to John, bishop of Larissa, as
Metropolitan of Thessalia, who, notwithstanding the exemption of Thebæ
from his jurisdiction by pope Pelagius II., took it up, and decided
against Adrian, at any rate with respect to his alleged pecuniary
defalcations.  Adrian appealed against this decision to the Emperor, who
thereupon deputed certain persons (not bishops) to enquire and report,
and, on receiving their report, exempted Adrian from further
proceedings, sending an order to that effect to the Bishop of Corinth,
who was Metropolitan of the adjoining province of Achaia.  Meanwhile
John of Larissa had imprisoned Adrian, and elicited from him (under
compulsion, it was said) an ambiguous confession of his guilt, and also
obtained from the Emperor a second order committing the reinvestigation
and final adjudication of the case to John, bishop of Prima Justiniana,
who confirmed the sentence of John of Larissa, and deposed Adrian from
his See.  Adrian now at last appealed to the pope, and went himself to
Rome to seek aid from Gregory, who took up the case at once and
strenuously declared the past proceedings unfair, uncanonical, and void,
ordered the immediate restoration of Adrian to his See, excommunicated
John of Prima Justiniana, and forbade John of Larissa, under pain of
excommunication, to assume hereafter any metropolitan jurisdiction over
the church of Thebæ.  Now it is plain that, till Adrian’s final appeal,
no recourse was had by any of the parties concerned to the See of Rome,
and that the Emperor, who alone was at first appealed to, took the
matter up on his own authority without reference to Rome:  nor was it
till he had failed of redress from Constantinople that Adrian himself
appealed to Gregory.  But it is equally evident that Gregory, when
appealed to, asserted his own plenary jurisdiction as matter of course
and without hesitation:  nor is there any evidence to shew that his
assertion of authority was resisted either by the Illyrican prelates or
the Emperor.  It was probably a case in which the Emperor himself took
little interest; and he might be glad that the pope should take it out
of his hands and settle it.  It was otherwise, however, in a subsequent
case (though occurring not in Eastern, but in Western Illyricum), in
which Gregory was at issue with the Emperor with respect to the
appointment of a bishop to the See of Salona, as will be seen
hereafter.  See III. 47, note 2.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[124b:1473](2120391.htm#fr_1472.md) <span
id="iii.v.iii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii.v-p6"></span> Otherwise he could not have been
examined by scourging, as it appears he was.  For clerics were by law
exempt from the question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop.](2120392.md)
