[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120196)  [Next](2120198) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p2.1"></span>On the Feast of the Epiphany, IV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p3"></span>I.  *The yearly observance of the Epiphany
is profitable to Christians.*

<span id="ii.v.xix-p4"></span>It is the right and reasonable duty of
true piety, dearly-beloved, on the days which bear witness to the works
of Divine mercy, to rejoice with the whole heart and to celebrate with
all honour the things which have been wrought for our salvation:  for
the very law of recurring seasons calls us to such devout observance,
and has now brought before us the feast of the Epiphany, consecrated by
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
appearance soon after the day on which the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p4.2"></span>God</span> co-eternal with the Father was born
of a Virgin.  And herein the providence of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p4.3"></span>God</span> has established a great safeguard
to our faith, so that, whilst the worship of the Saviour’s earliest
infancy is repeated year by year, the production of true man’s nature in
Him might be proved by the original verifications themselves.  For this
it is that justifies the ungodly, this it is that makes sinners saints,
to wit the belief in the true Godhead and the true Manhood of the one
Jesus Christ, our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p4.4"></span>Lord</span>:  the Godhead, whereby being
before all ages “in the form of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p4.5"></span>God</span>” He is equal with the Father:  the
Manhood whereby in the last days He is united to Man in the “form of a
slave.”  For the confirmation therefore of this Faith which was to be
fore-armed against all errors, it was a wondrous loving provision of the
Divine plan that a nation which dwelt in the far-off country of the East
and was cunning in the art of reading the stars, should receive the sign
of the infant’s birth who was to reign over all Israel.  For the
unwonted splendour of a bright new star appeared to the wise men and
filled their mind with such wonder, as they gazed upon its brilliance,
that they could not think they ought to neglect what was announced to
them with such distinctness.  And, as the event showed, the grace of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p4.6"></span>God</span> was the
disposing cause of this wondrous thing:  who when the whole of Bethlehem
itself was still unaware of Christ’s birth, brought it to the knowledge
of <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="ii.v.xix-Page_148"></span>the nations who would believe, and
declared that which human words could not yet explain, through the
preaching of the heavens.

<span id="ii.v.xix-p5"></span>II.  *Both Herod and the wise men
originally had an earthly conception of the kingdom signified; but the
latter learnt the truth, the former did not.*

<span id="ii.v.xix-p6"></span>But although it was the office of the
Divine condescension to make the Saviour’s Nativity recognizable to the
nations, yet for the understanding of the wondrous sign the wise men
could have had intimation even from the ancient prophecies of Balaam,
knowing that it was predicted of old and by constant repetition spread
abroad:  “A star shall rise out of Jacob, and a man shall rise out of
Israel, and shall rule the nations <span
id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) .”  And so the three men aroused by
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p7.2"></span>God</span> through the
shining of a strange star, follow the guidance of its twinkling light,
thinking they will find the babe designated at Jerusalem in the royal
city.  But finding themselves mistaken in this opinion, through the
scribes and teachers of the Jews they learnt what the Holy Scripture had
foretold of the birth of Christ; so that confirmed by a twofold witness,
they sought with still more eager faith Him whom both the brightness of
the star and the sure word of prophecy revealed.  And when the Divine
oracle was proclaimed through the chief priests’ answers and the
Spirit’s voice declared, which says:  “And thou, Bethlehem, the land of
Judah, art not least among the princes of Judah; for out of thee shall
come a leader to rule My people Israel <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) ,” how easy and how natural it was
that the leading men among the Hebrews should believe what they taught! 
But it appears that they held material notions with Herod, and reckoned
Christ’s kingdom as on the same level as the powers of this world:  so
that they hoped for a temporal leader while he dreaded an earthly
rival.  The fear that racks thee, Herod, is wasted; in vain dost thou
try to vent thy rage on the infant thou suspectest.  Thy realm cannot
hold Christ; the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p8.2"></span>Lord</span> of the world is not satisfied with
the narrow limits of thy sway.  He, whom thou dost not wish to reign in
Judæa, reigns everywhere:  and thou wouldst rule more happily thyself,
if thou wert to submit to His command.  Why dost thou not do with
sincerity what in treacherous falseness thou dost promise?  Come with
the wise men, and in suppliant adoration worship the true King.  But
thou, from too great fondness for Jewish blindness, wilt not imitate the
nations’ faith, and directest thy stubborn heart to cruel wiles, though
thou art doomed neither to stay Him whom thou fearest nor to harm them
whom thou slayest.

<span id="ii.v.xix-p9"></span>III.  *The perseverance of the Magi has
led to the most important results.*

<span id="ii.v.xix-p10"></span>Led then, dearly beloved, into Bethlehem
by obeying the guidance of the star, the wise men “rejoiced with very
great joy,” as the evangelist has told us:  “and entering the house,
found the child with Mary, His mother; and falling down they worshipped
Him; and opening their treasures they presented to Him gifts, gold,
frankincense and myrrh <span id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) .”  What
wondrous faith of perfect knowledge, which was taught them not by
earthly wisdom, but by the instruction of the Holy Spirit!  Whence came
it that these men, who had quitted their country without having seen
Jesus, and had not noticed anything in His looks to enforce such
systematic adoration, observed this method in offering their gifts?
unless it were that besides the appearance of the star, which attracted
their bodily eyes, the more refulgent rays of truth taught their hearts
that before they started on their toilsome road, they must understand
that He was signified to Whom was owed in gold royal honour, in incense
Divine adoration, in myrrh the acknowledgment of mortality.  Such a
belief and understanding no doubt, as far as the enlightenment of their
faith went, might have been sufficient in themselves and have prevented
their using their bodily eyes in inquiring into that which they had
beheld with their mind’s fullest gaze.  But their sagacious diligence,
persevering till they found the child, did good service for future
peoples and for the men of our own time:  so that, as it profited us all
that the apostle Thomas, after the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p11.2"></span>Lord’s</span> resurrection, handled the
traces of the wounds in His flesh, so it was of advantage to us that His
infancy should be attested by the visit of the wise men.  And so the
wise men saw and adored the Child of the tribe of Judah, “of the seed of
David according to the flesh <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) ,”
“made from a woman, made under the law <span
id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) ,” which He had come “not to destroy
but to fulfil <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) .”  They saw and
adored the Child, small in size, powerless to help others <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) , incapable of speech, and in nought
different to the generality of human children.  Because, as the
testimonies were trustworthy which asserted in Him the majesty of
invisible Godhead, so it ought to be impossible to doubt that “the Word
became flesh,” and the eternal <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="ii.v.xix-Page_149"></span>essence of the Son of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p15.1"></span>God</span> took man’s true
nature:  lest either the inexpressible marvels of his acts which were to
follow or the infliction of sufferings which He had to bear should
overthrow the mystery of our Faith by their inconsistency:  seeing that
no one at all can be justified save those who believe the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p15.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus to be both
true <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p15.3"></span>God</span> and
true Man.

<span id="ii.v.xix-p16"></span>IV.  *The Manichæan heresy corrupts the
Scriptures in order to disprove the truth.*

<span id="ii.v.xix-p17"></span>This peerless Faith, dearly-beloved, this
Truth proclaimed throughout all ages, is opposed by the devilish
blasphemies of the Manichæans:  who to murder the souls of the deceived
have woven a deadly tissue of wicked doctrine out of impious and forged
lies, and over the ruins of their mad opinions men have fallen headlong
to such depths as to imagine a Christ with a fictitious body, who
presented nothing solid, nothing real to the eyes and touch of men <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) , but displayed an empty shape of
fancy-flesh.  For they wish it to be thought unworthy of belief that
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p18.3"></span>God</span> the Son of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p18.4"></span>God</span> placed
Himself within a woman’s body and subjected His majesty to such a
degradation as to be joined to our fleshly nature and be born in the
true body of human substance although this is entirely the outcome of
His power, not of His ill-treatment, and it is His glorious
condescension, not His being polluted that should be believed in.  For
if yonder visible light is not marred by any of the uncleannesses with
which it is encompassed, and the brightness of the sun’s rays, which is
doubtless a material creature, is not contaminated by any of the dirty
or muddy places to which it penetrates, is there anything whatever its
quality which could pollute the essence of that eternal and immaterial
Light? seeing that by allying Himself to that creature which He had made
after His own image He furnished it with purification and received no
stain, and healed the wounds of its weakness without suffering loss of
power.  And because this great and unspeakable mystery of divine
Godliness was announced by all the testimonies of the Holy Scriptures,
those opponents of the Truth of which we speak have rejected the law
that was given through Moses and the divinely inspired utterances <span
id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) of the prophets, and have tampered
with the very pages of the gospels and apostles, by removing or
inserting certain things:  forging for themselves under the Apostles’
names and under the words of the Saviour Himself many volumes of
falsehood, whereby to fortify their lying errors and instil deadly
poison into the minds of those to be deceived.  For they saw that
everything contradicted and made against them and that not only by the
New but also by the Old Testament their blasphemous and treacherous
folly was confuted.  And yet persisting in their mad lies they cease not
to disturb the Church of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p19.3"></span>God</span> with their deceits, persuading
those miserable creatures whom they can ensnare to deny that man’s
nature was truly taken by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p19.4"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ; to deny that He was
truly crucified for the world’s salvation:  to deny that from His side
wounded by the spear flowed the blood of Redemption and the water of
baptism <span id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) :  to deny that He was
buried and raised again the third day:  to deny that in sight of the
disciples He was lifted above all the heights of the skies to take His
seat on the right hand of the Father; and in order that when all the
truth of the Apostles’ Creed was destroyed, there may be nothing to
frighten the wicked or inspire the saints with hope, to deny that the
living and the dead must be judged by Christ; so that those whom they
have robbed of the power of these great mysteries may learn to worship
Christ in the sun and moon, and under the name of the Holy Spirit to
adore Manichæus himself, the inventor of all these blasphemies.

<span id="ii.v.xix-p21"></span>V.  *Avoid all dealings with the
heretics, but intercede with <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p21.1"></span>God</span> for them.*

<span id="ii.v.xix-p22"></span>To confirm your hearts therefore,
dearly-beloved, in the Faith and Truth, let to-day’s festival help you
all, and let the catholic confession be fortified by the testimony of
the manifestation of the Saviour’s infancy, while we anathematize the
blasphemy of those who deny the flesh of our nature in Christ:  about
which the blessed Apostle John has forewarned us in no doubtful
utterance, saying, “every spirit which confesses Christ Jesus to have
come in the flesh is of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p22.1"></span>God</span>:  and every spirit which destroys
Jesus is not of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p22.2"></span>God</span>, and this is Antichrist <span
id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) .”  Consequently let no Christian have
aught in common with men of this kind, let him have no alliance or
intercourse with such.  Let it advantage the whole Church that many of
them in the mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p23.2"></span>God</span> have been discovered, and that
their <span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="ii.v.xix-Page_150"></span>own confession has disclosed how
sacrilegious their lives were.  Let no one be deceived by their
discriminations between food and food, by their soiled raiment, by their
pale faces.  Fasts are not holy which proceed not on the principle of
abstinence but with deceitful design.  Let this be the end of their
harming the unwary, and deluding the ignorant; henceforth no one’s fall
shall be excusable:  no longer must he be held simple but extremely
worthless and perverse who hereafter shall be found entangled in
detestable error.  A practice countenanced by the Church and Divinely
instituted, not only do we not forbid, we even incite you to, that you
should supplicate the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p23.3"></span>Lord</span> even for such:  since we also
with tears and mourning feel pity for the ruins of cheated souls,
carrying out the Apostles’ example of loving-kindness <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) , so as to be weak with those that are
weak and to “weep with those that weep <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) .”  For we hope that <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xix-p25.2"></span>God’s</span> mercy can be
won by the many tears and due amendment of the fallen:  because so long
as life remains in the body no man’s restoration must be despaired of,
but the reform of all desired with the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p25.3"></span>Lord’s</span> help, “who raiseth up them that
are crushed, looseth them that are chained, giveth light to the
blind <span id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) :”  to whom is honour and
glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_879"></span>[148:880](2120197.htm#fr_879) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p7"></span> [Numb. xxiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.xix-p7.1"></span>: 
cf. Serm. XXXI. chap 2, above.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[148:881](2120197.htm#fr_880) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p8"></span> [Micah v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[148:882](2120197.htm#fr_881) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p11"></span> S. [Matt.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011)<span id="ii.v.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[148:883](2120197.htm#fr_882) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p12"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[148:884](2120197.htm#fr_883) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p13"></span> [Gal.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#000)<span id="ii.v.xix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[148:885](2120197.htm#fr_884) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p14"></span> S. [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[148:886](2120197.htm#fr_885) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p15"></span> *Alienæ opis indignum*.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[149:887](2120197.htm#fr_886) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p18"></span> Whatever may be the correct reading
here, *actionibus* with the better <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p18.1"></span>mss.</span> or *tactibus,* the conjecture of
Quesnel from the reading of some <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xix-p18.2"></span>mss.</span> *actibus*, the meaning must be
such as is given in the translation.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[149:888](2120197.htm#fr_887) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p18.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p19"></span> *Oracula* representing the <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xix-p19.1"></span>λόγια</span> of the New
Testament (viz. [Acts 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038), [Rom.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.xix-p19.2"></span>,
&c.).

<span id="fn_888"></span>[149:889](2120197.htm#fr_888) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p19.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p20"></span> Cf. Ep. xxviii.<span
id="ii.v.xix-p20.1"></span> (Tome) 5, *aperto per militis lanceam latere
crucifixi intelligat unde sanguis et aqua fluxerit ut ecclesia Dei et
lavacro rigaretur et poculo*, and almost immediately afterwards, where
he interprets the spirit, water and blood of [1 John v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.xix-p20.2"></span>, as
*spiritus sanctificationis et sanguis redemptionis et aqua baptismatis*.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[149:890](2120197.htm#fr_889) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p23"></span> [1 John
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xix-p23.1"></span>: 
see Letter XXVIII. (Tome) 5, n. 7, on the various reading.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[150:891](2120197.htm#fr_890) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p23.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p24"></span> *Exsequentes apostolicæ pietatis
exemplum*.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[150:892](2120197.htm#fr_891) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p25"></span> [2 Cor.
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029), [Rom.
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015)<span
id="ii.v.xix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[150:893](2120197.htm#fr_892) <span
id="ii.v.xix-p25.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xix-p26"></span> [Ps.
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.xix-p26.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XXXVI](2120198)
