[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120376)  [Next](2120378) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p2"></span>To Castorius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p3"></span>Gregory to Castorius, Bishop of
Ariminum (Rimini).

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p4"></span>What lamentable supplications have
been poured out to us by Luminosus, abbot of the <span id="page_112b">p.
112b</span> <span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-Page_112b"></span>monastery of St.
Andrew and St. Thomas, in the city of Ariminum, appears from the text of
the subjoined petition.  With regard to this matter we exhort thy
Fraternity that, on the death of the abbot of this same monastery, thy
church shall under no pretext interfere in scheduling or taking charge
of the property of the said monastery, acquired or to be acquired.  And
we desire thee to ordain as abbot of the same monastery none other but
him whom the whole congregation may by common consent demand as being
worthy in character and apt for monastic discipline.  Moreover, we
entirely forbid public masses to be celebrated there by the bishop, lest
occasion be given for popular assemblies in the retreats of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> servants,
and also lest too frequent an entrance of women be a cause of scandal
(which <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p4.2"></span>God</span>
forbid), especially to the simpler souls.  Further, we ordain that this
paper by us written shall be carefully held to, and kept in force and
unadulterated in all future time by thee and the bishops that shall be
ordained after thee; that so, with the help of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p4.3"></span>God</span>, both thy church may be
content with its own rights and no more, and also the said monastery,
being subject henceforth to none but general or canonical jurisdiction,
and free from all annoyances and vexations, may accomplish its divine
work with the utmost devotion of heart.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p5"></span>\[In place of the epistle as above
given, the following, with the appended paper on the privileges of
monasteries, is found in some Codices.\]

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p6"></span>Gregory to Castorius, Bishop of
Ariminum.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p7"></span>What lamentable supplications
Luminosus, abbot of the monastery of Saints Andrew and Thomas, in the
city of Ariminum, has poured out to us, appears from the text of the
subjoined petition.  For from his account we learn that in very many
monasteries the monks have suffered many prejudices and annoyances from
prelates.  It is therefore the duty of thy Fraternity to make provision
for their future quiet by a wholesome arrangement, to the end that those
who have their conversation therein in <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p7.1"></span>God’s</span> service may, His grace
assisting them, persevere with minds free from disturbance.  But, lest
from a custom which ought to be rather amended than continued, any one
should presume to cause any kind of annoyance to monks, it is necessary
that the things which we have caused to be enumerated below should be so
carefully observed by the fraternity of bishops that no possible
occasion of introducing disquiet may be found hereafter.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p8"></span>Of the privileges of Monasteries.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p9"></span>We therefore interdict in the name of
our <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span>
Jesus Christ, and forbid by the authority of the blessed Peter, Prince
of the apostles, in whose stead we preside over this Roman Church, that
any bishop or secular person hereafter presume in any way to devise
occasions of interfering with regard to the revenues, property, or
writings of monasteries, or of the cells or vills thereto appertaining,
or have recourse to any tricks or exactions:  but, if any case should by
chance arise as to land disputed between their churches and any
monasteries, and it cannot be arranged amicably, let it be terminated
without intentional delay before selected abbots and other fathers who
fear <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p9.2"></span>God</span>,
sworn upon the most holy Gospels.  Also on the death of the abbot of any
congregation, let no stranger be ordained, or any but one of the same
congregation whom the society of the brethren shall of its own accord
have elected unanimously, and who shall have been elected without fraud
or venality.  But, if they cannot find a suitable person among
themselves, let them in like manner elect some one from some other
monastery to be ordained.  Nor, when an abbot has been constituted, let
any person whatever on any pretext be put over him, unless perchance
(which <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p9.3"></span>God</span>
forbid) crimes be apparent which are shewn to be punishable by the
sacred canons.  Likewise the rule is to be observed, that monks must
not, without the consent of the abbot, be removed from monasteries for
constituting other monasteries, or for sacred orders, or for any
clerical office.  We also disallow ecclesiastical schedules of the
property of a monastery to be made by bishops.  But if, circumstances
requiring it, the abbot of a place should have questions with other
abbots concerning property that has come into possession, let the matter
be terminated also by their counsel or judgment.  On the death also of
an abbot let not the bishop on any pretext intermeddle in the scheduling
or taking charge of the property of the monastery, acquired, or given,
or to be acquired.  We also entirely forbid public masses to be
celebrated by him in a convent, lest in the retreats of the servants of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p9.4"></span>God</span> and
their places of refuge any opportunity for a popular concourse be
afforded, or an unwonted entrance of women should ensue, which would be
by no means of advantage to their souls.  Nor let him dare to place his
episcopal chair there, or have any power whatever of command, or of
holding any ordination, even the most ordinary, unless he should be
requested to do so by the abbot of the place; that so the monks may
always remain under the <span id="page_113b">p. 113b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxii-Page_113b"></span>power of their abbots:  and let no
bishop detain a monk in any church without a testimonial and permission
from his abbot, or promote one without such permission to any dignity. 
We ordain, then, that this paper by us written be kept to for all future
time, in force and unadulterated, by all bishops; that both they may be
content with the rights of their own churches and no more, and that the
monasteries be subject to no ecclesiastical conditions, or compelled
services, or obedience of any kind to secular authorities (saving only
canonical jurisdiction <span id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441) ),
but, freed from all vexations and annoyances, may accomplish their
divine work with the utmost devotion of heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[113b:1442](2120377.htm#fr_1441) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxii-p10"></span> The text here (“nullis canonicis
juris deserviant”) appears to be corrupt, being unintelligible.  The
sense of the corresponding clause in the shorter Epistle has been given
in the translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Luminosus, Abbot.](2120378)
