[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120272)  [Next](2120274.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p2"></span>How the silent and the talkative are
to be admonished.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 15.)  Differently to be
admonished are the over-silent, and those who spend time in much
speaking.  For it ought to be insinuated to the over-silent that while
they shun some vices unadvisedly, they are, without its being perceived,
implicated in worse.  For often from bridling the tongue overmuch they
suffer from more grievous loquacity in the heart; so that thoughts
seethe the more in the mind from being straitened by the violent guard
of indiscreet silence.  And for the most part they overflow all the more
widely as they count themselves the more secure because of not being
seen by fault-finders without.  Whence sometimes a man’s mind is exalted
into pride, and he despises as weak those whom he hears speaking.  And,
when he shuts the mouth of his body, he is not aware to what extent
through his pride he lays himself open to vices.  For his tongue he
represses, his mind he exalts; and, little considering his own
wickedness, accuses all in his own mind by so much the more freely as he
does it also the more secretly.  The over-silent are therefore to be
admonished that they study anxiously to know, not only what manner of
men they ought to exhibit themselves outwardly, but also what manner of
men they ought to shew themselves inwardly; that they fear more a hidden
judgment in respect of their thoughts than the reproof of their
neighbours in respect of their speeches.  For it is written, *My son,
attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my prudence, that thou
mayest guard thy thoughts* ([Prov. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p3.1"></span>).  For, indeed, nothing is more fugitive
than the heart, which deserts us as often as it slips away through bad
thoughts.  For hence the Psalmist says, *My heart hath failed me* ([Psa.
40.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p3.2"></span> <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271) .md).  Hence, when he returns to
himself, he says, *Thy servant hath found his heart to pray to Thee* ([2
Sam. vii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p4.1"></span>).  When, therefore, thought is kept under
guard, the heart which was wont to fly away is found.  Moreover, the
over-silent for the most part, when they suffer some injustices, come to
have a keener sense of pain from not speaking of what they endure.  For,
were the tongue to tell calmly the annoyances that have been caused, the
pain would flow away from the consciousness.  For closed sores torment
the more; since, when the corruption that is hot within is cast out, the
pain is opened out for healing.  They, therefore, who are silent more
than is expedient, ought to know this, lest, amid the annoyances which
they endure while they hold their tongue, they aggravate the violence of
their pain.  For they are to be admonished that, if they love their
neighbours as themselves, they should by no means keep from them the
grounds on which they justly blame them.  For from the medicine of the
voice there is a concurrent effect for the health of both parties, while
on the side of him who inflicts the injury his bad conduct is checked,
and on the side of him who sustains it the violent heat of pain is
allayed by opening out the sore.  For those who take notice of what is
evil in their neighbours, and yet refrain their tongue in silence,
withdraw, as it were, the aid of <span id="page_38b">p. 38b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-Page_38b"></span>medicine from observed sores, and
become the causers of death, in that they would not cure the venom which
they could have cured.  The tongue, therefore, should be discreetly
curbed, not tied up fast.  For it is written, *A wise man will hold his
tongue until the time* (Eccles. xx. 7<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p4.2"></span>); in order, assuredly, that, when he
considers it opportune, he may relinquish the censorship of silence, and
apply himself to the service of utility by speaking such things as are
fit.  And again it is written, *A time to keep silence, and a time to
speak* ([Eccles. iii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p4.3"></span>).  For, indeed, the times for changes
should be discreetly weighed, lest either, when the tongue ought to be
restrained, it run loose to no profit in words, or, when it might speak
with profit, it slothfully restrain itself.  Considering which thing
well, the Psalmist says, *Set a watch, O <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p4.4"></span>Lord</span>, on my mouth, and a door round
about my lips* ([Psa. 141.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p4.5"></span> <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) .md).  For he seeks not that a wall
should be set on his lips, but a door:  that is, what is opened and
shut.  Whence we, too, ought to learn warily, to the end that the voice
discreetly and at the fitting time may open the mouth, and at the
fitting time silence close it.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p6"></span>But, on the other hand, those who
spend time in much speaking are to be admonished that they vigilantly
note from what a state of rectitude they fall away when they flow abroad
in a multitude of words.  For the human mind, after the manner of water,
when closed in, is collected unto higher levels, in that it seeks again
the height from which it descended; and, when let loose, it falls away
in that it disperses itself unprofitably through the lowest places.  For
by as many superfluous words as it is dissipated from the censorship of
its silence, by so many streams, as it were, is it drawn away out of
itself.  Whence also it is unable to return inwardly to knowledge of
itself, because, being scattered by much speaking, it excludes itself
from the secret place of inmost consideration.  But it uncovers its
whole self to the wounds of the enemy who lies in want, because it
surrounds itself with no defence of watchfulness.  Hence it is written,
*As a city that lieth open and without environment of walls, so is a man
that cannot keep in his spirit in speaking* ([Prov. xxv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p6.1"></span>).  For, because it has not the wall of
silence, the city of the mind lies open to the darts of the foe; and,
when by words it casts itself out of itself, it shews itself exposed to
the adversary.  And he overcomes it with so much the less labour as with
the more labour the mind itself, which is conquered, fights against
itself by much speaking.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p7"></span>Moreover, since the indolent mind for
the most part lapses by degrees into downfall, while we neglect to guard
against idle words we go on to hurtful ones; so that at first it pleases
us to talk of other men’s affairs; afterwards the tongue gnaws with
detraction the lives of those of whom we talk; but at last breaks out
even into open slanders.  Hence are sown pricking thorns, quarrels
arise, the torches of enmities are kindled, the peace of hearts is
extinguished.  Whence it is well said through Solomon, *He that letteth
out water is a well-spring of strifes* ([Prov. xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>).  For to let out water is to let loose
the tongue to a flux of speech.  Wherefore, on the other hand, in a good
sense it is said again, *The words of a man’s mouth are as deep water*
([Prov. 18.4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p7.2"></span>).  He therefore who letteth out water is
the wellspring of strifes, because he who curbs not his tongue
dissipates concord.  Hence on the other hand it is written, *He that
imposes silence on a fool allays enmities* ([Prov.
26.10](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p7.3"></span>).  Moreover, that any one who gives
himself to much speaking cannot keep the straight way of righteousness
is testified by the Prophet, who says, *A man full of words shall not be
guided aright upon the earth* ([Psa.
141.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p7.4"></span> <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273) .md).  Hence also Solomon says again,
*In the multitude of words there shall not want sin* ([Prov. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p8.1"></span>).  Hence Isaiah says, *The culture of
righteousness is silence* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000.md),
[Isa. 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p8.2"></span>), indicating, to wit, that the
righteousness of the mind is desolated when there is no stint of
immoderate speaking.  Hence James says, *If any man thinketh himself to
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart,
this man’s religion is vain* ([James i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p8.3"></span>).  Hence again he says, *Let every man be
swift to hear, but slow to speak* ([James
1.19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p8.4"></span>).  Hence again, defining the power of the
tongue, he adds, *An unruly evil, full of deadly poison* ([James
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p8.5"></span>).  Hence the Truth in person admonishes
us, saying, *Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment* ([Matth. xii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p8.6"></span>).  For indeed every word is idle that
lacks either a reason of just necessity or an intention of pious
usefulness.  If then an account is required of idle discourse, let us
weigh well what punishment awaits much speaking, in which there is also
the sin of hurtful words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[37b:1272](2120273.htm#fr_1271.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p4"></span> In *English Bible*, xl. 12.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[38b:1273](2120273.htm#fr_1272.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p5"></span> In *English Bible*, cxli. 3.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[38b:1274](2120273.htm#fr_1273.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p7.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xv-p8"></span> In *English Bible*, cxli. 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the slothful and the hasty are to be admonished.](2120274.md)
