[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120254)  [Next](2120256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ix-p2"></span>That the ruler ought to be careful to
understand how commonly vices pass themselves off as virtues.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.ix-p3"></span>The ruler also ought to understand
how commonly vices pass themselves off as virtues.  For often
niggardliness palliates itself under the name of frugality, and on the
other hand prodigality hides itself under the appellation of
liberality.  Often inordinate laxity is believed to be loving-kindness,
and unbridled wrath is accounted the virtue of spiritual zeal.  Often
precipitate action is taken for the efficacy of promptness, and
tardiness for the deliberation of seriousness.  Whence it is necessary
for the ruler of souls to distinguish with vigilant care between virtues
and vices, lest either niggardliness get possession of his heart while
he exults in seeming frugal in expenditure; or, while anything is
prodigally wasted, he glory in being as it were compassionately liberal;
or in remitting what he ought to have smitten he draw on those that are
under him to eternal punishment; or in mercilessly smiting an offence he
himself offend more grievously; or by immaturely anticipating mar what
might have been done properly and gravely; or by putting off the merit
of a good action change it to something worse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: What the ruler's discrimination should be between correction and
connivance, between fervour and gentleness.](2120256)
