[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120291)  [Next](2120293) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p2"></span>How those are to be admonished who
commit very small but frequent faults, and those who, while avoiding
such as are very small, are sometimes plunged in such as are grievous.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p3"></span>(*Admonition* 34.)  Differently to
be admonished are those who, though the unlawful things they do are very
small, yet do them frequently, and those who keep themselves from small
sins, but are sometimes plunged in such as are grievous.  Those who
frequently transgress, though in very small things, are to be admonished
by no means to consider the quality of the sins they commit, but the
quantity.  For, if they scorn being afraid when they weigh their deeds,
they ought to be alarmed when they number them; seeing that deep gulphs
of rivers are filled by small but innumerable drops of rain; and
bilge-water, increasing secretly, has the same effect as a storm raging
openly; and the sores that break out on the members in scab are minute;
but, when a multitude of them gets possession in countless numbers, it
destroys the life of the body as much as one grievous wound inflicted on
the breast.  Hence for certain it is written, *He that contemneth small
things falleth by little and little* ([Ecclesiasticus
19.1](../../../bib/apo/sir019.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>).  For he that neglects to bewail and
avoid the smallest sins falls from the state of righteousness, not
indeed suddenly, but bit by bit entirely.  Those who transgress
frequently in very little things are to be admonished to consider
anxiously how that sometimes there is worse sin in a small fault than in
a greater one.  For a greater fault, in that it is the sooner
acknowledged to be one, is by so much the more speedily amended; but a
smaller one, being reckoned as though it were none at all, is retained
in use with worse effect as it is so with less concern.  Whence for the
most part it comes to pass that the mind, accustomed to light evils, has
no horror even of heavy ones, and, being fed up by sins, comes at last
to a sort of sanction of iniquity, and by so much the more scorns to be
afraid <span id="page_66b">p. 66b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-Page_66b"></span>in greater matters as it has learnt
to sin in little ones without fear.

<span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p4"></span>But, on the other hand, those who
keep themselves from small sins, but are sometimes plunged in grievous
ones, are to be admonished anxiously to apprehend the state they are in;
how that, while their heart is lifted up for very small things guarded
against, they are so swallowed up in the very gulph of their own elation
as to perpetrate others that are more grievous, and, while they
outwardly master little ills, but are puffed up inwardly with vain
glory, they prostrate their soul, overcome within itself by the sickness
of pride, amid greater ills even outwardly.  Those, then, who keep
themselves from little faults, but are sometimes plunged in such as are
grievous, are to be admonished to take care lest they fall inwardly
where they suppose themselves to be standing outwardly, and lest,
according to the retribution of the strict judge, elation on account of
lesser righteousness become a way to the pitfall of more grievous sin. 
For such as, vainly elated, attribute their keeping of the least good to
their own strength, being justly left to themselves are overwhelmed in
greater sins; and by falling they learn that their standing was not of
themselves, so that immeasurable ills may humble the heart that is
exalted by the smallest good.  They are to be admonished to consider
that, while in their more grievous faults they bind themselves in deep
guilt, they nevertheless for the most part sin worse in the little
faults which they guard against; because, while in the former they do
what is wicked, in the latter they hide from men that they are wicked. 
Whence it comes to pass that, when they perpetrate greater evils before
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>God</span>, it
is a case of open iniquity; and when they are careful to observe small
good things before men, it is a case of pretended holiness.  For hence
it is that it is said of the Pharisees, *Straining out a gnat, but
swallowing a camel* ([Matth. xxiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>).  As if it were said plainly. The
least evils ye discern; the greater ye devour.  Hence it is that they
are again reproved by the mouth of the Truth, when they are told, *Ye
tithe mint and anise and cummin, and omit the weightier matters of the
Law, judgment and mercy and truth* ([Matt.
23.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.iv.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>).  For neither is it to be carelessly
heard that, when He said that the least things were tithed, He chose
indeed to mention the lowest of herbs, but yet such as are
sweet-smelling; in order, surely, to shew that, when pretenders observe
small things, they seek to extend for themselves the odour of a holy
reputation; and, though they omit to fulfil the greatest things, they
still observe such of the smallest as smell sweetly far and wide in
human judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How those are to be admonished who do not even begin good things,
and those who do not finish them when begun.](2120293)
