[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120033)  [Next](2120035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Letter XXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p2.1"></span>To Theodosius Augustus II.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p3"></span>Leo the bishop, to Theodosius Augustus.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p4"></span>I.  *He praises the Emperor’s piety and
mentions Eutyches’ appeal.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p5"></span>How much protection the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> has vouchsafed
His Church through your clemency and faith, is shown again by this
letter which you have sent me:  so that we rejoice at there being not
only a kingly, but also a priestly mind within you.  Seeing that,
besides your imperial and public cares, you have a most devout anxiety
for the Christian religion, lest schisms or heresies or other offences
should grow up among <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p5.2"></span>God’s</span> people.  For your realm is then
in its best state when men serve the eternal and unchangeable Trinity by
the confession of one Godhead <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) . 
What the disturbance was which occurred in the Church of Constantinople,
and which could have so moved my brother and fellow-bishop Flavian, that
he deprived Eutyches, the presbyter, of communion, I have not yet been
able to understand clearly.  For although the aforesaid presbyter sent
in writing a complaint concerning his trouble to the Apostolic See, yet
he only briefly touched on some points, asserting that he kept the
constitutions of the Nicene synod and had been vainly blamed for
difference of faith.

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p7"></span>II.  *He finds fault with Flavian’s
silence.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p8"></span>But the statement of bishop Eusebius,
his accuser, copies of which the said presbyter has sent us, contained
nothing clear about his objections, and though he charged a presbyter
with heresy, he did not say expressly what opinion he disapproved of in
him:  although the bishop himself also professed that he adhered to the
decrees of the Nicene synod:  for which reason we had no means of
learning anything more fully.  And because the method of our Faith and
the laudable anxiety shown by your piety requires the merits of the case
to be known, there must now be no place allowed for deception, but we
must be informed of the points on which he considers him unsound, that
the right judgment may be passed after full information.  I have sent a
letter to the aforesaid bishop, from which he may gather that I am
displeased at his still keeping silence upon what has been done in so
grave a matter, when he ought to have been forward in disclosing all to
us at the outset:  and we believe that even after the reminder he will
acquaint us with the whole, in order that, when what now seems obscure,
has been brought into the light, judgment may be passed agreeably to the
teaching of the Gospels and the Apostles.  Dated the 18th of
February <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) , in the consulship of
the illustrious Asturius and Protogenes (449).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[36:234](2120034.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p6"></span> Is it fanciful to trace an analogy
between these words and the language of the Collect for Trinity Sunday
(out of the Sacramentary of Gregory), “grace by the confession of a true
faith to acknowledge the glory of the Eternal Trinity, and in the power
of the Divine Majesty to worship the Unity?”

<span id="fn_234"></span>[36:235](2120034.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxiv-p9"></span> Quesnel reads the 1st of March as the
date.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Peter Chrysologus, Bishop of Ravenna, to Eutyches, the
Presbyter.](2120035.md)
