[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120577)  [Next](2120579) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p2"></span>To Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p4"></span>An address from a learned man is
always profitable, because the hearer either learns what he had known
himself to be ignorant of, or, what is more, comes to know what he did
not know he had been ignorant of.  A hearer of the latter kind I have
now become, your most holy Blessedness having been minded to write to
me, asking me to send you the acts of all the martyrs, which were
collected in the times of Constantine, of pious memory, by Eusebius of
Cæsarea.  But before receiving the letter of your Blessedness I did not
know of these acts, whether they had been collected, or whether not.  I
therefore give thanks that, instructed by your most holy teaching, I
have begun to know what I was ignorant of.  For beside what is contained
about the acts of the holy martyrs in the books of the same Eusebius, I
am not aware of any collections in the archives of this our Church, or
in the libraries of the city of Rome, unless it be some few things
collected in one single volume.  We have indeed the names of almost all
the martyrs, with their passions assigned to particular days, collected
in one volume; and we celebrate the solemnities of mass on such days in
commemoration of them.  Yet it is not indicated in this volume who each
was, and how he suffered; but only his name, the place, and day, of his
passion are put down.  Hence it results that many of divers countries
and provinces are known to have been crowned with martyrdom, as I have
said, through their several days.  But these we believe you have.  That,
however, which you wish to have sent to you we have sought for, but have
not found; but, though we have not found it, we will still search, and,
if it can be found, will send it.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p5"></span> <span id="page_240b">p.
240b</span> <span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-Page_240b"></span>With regard to
what you write about the timber being short in length, the cause was in
the kind of ship by which it was sent; for, if a larger ship had come,
we could have sent larger pieces of timber.  But as to your saying that,
if we send larger pieces, you will pay for them, we thank you indeed for
your liberality, but we are precluded from accepting a price, since the
Gospel forbids it.  For we do not buy the timber which we send; and how
can we accept a price, when it is written, *Freely ye have received,
freely give* ([Matth. x. 8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span
id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p5.1"></span>)?  We have therefore sent now through
the shipmaster timber of short length in accordance with the size of the
ship, whereof a notice is subjoined.  Next year, however, should it
please Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p5.2"></span>God</span>, we will prepare larger
pieces.

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p6"></span>We have received with the
kindliness wherewith it was sent the blessing of Saint Mark the
Evangelist, nay, it may be said more truly, of Saint Peter the
Apostle <span id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750) ; and, greeting you
well, we beg your Blessedness to deign to pray for us, that so we may be
counted worthy to be soon delivered from present evils, and not to be
excluded from future joys.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[240b:1751](2120578.htm#fr_1750) <span
id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.xvii-p7"></span> Cf. VII. 40, for Gregory’s view of
the sees of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, jointly representing the see
of St. Peter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eulogius, Bishop of Alexandria.](2120579)
