[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120521)  [Next](2120523) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle LV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxvi-p2"></span>To Protasius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxvi-p3"></span>Gregory to Protasius, Bishop of Aquæ
in Gaul (*Aix*).

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxvi-p4"></span>How great love of the blessed Peter,
Prince of the apostles, distinguishes you is evident, not only from the
prerogative of your office, but also from the devotion you bestow on
what is to the advantage of his Church.  And having learnt that this is
the case from the relation of Augustine, servant of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>God</span>, the bearer
of these presents, we rejoice exceedingly for the affection and zeal for
truth that is in you; and we give thanks that, though absent in the
body, you still shew that you are with us in heart and mind, seeing that
you exhibit brotherly charity towards us, as is fit.  In order then that
actual fact may confirm the good report of you, tell our brother and
fellow-bishop Virgilius to hand over to us the payments which his
predecessor received for many years and retained in his own hands:  for
it is the property of the poor.  And if perchance, as we do not believe
will be the case, he should desire in any way to excuse himself, do you,
who know the real truth more exactly, inasmuch as you acted as steward
(*vicedominus*) at that time, explain to him how the matter stands, and
urge him not to retain in his hands the property of Saint Peter and of
his poor.  But, though perhaps our men may not need this, do not refuse
your testimony in the case; that so, with regard to the truth as well as
to the devotion of your good will, the blessed apostle Peter, for whose
love you do this, may respond to you by his intercession both here and
in the life to come.  We heartily commend to your Holiness the presbyter
Candidus, our common son, to whom we have committed the charge of this
patrimony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Stephen, Abbot.](2120523)
