[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120456)  [Next](2120458) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle V.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.iii-p2"></span>To Dominicus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.v.iii-p3"></span>Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of
Carthage.

<span id="iii.v.v.iii-p4"></span>Prosper your delegate (*responsalis*),
the bearer of these presents, has been with us, and after other
expressions of your charity handed us your second letters with an
allegation of the imperial commands, and a paper giving an account of
the synod that has been held among you <span
id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577) .  Having read all, we rejoiced for
your pastoral zeal, and that our most pious lords had given no ear to
the calumnies of venal persons brought against you on the plea of
religion; but especially that your Fraternity has so taken pains to
preserve the African province as in no wise to neglect to restrain with
priestly fervour the devious sects of heretics; concerning the quieting
of whom we remember having laid down the law so fully, even before
consulting the letters of your Charity, that we do not believe that
anything needs to be said again in reply to you about them.  Although,
however, this is so, and though we desire all heretics to be repressed
always with vigour and reason by catholic priests, yet, on looking
thoroughly into what has been done among you, we are in fact
apprehensive lest offence should thereby be caused (which thing may the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.iii-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> avert)
to the primates of other councils.  For at the conclusion of your acts
you have promulged a sentence, in which, while ordering the searching
out of those heretics, you have brought in that those who neglect the
duty are to be punished by forfeiture of their possessions and
dignities.  It is therefore best, most dear brother, that, in dealing
with matters outside ourselves that require correction, charity among
ourselves should first be preserved, and that we should be subject in
mind (as I judge to be peculiarly proper to your Gravity) even to
persons below us in dignity.  For you will then more advantageously meet
the errors of heretics with your whole united powers when, as befits
your priesthood, you study to keep ecclesiastical concord among
yourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[163b:1578](2120457.htm#fr_1577) <span
id="iii.v.v.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.iii-p5"></span> This had been a synod held at Carthage
for the suppression of the Donatists.  Cf. I. 74, note 8.  Gregory,
while fully approving, as he shows elsewhere, of strict enforcement of
the imperial laws against them, expresses fear in this epistle lest the
council lately held might have gone too far, so as to endanger the unity
of the African Church, in exceeding the decrees of synods that had been
held elsewhere, and especially in ordering severe measures against
bishops or others who might be remiss in the work of suppressing heresy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle VIII](2120458)
