[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120379)  [Next](2120381.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p2"></span>To Dominicus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p3"></span>Gregory to Dominicus, Bishop of
Carthage <span id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453.md) .

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p5"></span>We have received with the utmost
gratification the letters of your Fraternity, which have reached us
somewhat late by the hands of Donatus and Quodvultdeus, our most
reverend brethren and fellow-bishops, and also Victor the deacon with
Agilegius the notary.  And though we thought that we had suffered loss
from the tardiness of their coming, yet we find gain from their more
abundant charity; seeing that from this delay in point of time there
appears no interruption, but rather increase of the love which, by the
mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p5.1"></span>God</span>, through your contemplation of
the priestly office, your practice of reading, and your maturity of age,
we know to be already firmly planted in you.  For it would not flow so
largely from you, had it not very many most abundant veins in your
heart.  Let us, therefore, most holy brother, hold fast with unshaken
firmness this mother and guard of virtues.  Let not the tongues of the
deceitful <span id="page_115b">p. 115b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-Page_115b"></span>diminish it in us, or any snares of
the ancient enemy corrupt it.  For this joins what is divided, and keeps
together what is joined.  This lifts up what is lowly without tumour;
this brings down what is lifted up without dejection.  Through this the
unity of the universal Church, which is the knitting together of the
Body of Christ, rejoices in its several parts through the mind’s
equalization of them, though having in it dissimilarity from the
diversity of its members.  Through this these members both exult in the
joy of others, though in themselves afflicted, and also droop for the
sorrows of others, though in themselves joyful.  For seeing that, as the
teacher of the Gentiles testifies, if one member suffers anything, the
other members suffer with it, and if one member glories, all the members
rejoice with it, I doubt not that you groan for our perturbation, as it
is quite certain that we rejoice for your peace.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p6"></span>Now as to your Fraternity rejoicing
with us on our ordination, it displays to me the affection of most
sincere charity.  But I confess that a force of sorrow strikes through
my soul from contemplation of this order of ministry.  For heavy is the
weight of priesthood; seeing that it is necessary for a priest, first to
live so as to be an example to others, and then to be on his guard not
to lift up his heart because of the example which he shews.  He should
ever be thinking of the ministry of preaching, considering with most
intense fear how that the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p6.1"></span>Lord</span>, when about to depart to
receive for Himself a kingdom, and giving talents to His servants, says,
*Trade ye till I come* ([Luke xix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p6.2"></span>).  Which trading surely we carry on only
if by our living and our speaking we win the souls of our neighbours; if
by preaching the joys of the heavenly kingdom we strengthen all that are
weak in divine love; if by terribly sounding forth the punishments of
hell we bend the froward and the timid; if we spare no one against the
truth; if, given to heavenly friendships, we fear not human enmities. 
And indeed it was in thus shewing himself that the Psalmist knew that he
had offered a kind of Sacrifice to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p6.3"></span>God</span>, when he said, *Did I not hate
them, O <span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p6.4"></span>God</span>,
that hated thee, and was I not grieved with thine enemies!  Yea I hated
them with a perfect hated, and they became enemies unto me* ([Psa.
139.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#021.md)<span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p6.5"></span> <span
id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454) .md).  But in view of this burden I
tremble for my infirmity, and look to the returning of the Master of the
house, after receiving His kingdom, to take account of us.  But with
what heart shall I bear His coming, if from the trading I undertook I
render Him no gain, or almost none?  Do thou, therefore, most dear
brother, help me with thy prayers; and what thou seest me to fear for
myself, consider daily on thine own account with anxious dread.  For
through the bond of charity both what I say of myself is thy concern,
and what I desire thee to do is mine.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p8"></span>Further, as to what your Fraternity
writes about ecclesiastical privileges, keep to this without any
hesitation, since, as we defend our own rights, so we observe those of
several churches.  Nor do I through partiality grant to any Church
whatever more than it deserves, nor do I under the instigation of
ambition derogate from any what belongs to it by right; but I desire to
honour my brethren in all ways, and study accordingly that each may be
advanced in honour, so long as there can be no opposition to it of right
on the part of one against the other.  Further, I greatly rejoice with
you in the manners of your messengers, in whom it has been shewn me how
much you love me, in that you have sent to me elect brethren and sons.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p9"></span>Given the tenth of the Kalends of
August, tenth indiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[114b:1454](2120380.htm#fr_1453.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p4"></span> The bishop of Carthage was primate of
the province of Africa Proconsularis in virtue of his See.  For the
custom with regard to primacy in other African provinces, see I. 74,
note 2.  The fact, apparent from this letter, that Dominicus had deemed
sending to Gregory on his accession the congratulatory letter that had
been expected, and Gregory’s carefulness to assure him, in the course of
the studiously courteous letter, of his desire to respect the ancient
privileges of Churches, may be among the symptoms, otherwise apparent,
of the authoritative claims of the Roman See being still viewed with
some jealousy in the African Church.  Cf. in Book VIII. Epistle 33, to
the same Dominicus, in which Gregory, in praising his reverence for the
Apostolic See, attributes such reverence to his knowledge of the origin
of the African episcopacy, refraining from asserting in this case any
prerogative of divine right belonging to the See of S. Peter.  Other
letters to Dominicus are V. 5; VII. 35; XII. 1.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[115b:1455](2120380.htm#fr_1454.md) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p6.6"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xxv-p7"></span> In *English Bible*, cxxxix. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Columbus, Bishop.](2120381.md)
