[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120065)  [Next](2120067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lvi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p1.1"></span>Letter LIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p2.1"></span>To the Clergy and People of the City of
Constantinople.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p3"></span>Leo the bishop to the clergy,
dignitaries, and people, residing at Constantinople.

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p4"></span>I.  *He congratulates them on their
outspoken resistance to error.*

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p5"></span>Though we are greatly grieved at the
things reported to have been done recently in the council of priests at
Ephesus, because, as is consistently rumoured, and also demonstrated by
results, neither due moderation nor the strictness of the Faith was
there observed, yet we rejoice in your devoted piety and in the
acclamations of the holy people <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383)
, instances of which have been brought to our notice, we have approved
of the right feeling of you all; because there lives and abides in good
sons due affection for their excellent Father, and because you suffer
the fulness of catholic teaching to be in no part corrupted.  For
undoubtedly, as the Holy Spirit has unfolded to you, they are leagued
with the Manichæans’ error, who deny that the only-begotten Son of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p6.1"></span>God</span> took our nature’s
true Manhood, and maintain that all His bodily actions were the actions
of a false apparition.  And lest you should in aught give your assent to
this blasphemy, we have now sent you, beloved, by my son Epiphanius and
Dionysius, notary of the Roman Church, letters of exhortation wherein we
have of our own accord rendered you the assistance which you sought,
that you may not doubt of our bestowing all a father’s care on you, and
labouring in every way, by the help of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p6.2"></span>God’s</span> mercy, to destroy all the
stumbling-blocks which ignorant and foolish men have raised.  And let no
one venture to parade his priestly dignity who can be convicted of
holding such detestably blasphemous opinions.  For if ignorance seems
hardly tolerable in laymen, how much less excusable or pardonable is it
in those who govern; especially when they dare even to defend their
mendacious and perverse views, and persuade the unsteadfast to agree
with them either by intimidation or by cajoling.

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p7"></span>II.  *They are to be rejected who deny
the truth of Christ’s flesh, a truth repeated by every recipient at the
Holy Eucharist.*

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p8"></span>Let such men be rejected by the holy
members of Christ’s Body, and let not catholic <span id="page_59">p.
59</span> <span id="ii.iv.lvi-Page_59"></span>liberty suffer the yoke of
the unfaithful to be laid upon it.  For they are to be reckoned outside
the Divine grace, and outside the mystery of man’s salvation, who,
denying the nature of our flesh in Christ, gainsay the Gospel and oppose
the Creed.  Nor do they perceive that their blindness leads them into
such an abyss that they have no sure footing in the reality either of
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p8.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
Passion or His Resurrection:  because both are discredited in the
Saviour, if our fleshly nature is not believed in Him.  In what density
of ignorance, in what utter sloth must they hitherto have lain, not to
have learnt from hearing, nor understood from reading, that which in
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p8.2"></span>God’s</span> Church is
so constantly in men’s mouths, that even the tongues of infants do not
keep silence upon the truth of Christ’s Body and Blood at the rite of
Holy Communion <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) ?  For in that
mystic distribution of spiritual nourishment, that which is given and
taken is of such a kind that receiving the virtue of the celestial food
we pass into the flesh of Him, Who became our flesh <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) .  Hence to confirm you, beloved, in
your laudably faithful resistance to the foes of Truth, I shall fully
and opportunely use the language and sentiments of the Apostle, and
say:  “Therefore I also hearing of your faith, which is in the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus, and love
towards all saints, do not cease to give thanks for you, making mention
of you in my prayers that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p10.2"></span>God</span> of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p10.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, the Father of
glory, may give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of Him, the eyes of your hearts being enlightened that you may know what
is the hope of His calling, and what the riches of the glory of His
inheritance among the saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of His
power in us, who believed according to the working of His mighty power
which he has wrought in Christ, raising Him from the dead, and setting
Him at His right hand in heavenly places above every principality, and
power, and strength, and dominion, and every name which is named not
only in this age, but also in that which is to come:  and hath put all
things under His feet, and given Him to be the head over all the Church
which is His body, and the fulness of Him Who filleth all in all <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) .”

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p12"></span>III.  *Perfect <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p12.1"></span>God</span> and perfect Man were united in
Christ.*

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p13"></span>In this passage let the adversaries of
the Truth say when or according to what nature did the Almighty Father
exalt His Son above all things, or to what substance did He subject all
things.  For the Godhead of the Word is equal in all things, and
consubstantial with the Father, and the power of the Begetter and the
Begotten is one and the same always and eternally.  Certainly, the
Creator of all natures, since “through Him all things were made, and
without Him was nothing made <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) ,”
is above all things which He created, nor were the things which He made
ever not subject to their Creator, Whose eternal property it is, to be
from none other than the Father, and in no way different to the Father. 
If greater power, grander dignity, more exalted loftiness was granted
Him, then was He that was so increased less than He that promoted Him,
and possessed not the full riches of His nature from Whose fulness He
received.  But one who thinks thus is hurried off into the society of
Arius, whose heresy is much assisted by this blasphemy which denies the
existence of human nature in the Word of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p14.2"></span>God</span>, so that, in rejecting the
combination of humility with majesty in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p14.3"></span>God</span>, it either asserts a false
phantom-body in Christ, or says that all His bodily actions and passions
belonged to the Godhead rather than to the flesh.  But everything he
ventures to uphold is absolutely foolish:  because neither our religious
belief nor the scope of the mystery admits either of the Godhead
suffering anything or of the Truth belying Itself in anything.  The
impassible Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p14.4"></span>God</span>, therefore, whose perpetually it
is with the Father and with the Holy Spirit to be what He is in the one
essence of the Unchangeable Trinity, when the fullness of time had come
which had been fore-ordained by an eternal purpose, and promised by the
prophetic significance of words and deeds, became man not by conversion
of His substance but by assumption of our nature, and “came to seek and
to save that which was lost <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) .” 
But He came not by local approach nor by bodily motion, as if to be
present where He had been absent, or to depart where He had come:  but
He came to be manifested to onlookers by that which was visible and
common to others, receiving, that is to say, human flesh and soul in the
Virgin mother’s womb, so that, abiding in the form of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p15.2"></span>God</span>, He united to
Himself the form of a slave, and <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-Page_60"></span>the likeness of sinful flesh, whereby He
did not lessen the Divine by the human, but increased the human by the
Divine.

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p16"></span>IV.  *The Sacrament of Baptism typifies
and realizes this union to each individual believer.*

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p17"></span>For such was the state of all mortals
resulting from our first ancestors that, after the transmission of
original sin to their descendants, no one would have escaped the
punishment of condemnation, had not the Word become flesh and dwelt in
us, that is to say, in that nature which belonged to our blood and
race.  And accordingly, the Apostle says:  “As by one man’s sin
(judgment passed) upon all to condemnation, so also by one man’s
righteousness (it) passed upon all to justification of life.  For as by
one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so also by one man’s
obedience shall many be made righteous <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) ;” and again, “For because by man
(came) death, by man also (came) the resurrection of the dead.  And as
in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) .”  All they to wit who though they be
born in Adam, yet are found reborn in Christ, having a sure testimony
both to their justification by grace, and to Christ’s sharing in their
nature <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) ; for he who does not
believe that <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p20.1"></span>God’s</span> only-begotten Son did assume
our nature in the womb of the Virgin-daughter of David, is without share
in the Mystery of the Christian religion, and, as he neither recognizes
the Bridegroom nor knows the Bride, can have no place at the
wedding-banquet.  For the flesh of Christ is the veil of the Word,
wherewith every one is clothed who confesses Him unreservedly.  But he
that is ashamed of it and rejects it as unworthy, shall have no
adornment from Him, and though he present himself at the Royal feast,
and unseasonably join in the sacred banquet, yet the intruder will not
be able to escape the King’s discernment, but, as the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p20.2"></span>Lord</span> Himself
asserted, will be taken, and with hands and feet bound, be cast into
outer darkness; where will be weeping and gnashing of teeth <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) .  Hence whosoever confesses not the
human body in Christ, must know that he is unworthy of the mystery of
the Incarnation, and has no share in that sacred union of which the
Apostle speaks, saying, “For we are His members, of His flesh and of His
bones.  For this cause a man shall leave father and mother and shall
cleave to his wife, and there shall be two in one flesh <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) .”  And explaining what was meant by
this, he added, “This mystery is great, but I speak in respect of Christ
and the Church.”  Therefore, from the very commencement of the human
race, Christ is announced to all men as coming in the flesh.  In which,
as was said, “there shall be two in one flesh,” there are undoubtedly
two, <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p22.2"></span>God</span> and
man, Christ and the Church, which issued from the Bridegroom’s flesh,
when it received the mystery of redemption and regeneration, water and
blood flowing from the side of the Crucified.  For the very condition of
a new creature which at baptism puts off not the covering of true flesh
but the taint of the old condemnation, is this, that a man is made the
body of Christ, because Christ also is the body of a man <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) .

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p24"></span>V.  *The true doctrine of the
Incarnation restated and commended to their keeping.*

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p25"></span>Wherefore we call Christ not <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p25.1"></span>God</span> only, as the
Manichæan heretics, nor Man only, as the Photinian <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) heretics, nor man in such a way that
anything should be wanting in Him which certainly belongs to human
nature, whether soul or reasonable mind or flesh which was not derived
from woman, but made from the Word turned and changed into flesh; which
three false and empty propositions have been variously advanced by the
three sections of the Apollinarian heretics <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) .  Nor do we say that the blessed
Virgin Mary conceived a Man without Godhead, Who was created by the Holy
Ghost and afterwards assumed by the Word, which we deservedly and
properly condemned Nestorius for preaching:  but we call Christ the Son
of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p27.1"></span>God</span>, true
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p27.2"></span>God</span>, born of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p27.3"></span>God</span> the Father
without any beginning in time, and likewise true Man, born of a human
Mother, at the ordained fulness of time, and we say that His Manhood,
whereby the Father is the greater, does not in anything lessen that
nature whereby He is equal with the Father.  But these two natures form
one Christ, Who has said most truly both according to His Godhead:  “I
and the Father are one <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) ,” and
according to His manhood “the Father is greater than I <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) .”  This true and indestructible <span
id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span id="ii.iv.lvi-Page_61"></span>Faith,
dearly-beloved, which alone makes us true Christians, and which, as we
hear with approval, you are defending with loyal zeal and praiseworthy
affection, hold fast and maintain boldly.  And since, besides <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p29.2"></span>God’s</span> aid, you must
win the favour of catholic Princes also, humbly and wisely make request
that the most clement Emperor be pleased to grant our petition, wherein
we have asked for a plenary synod to be convened; that by the aid of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lvi-p29.3"></span>God’s</span> mercy
the sound may be increased in courage, and the sick, if they consent to
be treated, have the remedy applied.  (Dated October 15, in the
consulship of the illustrious Asturius and Protogenes, 449.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_383"></span>[58:384](2120066.htm#fr_383) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p6"></span> *Sanctæ plebis acclamationibus*.  It
seems that the people had openly expressed their disapproval of the
maltreatment to which Flavian had been subjected.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[59:385](2120066.htm#fr_384) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p9"></span> Two things are here to be noticed:  (1)
that the allusion appears to be to the formula of reception then in use
at the Eucharist, the priest saying *Corpus Christi*, and the recipient
answering *Amen*.  Cf. Serm. xci. 3, *sic sacræ mensæ communicare
debetis ut nihil prorsus de veritate corporis Christi et sanguinis
ambigatis.  Hoc enim ore sumitar quod fide creditur:  et frustra ab
illis Amen respondetur a quibus contra id quod accipitur disputatur*;
(2) that infant communion is implied as regular:  this we know to have
been the case in much earlier days.  Cf. *Apost*. *Const.* viii. 13,
Cyprian *de Lapsis*, ix. and xxv. &c., also Bingham’s *Antiq*. xv. chap.
iv. § 7.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[59:386](2120066.htm#fr_385) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p10"></span> Cf. Sermon LXIII. 7, where much the
same language is used.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[59:387](2120066.htm#fr_386) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p10.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p11"></span> [Ephes. i.
15-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[59:388](2120066.htm#fr_387) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p14"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[59:389](2120066.htm#fr_388) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p14.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p15"></span> S. [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[60:390](2120066.htm#fr_389) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p18"></span> [Rom.
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[60:391](2120066.htm#fr_390) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p19"></span> [1 Cor.
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022)<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[60:392](2120066.htm#fr_391) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p20"></span> *Habentes fidei testimonium et de
justificatione gratiæ et ae communione naturæ*.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[60:393](2120066.htm#fr_392) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p21"></span> The reference is to S. [Matt. xxii.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[60:394](2120066.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p22"></span> [Eph.
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[60:395](2120066.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p23"></span> *Ipsa est enim novæ condiiio creaturæ
quæ in baptismate non indumento veræ carnis sed contagio damnatæ
vetustatis exuitur ut efficiatur homo corpus Christi, quia et Christus
corpus est hominis*.  The most crabbed of the several crabbed passages
in this letter.  The mystical transmutation of the believer’s body into
the body of Christ is here referred to the sacrament of Baptism, while
earlier in the letter (chap. ii.) it is described as one of the effects
of Holy Communion.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[60:396](2120066.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p26"></span> The followers of Photinus, Bishop of
Sirmium (*circ*. 410 <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p26.1"></span>a.d.</span>):  for an account of his
heretical opinions see Schaff’s History of the Christian Church, *in
loc*.  Cf. Letter XV. 4.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[60:397](2120066.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p27"></span> *Apollinaristarum tres partes*; see
Sermon xxviii. chap. 4 (end) with Bright’s n. 32 on Apollinarianism
generally.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[60:398](2120066.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p27.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p28"></span> S. [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[60:399](2120066.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lvi-p29"></span> S. [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="ii.iv.lvi-p29.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Pulcheria Augusta.](2120067)
