[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120502)  [Next](2120504) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p2"></span>To Maximus of Salona.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Maximus, intruder in the
Church of Salona <span id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p5"></span>While, seeking this or that excuse,
thou deferrest obedience to our letters, while thou puttest off coming
to us for ascertainment of the truth after being so often admonished,
thou lendest credibility all the more to what is alleged against thee;
and, even though there had been nothing else to go against thee and do
thee harm, thy delay alone would render thee culpable and accuse thee. 
Humble thyself at length, and submit thyself to obedience, and make
haste to come to us without any excuses, that, the truth being
investigated and ascertained, in the fear of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p5.1"></span>God</span>, whatever may be fair and
canonical may be decided.  For be assured that we will observe towards
thee justice and the ordinances of the canons, and, by the revelation of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p5.2"></span>God</span>, who is
the Author of truth, will terminate thy cause agreeably to justice. 
For, as to thy demand that we should send some one to your city, in
whose presence there might be proof of the things alleged, this would be
in some degree excusable, if reason ever imposed on the accused the
necessity of proof.  But, inasmuch as this burden lies not on thee but
on thine accusers, do not thou hesitate to come to us, as we have before
said, putting it off no longer; and either thine accuser will be present
without delay to support with suitable proof what has been alleged as to
simoniacal heresy or other things; or certainly, as far as regards a
sound settlement of this business, a just dealing with it will, through
the intervention of Peter, Prince of the apostles, ensue; that so no
guiltiness may confound us before <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p5.3"></span>God</span> for any connivance, now that
these things have come to our knowledge.  But, as to thy allegation that
our most serene lords have ordered cognizance of the matter to be taken
in your city, we indeed have received no other commands of theirs on the
subject except that thou wert to come to us.  But, even if by chance,
occupied as they are by many thoughts and anxieties for the good of
their republic which by the divine bounty has been granted to them, this
has been suggested to them, and a command has been surreptitiously
elicited from them, yet, inasmuch as it is known to us and to all how
our most pious lords love discipline, observe degrees, venerate the
canons, and refrain from mixing themselves up in the causes of priests,
we will still execute with instancy what is for the good both of their
souls and of the republic, and what we are driven to by regard to the
terrible and tremendous judgment.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p6"></span>Cease then from all excuses, and
delay not to appear here, that, fortified by investigation of the truth,
we may at length bring thy cause to a termination.  But, whereas we have
been informed that thou art greatly afraid and altogether in trepidation
lest we should avenge on <span id="page_196b">p. 196b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.xvii-Page_196b"></span>thee the known fact of thy having
forced thy way irregularly into the order of priesthood without our
consent, this was indeed an intolerable misdemeanour:  but, in
accordance with the commands of our most serene lord the Emperor, we
forgive thee this, provided that thou in no wise persist any longer in
the error of thy contumacy; and we are by no means moved against thee on
this account.  But other things that have been reported to us we cannot
suffer to pass without enquiry.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p7"></span>Now inasmuch as we long ago sent thee
a letter warning thee by no means to dare to celebrate the solemnities
of mass till we should ascertain the will of the said our most serene
lord, and as thou hast cunningly contrived that this letter should not
come into thy hands, though thou nevertheless knewest in one way or
another what its purport was, but hast refused to comply with it;—we
therefore confirm what was before sent thee in writing, that thou must
not dare to celebrate the solemnities of mass until all that has been
alleged against thee has been thoroughly enquired into and sifted.  And,
if, with perverse daring, thou shouldest presume to celebrate, know that
thou art not free from the former threat of interdiction from
communion.  For, even though there were no other transgressions, we
deprive thee of the communion of the body and blood of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p7.1"></span>Lord</span> for this sin
of pride alone.  Wherefore, shewing the obedience that becomes thee,
make haste, as we have said, with all diligence to come to us; but so as
to have a space of thirty days for preparing for thy journey; and so,
laying aside all excuses, defer not thy appearance here.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p8"></span>Moreover, if any occasion of
hindering thy journey has arisen from the judges, or the military force,
or the people, we acknowledge the skilfulness with which things are
done.  Do thou thyself, then, see what account of this obligation, thou
canst render either to men here or to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p8.1"></span>God</span> in the future judgment, having
by thy contempt provoked a strict sentence against thee.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p9"></span>Furthermore, it has come to my
knowledge that my brother and fellow-bishop Paulinus, and Honoratus,
archdeacon of the Church of Salona <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648) , for having refused to give assent
to thy presumption are suffering grievous molestation at thy hands, so
as to have been constrained to give sureties to the end that may not be
at liberty to leave the city or their own houses.  If this is so, do
thou on receipt of this present writing, returning at last, though late,
to a sound mind, desist from molesting either of them, that they may
have free license either to come to me if they wish, or to go anywhere
else for their advantage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[195b:1648](2120503.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p4"></span> See III. 47, note 2.

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[196b:1649](2120503.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xvii-p10"></span> In the letter to the Salonitans,
which follows, it appears that Honoratus only among the clergy of Salona
(having been the rival candidate for the bishopric and supported by the
Pope), and Paulinus only among the suffragan bishops, had refused to
communicate with Maximus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Salonitans.](2120504)
