[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120508)  [Next](2120510) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-p2"></span>To Castorius, Notary.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-p3"></span>Gregory to Castorius, our notary at
Ravenna.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-p4"></span>When Florentinus, deacon of the
Church of Ravenna, treated with us in behalf of our most reverend
brother and fellow-bishop Marinianus concerning the use of the pallium,
on our asking him what was the ancient custom, he replied that the
bishop of the Church of Ravenna used the pallium in all litanies <span
id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656) .  But that this was not so we both
learnt from others, and it appeared evidently from the letters of the
former bishop John, which we shewed to him.  But he said what he had
been ordered to say.  For, at the time when this same John was inhibited
by thee from presuming to use the pallium out of order and unadvisedly,
he wrote to us that the ancient custom had been this; that the bishop of
that city should use the pallium in solemn litanies.  We send thee, for
thy information, copies of his letters.  But when Adeodatus, deacon of
the aforesaid Church, at the time when he was here, in like manner
pressed us strongly concerning this use of the pallium, we, desiring to
ascertain the truth, in like manner had him questioned as to what the
custom was:  and he, that he might persuade us to believe him, and
succeed in obtaining from us what he sought, testified under oath that
it had been the ancient custom for the bishop of his city to use the
pallium in four or five solemn litanies.  Let therefore thy Experience
look to the matter diligently, and enquire with all carefulness how many
solemn litanies there have been from ancient times.  Take care also to
make enquiry by calling them, not the solemn, but the greater litanies;
that when, through what the aforesaid deacon Adeodatus testified to us
and what the letter of the aforesaid bishop John acknowledges, it shall
appear how many of these solemn litanies there were, we, knowing how
often the pallium used to be worn in litanies, may most willingly grant
the privilege.  But do not make this enquiry of those who are put
forward by the ecclesiastics, <span id="page_200b">p. 200b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-Page_200b"></span>but of others whom you know to be
impartial:  and whatever after careful investigation you discover
communicate to us with accuracy, that having ascertained the truth, as
we have said, we may relieve the mind of our brother and fellow-bishop,
the most reverend Marinianus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[199b:1657](2120509.htm#fr_1656) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxiii-p5"></span> Marinianus had succeeded John as
bishop of Ravenna.  For Gregory’s dispute with John concerning the use
of the pallium, see above, III. 56, 57; V. 11, 15, and below, VI. 61.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Anthemius, Subdeacon.](2120510)
