[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120236)  [Next](2120238.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>Of the weight of government; and that
all manner of adversity is to be despised, and prosperity feared.

<span id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>So much, then, have we briefly said,
to shew how great is the weight of government, lest whosoever is unequal
to sacred offices of government should dare to profane them, and through
lust of pre-eminence undertake a leadership of perdition.  For hence it
is that James affectionately deters us, saying, Be not made many
masters, my brethren ([James iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>).  Hence the Mediator between <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>God</span> and man
Himself—He who, transcending the knowledge and understanding even of
supernal spirits, reigns in heaven from eternity—on earth fled from
receiving a kingdom.  For it is written, *When Jesus therefore perceived
that they would come and take Him by force, to make Him a king, He
departed again into the mountain Himself alone* ([Joh. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p3.3"></span>).  For who could so blamelessly have had
principality over men as He who would in fact have reigned over those
whom He had Himself created?  But, because He had come in the flesh to
this end, that He might not only redeem us by His passion but also teach
us by His conversation, offering Himself as an example to His followers,
He would not be made a king; but He went of His own accord to the gibbet
of the cross.  He fled from the offered glory of pre-eminence, but
desired the pain of an ignominious death; that so His members might
learn to fly from the favours of the world, to be afraid of no terrors,
to love adversity for the truth’s sake, and to shrink in fear from
prosperity; because this often defiles the heart through vain glory,
while that purges it through sorrow; in this the mind exalts itself, but
in that, even though it had once exalted itself, it brings itself low;
in this man forgets himself, but in that, even perforce and against his
will, he is recalled to memory of what he is; in this even good things
done aforetime often come to nothing, but in that faults even of long
standing are wiped away.  For commonly in the school of adversity the
heart is subdued under discipline, while, on sudden attainment of
supreme rule, it is forthwith changed and becomes elated through
familiarity with glory.  Thus Saul, who had before fled in consideration
of his unworthiness, no sooner had assumed the government of the kingdom
than he was puffed up ([1 Kings 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#022.md),
[1 Kings 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#017.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#030.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p3.4"></span>); for, desirous of being honoured before
the people while unwilling to be publicly blamed, he cut off from
himself even him who had anointed him to the kingdom.  Thus David, who
in the judgment of Him who chose him was well pleasing to Him in almost
all his deeds, as soon as the weight of pressure was removed, broke out
into a swelling sore ([2 Kings xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p3.5"></span>,
*seq*.), and, having been as a laxly running one in his appetite for the
woman, became as a cruelly hard one in the slaughter of the man; and he
who had before known pitifully how to spare the bad learnt afterwards,
without impediment of hesitation, to pant even for the death of the good
([2 Kings 11.15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.ii.iv-p3.6"></span>).  For, indeed, previously he had been
unwilling to smite his captured persecutor; and afterwards, with loss to
his wearied army, he destroyed even his devoted soldier.  And in truth
his crime would have snatched him farther away from the number of the
elect, had not scourges called him back to pardon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That for the most part the occupation of government dissipates
the solidity of the mind.](2120238.md)
