[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120201)  [Next](2120203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Sermon XLVI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p2.1"></span>On Lent, VIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p3"></span>I.  *Lent must be kept not only by
avoiding bodily impurity but also by avoiding errors of thought and
faith.*

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p4"></span>We know indeed, dearly-beloved, your
devotion to be so warm that in the fasting, which is the forerunner of
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxiv-p4.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
Easter, many of you will have forestalled our exhortations.  But because
the right practice of abstinence is needful not only to the
mortification of the flesh but also to the purification of the mind, we
desire your observance to be so complete that, as you cut down the
pleasures that belong to the lusts of the flesh, so you should banish
the errors that proceed from the imaginations of the heart.  For he
whose heart is polluted with no misbelief prepares himself with true and
reasonable purification for the Paschal Feast, in which all the
mysteries of our religion meet together.  For, as the Apostle says, that
“all that is not of faith is sin <span id="fr_932"></span>[933](#fn_932.md)
,” the fasting of those will be unprofitable and vain, whom the father
of lying deceives with his delusions, and who are not fed by Christ’s
true flesh.  As then we must with the whole heart obey the Divine
commands and sound doctrine, so we must use all foresight in abstaining
from wicked imaginations.  For the mind then only keeps holy and
spiritual fast when it rejects the food of error and the poison of
falsehood, which our crafty and wily foe plies us with more
treacherously now, when by the very return of the venerable Festival,
the whole church generally is admonished to understand the mysteries of
its salvation.  For he is the true confessor and worshipper of Christ’s
resurrection, who is not confused about His passion, nor deceived about
His bodily nativity.  For some are so ashamed of the Gospel of the Cross
of Christ, as to impudently nullify the punishment which He underwent
for the world’s redemption, and have denied the very nature of true
flesh in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, not understanding how the
impassible and unchangeable Deity of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p5.3"></span>God’s</span> Word could have so far
condescended for man’s salvation, as by His power not to lose His own
properties, and in His mercy to take on Him ours.  And so in Christ,
there is a twofold form but one person, and the Son of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxiv-p5.4"></span>God</span>, who is at the
same time Son of Man, is one <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p5.5"></span>Lord</span>, accepting the condition of a
slave by the design of loving-kindness, not by the law of necessity,
because by His power He became humble, by His power passible, by <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="ii.v.xxiv-Page_159"></span>His
power mortal; that for the destruction of the tyranny of sin and death,
the weak nature in Him might be capable of punishment, and the strong
nature not lose aught of its glory.

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p6"></span>II.  *All the actions of Christ reveal
the presence of the twofold nature.*

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p7"></span>And so, dearly-beloved, when in reading
or hearing the Gospel you find certain things in our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxiv-p7.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ
subjected to injuries and certain things illumined by miracles, in such
a way that in the same Person now the Humanity appears, and now the
Divinity shines out, do not put down any of these things to a delusion,
as if in Christ there is either Manhood alone or Godhead alone, but
believe both faithfully, worship both right humbly; so that in the union
of the Word and the Flesh there may be no separation, and the bodily
proofs may not seem delusive, because the divine signs were evident in
Jesus.  The attestations to both natures in Him are true and abundant,
and by the depth of the Divine purpose all concur to this end, that the
inviolable Word not being separated from the passible flesh, the Godhead
may be understood as in all things partaker with the flesh and flesh
with the Godhead.  And, therefore, must the Christian mind that would
eschew lies and be the disciple of truth, use the Gospel-story
confidently, and, as if still in company with the Apostles themselves,
distinguish what is visibly done by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p7.2"></span>Lord</span>, now by the spiritual
understanding and now by the bodily organs of sight.  Assign to the man
that He is born a boy of a woman:  assign to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p7.3"></span>God</span> that His mother’s virginity is not
harmed, either by conception or by bearing.  Recognize “the form of a
slave” enwrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger, but
acknowledge that it was the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p7.4"></span>Lord’s</span> form that was announced by
angels, “proclaimed by the elements <span
id="fr_933"></span>[934](#fn_933.md) ,” adored by the wise men.  Understand
it of His humanity that he did not avoid the marriage feast:  confess it
Divine that he turned water into wine.  Let your own feelings explain to
you why He shed tears over a dead friend:  let His Divine power be
realized, when that same friend, after mouldering in the grave four
days, is brought to life and raised only by the command of His voice. 
To make clay with spittle and earth was a work of the body:  but to
anoint therewith and enlighten the eyes of the blind is an undoubted
mark of that power which had reserved for the revelation of its glory
that which it had not allowed to the early part of His natural life.  It
is truly human to relieve bodily fatigue with rest in sleep:  but it is
truly Divine to quell the violence of raging storms by a rebuking
command.  To set food before the hungry denotes human kindness and a
philanthropic spirit:  but with five loaves and two fishes to satisfy
5,000 men, besides women and children, who would dare deny that to be
the work of Deity? a Deity which, by the co-operation of the functions
of true flesh, showed not only itself in Manhood, but also Manhood in
itself; for the old, original wounds in man’s nature could not be
healed, except by the Word of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p8.1"></span>God</span> taking to Himself flesh from the
Virgin’s womb, whereby in one and the same Person flesh and the Word
co-existed.

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p9"></span>III.  *Hold fast to the statements of the
Creed.*

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p10"></span>This belief in the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxiv-p10.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Incarnation,
dearly-beloved, through which the whole Church is Christ’s body <span
id="fr_934"></span>[935](#fn_934.md) , hold firm with heart unshaken and
abstain from all the lies of heretics, and remember that your works of
mercy will only then profit you, and your strict continence only then
bear fruit, when your minds are unsoiled by any defilement from wrong
opinions.  Cast away the arguments of this world’s wisdom, for <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxiv-p11.1"></span>God</span> hates them, and
none can arrive by them at the knowledge of the Truth, and keep fixed in
your mind that which you say in the Creed.  Believe <span
id="fr_935"></span>[936](#fn_935.md) the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p12.1"></span>God</span> to be co-eternal with the Father
by Whom all things were made and without Whom nothing was made, born
also according to the flesh at the end of the times.  Believe Him to
have been in the body crucified, dead, raised up, and lifted above the
heights of heavenly powers, set on the Father’s right hand, about to
come in the same flesh in which He ascended, to judge the living and the
dead.  For this is what the Apostle proclaims to all the faithful,
saying:  “if ye be risen with Christ seek the things which are above,
where Christ is sitting on the right hand of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p12.2"></span>God</span>.  Set your mind on the things
that are above, not on the things that are upon the earth.  For ye are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p12.3"></span>God</span>.  For when Christ, our life,
shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in glory <span
id="fr_936"></span>[937](#fn_936.md) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p14"></span>IV.  *Use Lent for general improvement
in the whole round of Christian duties.*

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p15"></span>Relying, therefore, dearly-beloved, on
so great a promise, be heavenly not only in hope, <span id="page_160">p.
160</span> <span id="ii.v.xxiv-Page_160"></span>but also in conduct. 
And though our minds must at all times be set on holiness of mind and
body, yet now during these 40 days of fasting bestir yourselves <span
id="fr_937"></span>[938](#fn_937.md) to yet more active works of piety, not
only in the distribution of alms, which are very effectual in attesting
reform, but also in forgiving offences, and in being merciful to those
accused of wrongdoing, that the condition which <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p16.1"></span>God</span> has laid down between Himself and
us may not be against us when we pray.  For when we say, in accordance
with the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p16.2"></span>Lord’s</span> teaching, “Forgive us our
debts, as we also forgive our debtors <span
id="fr_938"></span>[939](#fn_938.md) ,” we ought with the whole heart to
carry out what we say.  For then only will what we ask in the next
clause come to pass, that we be not led into temptation and freed from
all evils <span id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939.md) :  through our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxiv-p18.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ,
Who with the Father and the Holy Spirit lives and reigns for ever and
ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_932"></span>[158:933](2120202.htm#fr_932.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p5"></span> [Rom. xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md)<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[159:934](2120202.htm#fr_933.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p7.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p8"></span> *Declaratam ab elementis*, viz. by the
star in the east.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[159:935](2120202.htm#fr_934.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p11"></span> *Per quam tota Ecclesia corpus est
Christi*.  This is a great saying, by which the centrality of the
doctrine of the Incarnation is fearlessly asserted.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[159:936](2120202.htm#fr_935.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p12"></span> Notice that both here and in the next
sentence the construction is *credite Filium*—*credite Hunc* not
*credite* in *Filium*—in *Hunc*, the exact language of the creed being
the latter (I believe *in*, &c.).

<span id="fn_936"></span>[159:937](2120202.htm#fr_936.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p13"></span> [Col. iii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[160:938](2120202.htm#fr_937.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p16"></span> Lit. “polish yourselves up” (*expolite
vos*).

<span id="fn_938"></span>[160:939](2120202.htm#fr_938.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p17"></span> S. [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_939"></span>[160:940](2120202.htm#fr_939.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p18"></span> *A malis omnibus liberemus*.  The free
turn given to this passage is interesting:  <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p18.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p18.2"></span>πὸ τοῦ πονηροῦ</span> (Vulg. *a malo*) being
now considered personal “from the evil one” (R.V.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XLIX](2120203.md)
