[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120170)  [Next](2120172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.clxi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXVII <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p3.1"></span>To Rusticus, Bishop of Gallia Narbonensis,
with the replies to his Questions on various points.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p4"></span>Leo, the bishop, to Rusticus, bishop of
Gallia Narbonensis.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p5"></span> <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-Page_109"></span>I.  *He exhorts him to act with
moderation towards two bishops who have offended him*.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p6"></span>Your letter, brother, which Hermes your
archdeacon <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614) brought, I have
gladly received; the number of different matters it contains makes it
indeed lengthy, but not so tedious to me on a patient perusal that any
point should be passed over, amid the cares that press upon me from all
sides.  And hence having grasped the gist of your allegation and
reviewed what took place at the inquiry of the bishops and leading
men <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) , we gather that Sabinian
and Leo, presbyters, lacked confidence in your <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) action, and that they have no longer
any just cause for complaint, seeing that of their own accord they
withdrew from the discussion that had been begun.  What form or what
measure of justice you ought to mete out to them I leave to your own
discretion advising you, however, with the exhortation of love that to
the healing of the sick you ought to apply spiritual medicine, and that
remembering the Scripture which says “be not over just <span
id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) ,” you should act with mildness
towards these who in zeal for chastity seem to have exceeded the limits
of vengeance, lest the devil, who deceived the adulterers, should
triumph over the avengers of the adultery.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p11"></span>II.  *He expostulates with him for
wishing to give up his office, which would imply distrust of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clxi-p11.1"></span>God’s</span> promises.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p12"></span>But I am surprised, beloved, that you
are so disturbed by opposition in consequence of offences, from whatever
cause arising, as to say you would rather be relieved of the labours of
your bishopric, and live in quietness and ease than continue in the
office committed to you.  But since the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p12.1"></span>Lord</span> says, “blessed is he who shall
persevere unto the end <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) ,” whence
shall come this blessed perseverance, except from the strength of
patience?  For as the Apostle proclaims, “All who would live godly in
Christ shall suffer persecution <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619)
.”  And it is not only to be reckoned persecution, when sword or fire or
other active means are used against the Christian religion; for the
direst persecution is often inflicted by nonconformity of practice and
persistent disobedience and the barbs of ill-natured tongues:  and since
all the members of the Church are always liable to these attacks, and no
portion of the faithful are free from temptation, so that a life neither
of ease nor of labour is devoid of danger, who shall guide the ship
amidst the waves of the sea, if the helmsman quit his post?  Who shall
guard the sheep from the treachery of wolves, if the shepherd himself be
not on the watch?  Who, in fine, shall resist the thieves and robbers,
if love of quietude draw away the watchman that is set to keep the
outlook from the strictness of his watch?  One must abide, therefore, in
the office committed to him and in the task undertaken.  Justice must be
stedfastly upheld and mercy lovingly extended.  Not men, but their sins
must be hated <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) .  The proud must
be rebuked, the weak must be borne with; and those sins which require
severer chastisement must be dealt with in the spirit not of
vindictiveness but of desire to heal.  And if a fiercer storm of
tribulation fall upon us, let us not be terror-stricken as if we had to
overcome the disaster in our own strength, since both our Counsel and
our Strength is Christ, and through Him we can do all things, without
Him nothing, Who, to confirm the preachers of the Gospel and the
ministers of the mysteries, says, “Lo, I am with you all the days even
to the consummation of the age <span id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621)
.”  And again He says, “these things I have spoken unto you that in me
ye may have peace.  In this world ye shall have tribulation, but be of
good cheer, because I have overcome the world <span
id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) .”  The promises, which are as plain
as they can be, we ought not to let any causes of offence to weaken,
lest we should seem ungrateful to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p17.2"></span>God</span> for making us His chosen
vessels, since His assistance is powerful as His promises are true.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p18"></span>III.  *Many of the questions raised
could be more easily settled in a personal interview than on paper.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p19"></span>On those points of inquiry, beloved,
which your archdeacon has brought me separately written out, it would be
easier to arrive at conclusions on each point face to face, if you could
grant us the advantage of your presence.  For since some questions seem
to exceed the limits of ordinary diligence, I perceive that they are
better suited to conversation than to writing:  for as there are certain
things which can in no wise be controverted, so there are many things
which require to be modified either by considerations of age or by the
necessities of the case; always provided that we remember in things
which are doubtful or obscure, that <span id="page_110">p. 110</span>
<span id="ii.iv.clxi-Page_110"></span>must be followed which is found to
be neither contrary to the commands of the Gospel nor opposed to the
decrees of the holy Fathers.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p20"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p20.1"></span>Question I</span>.  *Concerning a presbyter
or deacon who falsely claims to be a bishop, and those whom they have
ordained.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p21"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p21.1"></span>Reply</span>.  No consideration permits men
to be reckoned among bishops who have not been elected by the clergy,
demanded by the laity, and consecrated by the bishops of the province
with the assent of the metropolitan <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623) .  And hence, since the question often
arises concerning advancement unduly obtained, who need doubt that that
can in no wise be which is not shown to have been conferred on them. 
And if any clerics have been ordained by such false bishops in those
churches which have bishops of their own, and their ordination took
place with the consent and approval of the proper bishops, it may be
held valid on condition that they continue in the same churches. 
Otherwise it must be held void, not being connected with any place nor
resting on any authority.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p23"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p23.1"></span>Question II</span>.  *Concerning a
presbyter or deacon, who on his crime being known asks for public
penance, whether it is to be granted him by laying on of hands?*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p24"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p24.1"></span>Reply</span>.  It is contrary to the custom
of the Church that they who have been dedicated to the dignity of the
presbyterate or the rank of the diaconate, should receive the remedy of
penitence by laying on of hands for any crime; which doubtless descends
from the Apostles’ tradition, according to what is written, “If a priest
shall have sinned, who shall pray for him <span
id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) ?”  And hence such men when they have
lapsed in order to obtain <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p25.2"></span>God’s</span> mercy must seek private
retirement, where their atonement may be profitable as well as adequate.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p26"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p26.1"></span>Question III</span>.  *Concerning those who
minister at the altar and have wives, whether they may lawfully cohabit
with them?*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p27"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p27.1"></span>Reply</span>. The law of continence is the
same for the ministers <span id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) of the
altar as for bishops and priests, who when they were laymen or readers,
could lawfully marry and have offspring.  But when they reached to the
said ranks, what was before lawful ceased to be so.  And hence, in order
that their wedlock may become spiritual instead of carnal, it behoves
them not to put away their wives but to “have them as though they had
them not <span id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626) ,” whereby both the
affection of their wives may be retained and the marriage functions
cease.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p30"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p30.1"></span>Question IV</span>.  *Concerning a
presbyter or deacon who has given his unmarried daughter in marriage to
a man who already had a woman joined to him, by whom he had also had
children.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p31"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p31.1"></span>Reply</span>.  Not every woman that is
joined to a man is his wife, even as every son is not his father’s
heir.  But the marriage bond is legitimate between the freeborn and
between equals:  this was laid down by the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p31.2"></span>Lord</span> long before the Roman law had
its beginning.  And so a wife is different from a concubine, even as a
bondwoman from a freewoman.  For which reason also the Apostle in order
to show the difference of these persons quotes from Genesis, where it is
said to Abraham, “Cast out the bondwoman and her son:  for the son of
the bondwoman shall not be heir with my son Isaac <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) .”  And hence, since the marriage tie
was from the beginning so constituted as apart from the joining of the
sexes to symbolize the mystic union of Christ and His Church, it is
undoubted that that woman has no part in matrimony, in whose case it is
shown that the mystery of marriage has not taken place.  Accordingly a
clergyman of any rank who has given his daughter in marriage to a man
that has a concubine, must not be considered to have given her to a
married man, unless perchance the other woman should appear to have
become free, to have been legitimately dowered and to have been honoured
by public nuptials.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p33"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p33.1"></span>Question V</span>.  *Concerning young women
who have married men that have concubines.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p34"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p34.1"></span>Reply</span>.  Those who are joined to
husbands by their fathers’ will are free from blame, if the women whom
their husbands had were not in wedlock.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p35"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p35.1"></span>Question VI</span>.  *Concerning those who
leave the women by whom they have children and take wives.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p36"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p36.1"></span>Reply</span>.  Seeing that the wife is
different from the concubine, to turn a bondwoman from one’s couch and
take a wife whose free birth is assured, is not bigamy but an honourable
proceeding.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p37"></span> <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>
<span id="ii.iv.clxi-Page_111"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p37.1"></span>Question VII</span>.  *Concerning those who
in sickness accept terms of penitence, and when they have recovered,
refuse to keep them.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p38"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p38.1"></span>Reply</span>.  Such men’s neglect is to be
blamed but not finally to be abandoned, in order that they may be
incited by frequent exhortations to carry out faithfully what under
stress of need they asked for.  For no one is to be despaired of so long
as he remain in this body, because sometimes what the diffidence of age
puts off is accomplished by maturer counsels.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p39"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p39.1"></span>Question VIII</span>.  *Concerning those
who on their deathbed promise repentance and die before receiving
communion.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p40"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p40.1"></span>Reply</span>.  Their cause is reserved for
the judgment of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p40.2"></span>God</span>, in Whose hand it was that their
death was put off until the very time of communion.  But we cannot be in
communion with those, when dead, with whom when alive we were not in
communion.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p41"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p41.1"></span>Question IX</span>.  *Concerning those who
under pressure of great pain ask for penance to be granted them, and
when the presbyter has come to give what they seek, if the pain has
abated somewhat, make excuses and refuse to accept what is offered.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p42"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p42.1"></span>Reply</span>.  This tergiversation cannot
proceed from contempt of the remedy but from fear of falling into worse
sin.  Hence the penance which is put off, when it is more earnestly
sought must not be denied in order that the wounded soul may in whatever
way attain to the healing of absolution.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p43"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p43.1"></span>Question X</span>.  *Concerning those who
have professed repentance, if they begin to go to law in the forum.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p44"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p44.1"></span>Reply</span>.  To demand just debts is
indeed one thing and to think nothing of one’s own property from the
perfection of love is another.  But one who craves pardon for unlawful
doings ought to abstain even from many things that are lawful, as says
the Apostle, “all things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628) .”  Hence, if the
penitent has a matter which perchance he ought not to neglect, it is
better for him to have recourse to the judgment of the Church than of
the forum.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p46"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p46.1"></span>Question XI</span>.  *Concerning those who
during or after penance transact business.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p47"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p47.1"></span>Reply</span>.  The nature of their gains
either excuses or condemns the trafficker, because there is an
honourable and a base kind of profit.  Notwithstanding it is more
expedient for the penitent to suffer loss than to be involved in the
risks of trafficking, because it is hard for sin not to come into
transactions between buyer and seller.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p48"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p48.1"></span>Question XII</span>.  *Concerning those who
return to military service after doing penance.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p49"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p49.1"></span>Reply</span>.  It is altogether contrary to
the rules of the Church to return to military service in the world after
doing penance, as the Apostle says, “No soldier in <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.clxi-p49.2"></span>God’s</span> service
entangles himself in the affairs of the world <span
id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) .”  Hence he is not free from the
snares of the devil who wishes to entangle himself in the military
service of the world.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p51"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p51.1"></span>Question XIII</span>.  *Concerning those
who after penance take wives or join themselves to concubines.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p52"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p52.1"></span>Reply</span>.  If a young man under fear of
death or the dangers of captivity has done penance, and afterwards
fearing to fall into youthful incontinence has chosen to marry a wife
lest he should be guilty of fornication, he seems to have committed a
pardonable act, so long as he has known no woman whatever save his
wife.  Yet herein we lay down no rule, but express an opinion as to what
is less objectionable.  For according to a true view of the matter
nothing better suits him who has done penance than continued chastity
both of mind and body.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p53"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p53.1"></span>Question XIV</span>.  *Concerning monks who
take to military service or to marriage.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p54"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p54.1"></span>Reply</span>.  The monk’s vow being
undertaken of his own will or wish cannot be given up without sin.  For
that which a man has vowed to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p54.2"></span>God</span>, he ought also to pay.  Hence he
who abandons his profession of a single life and betakes himself to
military service or to marriage, must make atonement and clear himself
publicly, because although such service may be innocent and the married
state honourable, it is transgression to have forsaken the higher
choice.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p55"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p55.1"></span>Question XV</span>.  *Concerning young
women who have worn the religious habit for some time but have not been
dedicated, if they afterwards marry.*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p56"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p56.1"></span>Reply</span>.  Young women, who without
being forced by their parents’ command but of their own free-will have
taken the vow and habit of virginity, if afterwards they choose wedlock,
act wrongly, even though they have not received <span id="page_112">p.
112</span> <span id="ii.iv.clxi-Page_112"></span>dedication:  of which
they would doubtless not have been defrauded, if they had abided by
their vow.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p57"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p57.1"></span>Question XVI</span>.  *Concerning those who
have been left as infants by christian parents, if no proof of their
baptism can be found whether they ought to be baptized?*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p58"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p58.1"></span>Reply</span>.  If no proof exist among
their kinsfolk and relations, nor among the clergy or neighbours whereby
those, about whom the question is raised, may be proved to have been
baptized, steps must be taken for their regeneration:  lest they
evidently perish; for in their case reason does not allow that what is
not shown to have been done should seem to be repeated.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p59"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p59.1"></span>Question XVII</span>.  *Concerning those
who have been captured by the enemy and are not aware whether they have
been baptized but know they were several times taken to church by their
parents, whether they can or ought to be baptized when they come back to
Roman territory* <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) *?*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p61"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p61.1"></span>Reply</span>.  Those who can remember that
they used to go to church with their parents can remember whether they
received what used to be given to their parents <span
id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) .  But if this also has escaped their
memory, it seems that that must be bestowed on them which is not known
to have been bestowed because there can be no presumptuous rashness
where the most loyal carefulness has been exercised.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p63"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p63.1"></span>Question XVIII</span>.  *Concerning those
who have come from Africa or Mauretania and know not in what sect they
were baptized, what ought to be done in their case* <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632) *?*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p65"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p65.1"></span>Reply</span>.  These persons are not
doubtful of their baptism, but profess ignorance as to the faith of
those who baptized them:  and hence since they have received the form of
baptism in some way or other, they are not to be baptized but are to be
united to the catholics by imposition of hands, after the invocation of
the Holy Spirit’s power, which they could not receive from heretics.

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p66"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p66.1"></span>Question XIX</span>.  *Concerning those who
after being baptized in infancy were captured by the Gentiles, and lived
with them after the manner of the Gentiles, when they come back to Roman
territory as still young men, if they seek Communion, what shall be
done?*

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p67"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p67.1"></span>Reply</span>.  If they have only lived with
Gentiles and eaten sacrificial food, they can be purged by fasting and
laying on of hands, in order that for the future abstaining from things
offered to idols, they may be partakers of Christ’s mysteries.  But if
they have either worshipped idols or been polluted with manslaughter or
fornication, they must not be admitted to communion, except by public
penance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_613"></span>[108:614](2120171.htm#fr_613) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p2"></span> The date of this important letter has
been variously conjectured, Quesnel assigning it to the years 442–4,
Sirmond and Baluze to 452, and the Ball. preferring 458 or 9.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[109:615](2120171.htm#fr_614) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p7"></span> In an inscription quoted from Gruter
and Baluze by Quesnel, Hermes is mentioned as *diacunus* to *Rusticus
episcopus*.  He was afterwards made bp. of Biterra, but being unfairly
expelled by that city, he succeeded Rusticus in Narbonensis.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[109:616](2120171.htm#fr_615) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p8"></span> *Honorati*.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[109:617](2120171.htm#fr_616) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p9"></span> *Tuæ*, others *suæ* (the bishops).

<span id="fn_617"></span>[109:618](2120171.htm#fr_617) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p10"></span> [Eccl. vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#017)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p10.1"></span>
(A.V. over*wicked*).

<span id="fn_618"></span>[109:619](2120171.htm#fr_618) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p13"></span> S. [Matt. xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[109:620](2120171.htm#fr_619) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p14"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[109:621](2120171.htm#fr_620) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p15"></span> The thought of this fine passage is
more fully worked out in Sermon XLVIII., chaps. 2 and 3.  Cf. esp. the
remark, *bellum vitiis potius quam hominibus indicunt,* *“nulli malum
pro malo reddentes”* *sed correctionem peccantium semper optantes*.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[109:622](2120171.htm#fr_621) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p16"></span> S. [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[109:623](2120171.htm#fr_622) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p17"></span> S. [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[110:624](2120171.htm#fr_623) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p22"></span> The same requisites of ordination of
bishops are laid down in Lett. X. chap. 6.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[110:625](2120171.htm#fr_624) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p25"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[110:626](2120171.htm#fr_625) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p28"></span> The order of sub-deacons (acc. to
Quesnel) is here particularly meant:  cf. Lett. XIV. chap. 4.  The
readers (*lectores*) mentioned below were of course one of the Minor
Orders of clergy:  cf. Bingham, *Antiq*. Bk. V. chap. iii.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[110:627](2120171.htm#fr_626) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p29"></span> [1 Cor. vii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029)<span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p29.1"></span>.  This was also provided by the Apostolic
canons (quoted by Quesnel), *episcopus aut presbyter uxorem propriam
nequaquam sub obteniu religionis abiciat*.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[110:628](2120171.htm#fr_627) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p32"></span> [Gal.
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#030), [Gen.
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[111:629](2120171.htm#fr_628) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p45"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[111:630](2120171.htm#fr_629) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p49.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p50"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[112:631](2120171.htm#fr_630) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p60"></span> On these points, cf. Letter CLXVI., to
Neo, bp. of Ravenna.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[112:632](2120171.htm#fr_631) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p62"></span> Viz. the sacred elements of the
Eucharist.

<span id="fn_632"></span>[112:633](2120171.htm#fr_632) <span
id="ii.iv.clxi-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.clxi-p64"></span> On these points, cf. Letter CLXVI., to
Neo, bp. of Ravenna.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To all the Bishops of Campania, Samnium and Picenum.](2120172)
