[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120530)  [Next](2120532) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXVI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p2"></span>To Athanasius, Presbyter.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p3"></span>Gregory to Athanasius, Presbyter of
Isauria.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p4"></span>As we are afflicted and mourn for
those whom the error of heretical pravity has cut off from the unity of
the Church, so we rejoice with those whom their profession of the
catholic faith retains within her bosom.  And, as it is our duty to
oppose the impiety of the former with pastoral solicitude, so it is
fitting for us to bestow favour on the pious professions of the latter,
and to declare their views to be sound.  And accordingly, a suspicion of
unsoundness in the faith having arisen against thee, Athanasius,
presbyter of the monastery of Saint Mile, called Tamnacus, which is
established in the province of Lycaonia, thou, in order that the
integrity of the profession of faith might appear, didst elect to have
recourse to the Apostolical See over which we preside, asserting also
that, having been corporally chastised, thou hadst done some things
unjustly and impetuously.  And, although things done under compulsion by
no means fall under the censure of the canons, and they are rightly
accounted to be of no weight (since he himself invalidates them who
compels what is unjust to be confessed and done), and though that
confession is rather to be received and embraced which is shewn to
proceed from the spontaneous will, as is known to be the case in that
which thou madest before us;—yet still, to avoid the possibility of
uncertainty, we took the precaution of writing about thee to our brother
and fellow-bishop, <span id="page_209b">p. 209b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.xlv-Page_209b"></span>the prelate of the city of
Constantinople, that he might inform us by letter of what had been
done.  He, after being often admonished by us, wrote in reply to the
effect that a volume had been found in thy possession, which contained
many heretical statements, and that on this account he had been incensed
against thee.  He having lent this to us in his desire to satisfy us, we
read the earlier portions of it attentively:  and inasmuch as we found
in it manifest poison of heretical pravity, we forbade its being read
any more.  But, since thou hast assured us that thou hadst read it in
simplicity, and, in order to cut off all ground for uncertain suspicion,
hast handed to us a paper in thine own handwriting in which expounding
thy faith, thou hast most plainly condemned all heresies in general, or
whatever is opposed to the integrity of the Catholic faith or
profession, and hast declared that thou hadst always received and didst
still receive all that the four holy Ecumenical synods receive, and
hadst condemned and didst still condemn what they condemn, and hast
promised also to accept and hold to that synod which was held in the
times of the emperor Justinian concerning the Three Chapters, and, being
forbidden by us to read that same volume in which the poison of
pestiferous error is interwoven, rejecting also and condemning all that
in it is said or latently implied against the integrity of the Catholic
faith, thou hast promised that thou wilt not read it again;—we, moved by
these reasons (thy faith also having clearly appeared to us from the
paper under thine own hand, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p4.1"></span>God</span> guarding thee, to be catholic),
decree thee to be, according to thy profession, free from all stain of
heretical perversity, and catholic; and we pronounce that thou hast
proved thyself, by the grace of Christ Jesus our Saviour to be in all
things a professor and follower of the unadulterated faith:  and we give
thee free licence, notwithstanding all, to return to thy monastery,
resuming thy place and rank.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p5"></span>We wish to write also on this matter
to our most beloved brother, the prelate of the city of Constantinople,
who has been ordained in the place of the aforesaid holy John <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681) .  But, since it is the custom that
we should not write before his synodical epistle has reached us, we have
therefore delayed.  But, after it has reached us, we will inform him of
these things when we find a convenient opportunity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[209b:1682](2120531.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p6"></span> Cyriacus (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xlv-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 595) succeeded John the Faster
as patriarch of Constantinople.  For the letter written afterwards
written to him with reference to Athanasius, cf. VII. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII](2120532)
