[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120229)  [Next](2120231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii"></span> <span id="page_vib">p. vib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_vib"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Prolegomena.</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>FOR an understanding of Gregory’s position,
and of the purport of a great part of those of his epistles which are
translated in this Series, a brief survey of the state of things,
politically and ecclesiastically, at the time of his accession may in
the first place be of service.  There was now no separate Emperor of the
West; what remained of the once great Western Empire being governed in
the name of the Eastern Emperor, who had his court at Constantinople, by
the Exarch of Italy, resident at Ravenna.  The Kingdom of the Goths in
Italy had ceased to be, the country having been recovered from them
under Justinian about half a century before Gregory’s accession, as well
as the province of Africa from the Vandals.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span>But the Emperor’s hold on Italy was limited
and precarious, a large portion of it being already occupied by the
Lombards, whose first invasion, under Alboin, had been in 568:  and
accordingly Gregory, writing in the thir­teenth Indiction (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 594–5), speaks of
their having been in Italy for twenty-seven years, and in the sixth
Indiction (<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span>
602–3) of their having been there for thirty-five years \[*Epp., Lib.*
V., *Ep.* 21, and *Lib.* XIII., *Ep.* 38\].  Subsequently the Lombard
King Autharis had advanced on Alboin’s conquests, and is said to have
proceeded to Rhegium, at the very toe of Italy, and there, riding up to
a column on the shore through the tidal waves, to have touched it with
the point of his spear and said, “So far shall extend the boundary of
the Lombards” (Paul. Warnefr., *de gestis Longob.,* III. 33\].  Autharis
died in the first year of Gregory’s popedom *\[Epp., Lib.* I., *Ep.*
17\], and was succeeded by Agilulph, previously duke of Turin, whom
Theodelinda, the widow of the deceased king, had selected as her
consort.  Under him, his royal seat being at Ticinum *(Pavia),* the
Lombard dominion included the greater part of Northern Italy, reaching
northward to the Alpine passes, the two great dukedoms of Spoletum and
Beneventum in Southern Italy, with partial hold on Tuscia and
elsewhere.  The only parts that now distinctly acknowledged the sway of
the Exarch were the Exarchate of Ravenna, on the eastern side of Italy,
with Istria and Venetia further north, the duchies of Rome and Naples on
the western side, portions of territory at the heel and toe of Italy,
and the islands of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica.  But beyond the limits
of their actual occupation the Lombards kept the country in a continual
state of disturbance and alarm; a great part of it appears to have been
debatable ground, and no one could say definitely to whom it belonged.

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>No previous invaders seem to have been
viewed by contemporaries with more horror, or painted in blacker
colours, than the Lombards.  Their Arian Christianity does not appear to
have rendered them less odious than heathens would have been, or to have
softened their alleged savagery.  Gregory repeatedly in his letters
speaks in the strongest possible terms of the misery of Italy “among the
swords of the Lombards:”  and it was doubtless the state of general
distress thence arising, together with disorganization of the country
from other causes, and the prevalence of calamity on whatever side he
looked, that caused him continually to express his conviction that the
signs of the times betokened the speedy approach of the Second Advent. 
It is in connexion with such a state of things that he stands out
promi­nently as a political administrator of no common order.  His
position was one of peculiar <span id="page_viib">p. viib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_viib"></span>difficulty.  Though virtually, as bishop,
the ruler of Rome, he was not a temporal potentate with power to act
independently.  He was but a subject of the Emperor, as he continually
acknowledged, under the dominion of the Exarch of Ravenna, and possessed
theoretically of spiritual jurisdiction only.  And in his efforts to do
good he was continually thwarted.  He complains repeatedly in his
letters of the insufficient aid afforded him by the distant Emperor, the
counteraction of his own designs by the Exarch, and the corruption and
iniquitous conduct of the imperial officers in Italy, which in more than
one place he describes as even more trying than the oppressions of the
Lombards.  Still, in virtue of his high and influential position as
bishop of old Rome, his commanding character, his indefatigable zeal,
and his diplomatic talents, he did exert great political influence; and
whatever success was attained in the defence of Italy against further
aggression, or in effecting truces with the enemy, to him alone such
success appears to have been due.  Many of the letters translated in
this volume shew his activity in this regard.  A short summary of what
may be gathered from them will be given below.  All Europe, to the north
of Italy, was now severed from the Western Empire.  Britain had long
been relinquished:  the old provinces of Gaul were ruled and contended
for by the descendants of Clovis of the Merovingian dynasty:  Spain,
with Narbonensian Gaul, was an independent Visigothic kingdom.  The
relations of these kingdoms to the Empire were at this time amicable;
and it was in ecclesiastical, and not temporal, matters that Gregory had
dealings with them, as will appear below.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>His talents and activity in secular affairs
were shewn also in his management of the possessions in various quarters
with which the See of Rome had been endowed, known as “St. Peter’s
patrimony.”  In Sicily especially, and also in Campania, Calabria,
Dalmatia and elsewhere, and to a small extent in Gaul, the Roman Church
held lands so called, over all of which Gregory exercised personal
superintendence by letters to his various agents, shewing a remarkable
knowledge of the state of things in the several localities, and giving
minute directions.  While, on the one hand, he took care that the Church
should not be defrauded of her just dues, on the other hand we find him
repeatedly and strongly forbidding any unjust claims, or any oppression
of the natives who cultivated the Church lands.  The patrimony was
commonly managed, under him, by agents on the spot, called *rectores
patrimonii*, and often by deacons, or subdeacons, sent from Rome, to
control the ordinary *rectores*, or act in the same capacity.  We find
bishops also in some cases acting as *rectores.*  There was also a class
of officials called *defensores ecclesiæ*, or Guardians of the Church,
who were required to be authorized by letters from Rome under the Pope’s
hand (see V. 29; IX, 62; XI. 38).  These letters of appointment, of
which we have specimens in V. 29 and XI. 38, specified the protection of
the poor as their primary duty.  But their office had a much wider
scope.  We find them commissioned, not only to carry out various works
of charity, but also to maintain the rights and property of churches, to
rectify abuses in monasteries and hospitals (see e.g. I. 52; XIV. 2), to
see to the canonical election of bishops (e.g. X. 77), and to the supply
of episcopal ministrations during the suspension or incapacity of the
holders of Sees (XIV. 2), to assist bishops in the exercise of
discipline (X. I), and even to rebuke and coerce bishops themselves when
negligent of duty (III. 36; X. 10; XIII. 26, 27; XIV. 4).  In some cases
they were also themselves *rectores patrimonii* (IX. 18).  Further, they
constituted a *schola*, as did also the notaries and subdeacons; and in
the first Indiction (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 598) Gregory appointed that seven
of their number should thenceforth be dignified with the name of
*regionarii* (as was already the case with the notaries and subdeacons),
which gave them rank, and entitled them to sit in assemblies of the
clergy (VIII. 14).  Though entrusted with such large powers in matters
ecclesiastical, they do not seem to have been of necessity in sacred
orders, and <span id="page_viiib">p. viiib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_viiib"></span>might marry and have families (cf. III.
21; XII. 25).  Some were subdeacons, as Anthemius, subdeacon and
defensor of Campania (VII. 23).  They might be apt, it seems, to take
too much upon them:  for we find Romanus, the defensor of Sicily,
sharply rebuked for trenching on the prerogatives of a bishop (XI. 37). 
Though entitled, by special com­mission from the Roman See, to call even
bishops to account, they were not to usurp their junctions.  In some
cases we find sworn *notarii* (otherwise called *chartularii*) attached
to the patrimonies in addition to the *rectores*.  Thus Adrian receives
instructions as being *notarius Siciliæ*; and, on his being made rector,
Pantaleo is appointed *notarius* (XIII. 18 and 34).

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>Notable among the subdeacons invested with
authority for the number and particularity of the letters addressed to
him is Peter, whom Gregory sent at once in the first year of his
pontificate to Sicily, not only to look after the patrimony there and
after the supply of corn sent annually thence to Rome, but also, for a
time at least, to exercise delegated authority, in matters
ecclesiastical, over the bishops of the island (see *Lib*. 1., *Ep*.
I).  From the letters to this Peter we learn a good deal about the way
in which the lands of the patrimony, in Sicily at least, were
cultivated, and how the revenues were derived from them.  (See
especially *Lib*. I., *Ep*. 44.)  They were cultivated by native
peasants, called by Gregory *rustici*, or *coloni*, who enjoyed the
fruit of their labour, subject only to customary dues to the lords of
the land; in this case to the Roman See.  The principal dues we find
referred to were, in the first place, a kind of land-tax, called
*burdatio*, and further, the tithe of all the produce, which might be
paid in kind, but seems to have been often commuted for a money
payment.  Among the pre­valent abuses which Gregory peremptorily
required to be corrected were excessive valuation of the tithe,
irrespective of the current price of corn, when a money equivalent was
paid, and in other cases the use of measures of too large capacity, and
exactions in various ways of more than was fairly due.  He orders
schedules to be made and authorised, copies of which were to be given to
the *rustici* in all the farms of the church, shewing what their legal
payments were, so as to guard against their being wronged in future. 
There were other customary payments of smaller amounts, such as fees on
the marriage of peasants, which, under limita­tions, he allows to be
continued.  It appears also from *Lib*. XII., *Ep*. 25, that these
*rustici*, or *coloni*, were *ascripti glebæ*, so as not to be allowed
to migrate from the estate (*massa*) to which they were attached, or to
contract marriages beyond its limits.  The several estates constituting
the patrimony were called *massæ*, each of which might comprise several
*fundi;* and it was customary to let these *massæ* to farmers
(*conductores*), who were left to deal with the *rustici*, or *coloni*,
being themselves responsible for a certain amount, whether in money or
produce, to the officials of the Church.  Gregory directed, among other
things, that these *conductores*, should not be arbitrarily disturbed in
their holdings, and that, on their death, members of their family should
succeed them, guardians being appointed in case of their children being
under age.  Sicily was of great importance to Rome, as being a
corn-growing country from which especially the Romans were supplied. 
Among Gregory’s temporal responsibilities was that of seeing to a
regular and adequate supply, a failure in which might be followed by
famine in Rome:  and we find him attentive to this duty, giving
particular directions as to the procuring, storing, and shipping of the
corn.  (See e.g. *Lib*. l., *Ep*. 2, 44, 72.)  In fact, provision
generally for the welfare of the Roman citizens, and the general charge
of the city, seems to have devolved upon the Pope.  And it was doubtless
his responsibilities in this regard, together with his more general
political ones, in addition to his “care of all the churches,” that
caused him so continually to bemoan in his letters the billows of
worldly business, incident to his office, which overwhelmed him, and
hindered his advance­ment in the spiritual life.  Remarkable, indeed,
must have been his mental activity and his varied abilities, in that he
was able, as appears from his epistles, to make himself accurately <span
id="page_ixb">p. ixb</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_ixb"></span>acquainted with, and personally attend to,
so many matters, finding time also for theological composition and
letters of spiritual counsel, and retaining his religious aspirations in
the midst of all.  And all this is the more striking when one considers
the distressing state of health, especially from gout, of which he
continually complains, and the fact also that, with his strong monastic
predilections, matters of worldly business would be likely to be
peculiarly distasteful to him.  We get a further view of his
multifarious engagements from what his biographer, John the Deacon,
tells us of his having himself seen to the fourfold distribution—to the
bishop, the clergy, the fabrics and services of the churches, and the
poor—of the revenues of the See; his having himself caused to be sought
out, and kept a list of, the recipients of charity; and himself taught
the choristers in the *Orphanotrophium* which he had himself founded in
Rome.  It appears to have been his principle and practice to rely on
others for nothing which he could possibly do himself.

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span>With regard to the state of things in the
ecclesiastical sphere during Gregory’s popedom, it may be observed
first, that there was now a comparative cessation for a time of
controversial warfare.  The battle no longer raged over Arian,
Nestorian, Monophysite, or Pelagian heresies; the Monothelitic
controversy had not yet begun.  Catholic orthodoxy, as defined by the
first four Councils, was accepted generally, and enforced by the
imperial power, with Gregory’s full approval of coercive measures (see
e.g. *Lib*. IX., *Ep*. 49; *Lib*. XI., *Ep*. 46) <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) ; while outside the limits of the
Empire it was professed and upheld by the Frankish rulers of Gaul, and
at length at the commencement of Gregory’s reign accepted in Spain by
the Visigothic Reccared.  The Lombards, indeed, with their king
Agilulph, were still Arians; but his queen Theodelinda, with whom
Gregory corresponded, was herself a devout Catholic.  Hence he was not
called on to come forward prominently in the field of controversy, for
which indeed he does not appear to have been peculiarly fitted.  For,
though able to state clearly, and give the received reasons for,
accepted dogmas, he nowhere evinces any great originality of conception,
or depth of insight of his own.  He is content to rest on authority;
that especially of the four Councils, which he regards as the
unassailable bulwarks of the true faith (see I. 25; III. 10; IV. 37), or
of ancient fathers of the Church.  Nor does he seem to have been well
versed in the past history of controversy.  An instance of his imperfect
knowledge in this regard is found in the letters which he wrote after
receiving from Cyriacus, the newly-appointed bishop of Constantinople,
his confession of faith, in which Eudoxius, who had been prominent in
the course of the Arian controversy, was condemned.  Gregory had never
heard of this noted heretic, though he had come across the name of a
sect called Eudoxiani, and, not finding his name in the Latin books he
was able to consult at Rome, he takes objection to his condemnation by
Cyriacus (*Lib*. VII., *Ep*. 4); and it was not till he had consulted
Eulogius of Alexandria, who was more learned than himself, that he was
satisfied; and this simply on being informed that ancient fathers of
repute had con­demned this Eudoxius.  “We know him (he writes) to be
manifestly slain, against whom our heroes have cast so many darts” (VII.
34; VIII. 30).  Again, in writing to the same Eulogius against the sect
of *Agnoitæ*, who taught a certain limitation of our Lord’s human
knowledge, he appears to draw all his arguments from what he found in
Augustine and other Latin Fathers, and he rejoices to hear that Eulogius
had found the Greek Fathers (whom he himself, being wholly ignorant of
Greek, was unable to consult) consentient (*Lib*. X., *Epp*. 35, 39).

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span> <span id="page_xb">p. xb</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xb"></span>But one subject of controversy there was,
which especially troubled him; viz., that of “the three Chapters” (*tria
capitula*), consequent upon the condemnation of the documents so-called,
and of their deceased authors, at the instance of the Emperor Justinian,
by the fifth General Council (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 553).  This con­demnation had been
in fact forced upon the Church by the Emperor in the said Council under
his presidency at Constantinople, in spite of the protest of the great
majority of the Western bishops, and of the then bishop of Rome,
Vigilius.  The grounds of objection to the condemnation were, that it
was held to contravene the Council of Chalcedon, at which two of the
writers whom it was proposed to condemn-—Theodoret and Ibas—had been
expressly acquitted of heresy; that to anathematize the dead, whatever
their opinions might have been, was wrong; and further, that the
condemnation was intended to conciliate the Monophysites, to whom the
writers in question had been peculiarly obnoxious, and was in fact a
concession to their heresy.  Nor can it be doubted that a design to
conciliate the Monophysite party, still strong and resolute in spite of
its condemnation at Chalcedon, had been a main motive with Justinian in
forcing a decree against the Three Chapters on the Church.  Vigilius,
however, had afterwards yielded to pressure, and assented, however
inconsistently, to the condemnation of the Chapters; as did his
successors in the See of Rome, including Gregory.  Consequently several
Churches of the West had renounced communion with Rome; and the schism
thus arising—as in Liguria, which was under the metropolitan of Milan,
and still more decidedly in Istria and Venetia under the metropolis of
Aquileia—continued throughout the reign of Gregory.  He in vain
endeavoured, either by remonstrance or by trying to enlist the emperor’s
aid, to bring back the Istrian bishops to conformity; and it must have
been distressing to him, that even the Lombard queen, Theodelinda, who
was so orthodox a Catholic, and whom he esteemed so highly, and
corre­sponded with so cordially, herself could not be induced to accept
the fifth Council, so far as the condemnation of the Three Chapters was
concerned.  In his last extant letter to her, written in the year of his
death, he regrets that severe illness prevented him from replying to
certain arguments on the subject by an abbot, Secundus, which she had
sent for his considera­tion, but transmits to her a copy of the Acts of
the fifth council, and again repeats his constant protest that his
acceptance of that Council by no means implied any disparagement of the
previous councils, or of the Tome of pope Leo (*Lib*. XIV., *Ep*. 12).
Further, the schism of the Donatists still lingered in the African
provinces, though no longer powerful, and though a series of Imperial
edicts had been issued for their suppression.  We find Gregory, in many
letters, urging measures against them, and more rigid enforcement of the
penal laws.

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span>With regard to the spiritual authority
over the Church at large, claimed in the time of Gregory, and by him
asserted, and the extent to which such claims were then acknowledged,
the following remarks may be made.

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span>Beyond the episcopal jurisdiction of the
bishops of Rome over their own proper diocese, which comprised only the
city of Rome, and their metropolitan jurisdiction over the seven
suffragan bishops of the Roman territory—viz., those of Ostia, Portus,
Silva Candida, Sabina, Præneste, Tusculum, and Albanum,—they had long
exercised a more extended patriarchal jurisdiction, which (according to
Rufinus towards the end of the fourth century) seems originally to have
extended over the suburban provinces which were under the civil
jurisdiction of the *vicarius urbis*, including the islands of Sicily,
Sardinia, and Corsica.  But, being the only patriarchs of the West, they
had long exercised authority, more or less defined, over a much wider
area, including Northern Italy, with its metropolis at Milan, Illyricum
East and West, and Northern Africa.  It is not necessary to attempt any
review here of the growth, as years <span id="page_xib">p. xib</span>
<span id="iii.iii-Page_xib"></span>had gone on, of such extended
jurisdiction, or of the degree and kind of authority over Churches that
had been consequently claimed.  Nor need we consider now the well-known
instances of resistance to such authority, as notably in Africa by St.
Cyprian in the third century, and at a later date in the same province
when Zosimus was pope, in the case of Apiarius.  For our present purpose
it may be enough to say that the bishop of Rome was now generally
acknowledged to be not only the sole Patriarch in the West, but also the
highest in rank of all the bishops of Christendom.  Still, even in some
provinces where his authority was not openly disputed, there appears to
have been, at any rate, jealousy of its exercise.  For proofs of this in
Africa, see II. 47, n. 1; IV. 34, n. 1 ; IX. 58, n. 1.  For a notable
instance in Western Illyricum, in the case of Maximus, bishop of Salona,
see III. 47, and note there.  At Ravenna also, the seat of the Exarch,
there seems to have been jealousy of the claims of Rome, seeing that
John, bishop of that See, in a letter to Gregory, though expressing
himself as personally devoted to the Roman See, says that he had
provoked no little ill-will of many enemies against himself for his
defence of its authority (III. 57).

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span>In Gaul, under the Merovingian princes,
there are no signs of any dispute of the pope’s spiritual jurisdiction,
which was constantly asserted, over the Churches there:  but the ancient
Celtic Churches of the British islands still retained their
independence.  This last fact is apparent, not only from what Bede
relates of the attitude of the British and Scottish Christians towards
Augustine and the Roman mission, but also from the tone of the letter of
the Irish Columbanus to Gregory, which will be found among the epistles
(see *Lib*. IX., *Ep*. 127).  With the Church in Spain, after its
renunciation of Arianism under King Reccared at the beginning of
Gregory’s episcopate, he seems to have had little com­munication.  He
corresponded indeed with his friend Leander, of Seville, about the
King’s conversion, and wrote a letter to the latter (IX. 122), who had
sent an offering to Rome.  Further, he sent into Spain the abbot
Cyriacus, who had been employed to bring about the assembling of a
Council in Gaul, commending him in a somewhat adulatory epistle to one
Claudius, who appears to have been a person of influence in the court of
Reccared (IX. 120).  But for what special purpose he was sent does not
appear.  There is, moreover, a long document, comprised under XIII. 45
in the Benedictine edition of the epistles, relating to two bishops who
were said to have been uncanonically deposed, for the adjudication of
whose case one John, a *defensor ecclesiæ*, is said to have been sent,
and to have pronounced sentence.  But this epistle is not found in all
codices; nor does it appear from it, even if it were considered genuine,
whether John’s decision was accepted in Spain.  On the whole, there is
no sufficient evidence, but rather the contrary, of papal jurisdiction
being recognized at that time in Spain as it certainly was in Gaul.  It
remains only to note the historical fact, that the whole Eastern branch
of the Church Catholic never at any time submitted it­self to the Roman
See, notwithstanding occasional appeals to it by bishops or others when
suffering under grievances.

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span>With regard to Gregory’s own view of the
prerogatives of the Roman See beyond the limits of its proper
metropolitan or patriarchal jurisdiction, he undoubtedly claimed for it
a primacy not of rank only, but also of authority in the Church
Universal; and this of divine right, as representing the See of the
Prince of the apostles.  Such claim had come, in his day, to be the
tradition of the Roman Church, which he accepted as a matter of course,
and handed on.  In assertion of this claim he says in more than one
place, “Petro totius ecclesiæ cura et principatus commissa est;” and
again, “quis nesciat sanctam Ecclesiam in apostolorum principis
soliditate firmatam.…Itaque, cum multi sint apostoli, pro ipso tamen
principatu sola apostolorum principis sedes in auctoritate convaluit”
(*Lib*. VII., *Ep*. 40); and he certainly regarded the like authority as
residing still in what was called St. Peter’s See.  <span
id="page_xiib">p. xiib</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_xiib"></span>But we
nowhere find him asserting it in such a way as to merge the general
episcopal com­mission in the Papacy, or to interfere with the canonical
exercise of their independent jurisdiction by other patriarchs of
ancient Apostolic Sees.  He sent according to custom, after his
accession, his confession of faith to the four Eastern patriarchs of
Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, and Constantinople, as to brethren:  he
never, even where his jurisdiction was acknowledged, interfered with the
free election of bishops by their several Churches, except where he saw
some canonical impediment, reserving only to himself the right of
confirming the election (see e.g. *Lib*. II., *Ep*. 6; *Lib*. V., *Ep*.
17, &c.):  and, lastly, his memorable emphatic protest against the
assumption of the title of Universal Bishop by the patriarchs of
Constantinople, with his total renunciation of any right of his own to
assume such a title, has often been quoted as a standing protest against
such papal supremacy as has subsequently been claimed and exercised.  He
seems to have regarded the See of St. Peter as everywhere supreme only
in the sense of its being its prerogative to conserve inviolate the
catholic faith and observance of the canons, wherever heresy or
uncanonical proceedings called for protest and correction.  He writes
thus to John, bishop of Syracuse, “Si qua culpa in episcopis invenitur,
nescio quis ei \[*Sedi apostolicæ*\] subjectus non sit:  cum vero culpa
non exigit, omnes secundum rationem humilitatis æquales sunt” (*Lib*.
IX., *Ep*. 59).  Again, to the *defensor* Romanus, “Si qua unicuique
episcopo jurisdictio non servatur, quid aliud agitur, nisi ut per nos,
per quos ecclesiasticus custodiri debuit ordo, confundatur?”  (*Lib*.
XI., *Ep*. 37).  Again to Eulogius of Alexandria, protesting against
being addressed as Universal Pope, and against the expression, *sicut
jussistis*, “Quod verbum jussionis peto a meo auditu removere, quia scio
qui sum, qui estis.  Loco quim mihi fratres estis, moribus patres.  Non
ergo jussi, sed quæ utilia visa sunt indicare curavi.…Nec honorem esse
deputo in quo fratres meos honorem suum perdere cognosco.  Si enim
univer­salem me Papam vestra sanctitas dicit, negat se hoc esse, quod me
fatetur universum.  Sed absit hoc.”  (*Lib*. VIII., *Ep*. 30).  Further,
there is the notable fact, that he distinctly accords to the patriarchs
of Alexandria and Antioch equal shares with himself in the primacy of
St. Peter’s See;—to the former on the ground of his See having been
founded by St. Mark, who had been sent by St. Peter; to the latter
because (according to the Clementine tradition, which he takes for
granted) St. Peter had been for seven years bishop of Antioch before he
went to Rome.  To Eulogius of Alexandria he writes, “Cum ergo unius
atque una sit sedes, cui ex auctoritate divina tres nunc episcopi
præsident, quicquid ergo de vobis boni audio, hoc mihi imputo.  Si quid
de me boni creditis, hoc vestris meritis imputate, quia in illo unum
sumus qui ait, *Ut omnes unum sint, sicut et tu Pater in me, et ego in
te, et ipsi in nobis unum sint*” (*Lib*. VII., *Ep*. 40.  Cf. V. 39; X.
35; XIII. 41).  He wrote thus in his anxiety to induce those two
patriarchs to support him in his resistance to the assumptions of
Constantinople; but his view of the principality of St. Peter’s See not
being vested exclusively in the See of Rome remains no less distinctly
on record.  The view to which he gives expression of the unity of the
three Sees may perhaps have arisen thus.  The tradition of the
peculiarly Petrine origin of the Roman See, and hence its claim as of
divine right to supremacy, having come by this time to be accepted in
the West, the undoubted ancient jurisdiction, independently of Rome, of
the great patriarchal sees of the East in their own regions, had to be
accounted for in accordance with this theory:  and hence they too were
regarded as deriving their authority from St. Peter.  Accordingly we do
not find Gregory in any of his letters to the patriarchs of Alexandria
and Antioch addressing them in a tone of command.  It is true that in
one letter to Eulogius of Alexandria he remonstrates with him urgently
for allowing (as was alleged) simony in his diocese; but it is brotherly
remonstrance only (*Lib*. XIII., *Ep*. 41).

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span>\[There is indeed a passage in one of
Gregory’s Epistles (II. 52) which has been taken <span
id="page_xiiib">p. xiiib</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_xiiib"></span>to
imply a claim to jurisdiction over them.  (See note on passage in
Migne’s *Patrologia*.)  Natalis, bishop of Salona, had disregarded the
admonitions of two successive bishops of Rome; and Gregory writes to
him, “Quod si quilibet ex quatuor patriarchis fecisset, sine gravissimo
scandalo tanta contumacia transire nullo modo potuisset.”  But the
intended meaning may be, not that such contumacy towards Rome would have
been scandalous even in one of the great Eastern patriarchs, but that it
could not have been passed over by them if shewn towards themselves in
their own patriarchates.  The words, it is true, suggest the former
meaning, but the latter seems more likely to have been intended.\]

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span>On the other hand, towards the patriarch
of Constantinople, when he considered him guilty of uncanonical
procedure, he assumed a distinctly authoritative attitude.  On his own
authority he declared null and void (as his predecessor Pelagius II. had
done) the synod at which the title of œcumenical bishop had been
conferred on the Constantinopolitan patriarch (*Lib*. V., *Epp*. 18,
21); he entertained the appeal to himself of the two presbyters John and
Athanasius, reversed their condemnation by the patriarch of
Constantinople, and ordered their restitution (*Lib*. VI., *Epp*. 14,
15, 16, 17, &c.); and in a letter to John of Syracuse he says, “Nam de
Constantinopolitana ecclesia quod dicunt, quis eam dubitet sedi
apostolicæ esse sub­jectam?”  (*Lib*. IX., *Ep*. 12.)  For the See of
Constantinople, though now patriarchal, was not even an ancient *sedes
apostolica*:  its bishop had indeed been assigned honorary rank (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>τὰ πρεσβεῖα τῆς
τιμῆς</span>) next after the bishop of Rome by the general Council of
Constantinople (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p16.2"></span>a.d.</span> 381), but this only on the
political ground of Constantinople being new Rome:  patriarchal
jurisdiction had indeed been confirmed to it over the Metropolitans of
the Pontic, Arian, and Thracian dioceses by the 28th Canon of the
Council of Chalcedon (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p16.3"></span>a.d.</span> 451); but this Canon had been
repudiated at the time by Pope Leo of Rome.  Hence the popes were ever
peculiarly jealous of any new assumption, or uncanonical proceedings, on
the part of the Constantinopolitan See, the ascendancy of which
signified to them imperial domina­tion rather than primitive
ecclesiastical order or prerogative:  and hence it is not to be wondered
at that on the assumption of a title that seemed to imply universal
supremacy Gregory was at once in arms, and asserted strongly all the
authority that he believed to be inherent in his own Apostolic See. 
Such assertion, however, had no immediate effect in the absence of power
to enforce it:  it was disregarded at Constantinople:  the Emperor
Mauricius, who alone could have given practical effect to it, was
appealed to by Gregory in vain; and, though Phocas, who succeeded him,
is said to have issued a decree that “the Apostolic See of St. Peter,
that is the Roman Church, should be the head of all Churches”
(*Anastasius Bibliothec*.), yet it is an historical fact that neither
Constantinople nor the Churches of the East generally, ever submitted to
the claims of the Roman See.

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span>There is no record of the year of Pope
Gregory’s birth:  It was probably about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span> 540, some ten years after Benedict
of Nursia had founded the Benedictine order.  He was well born, his
father Gordianus being a wealthy Roman of senatorial rank, bearing the
title of “Regionarius,” which denoted some office of dignity.  He
received the education usual with young Romans of his rank in life, and
is said to have been an apt scholar.  The historian Gregory of Tours,
who was his contemporary, states that in grammar, rhetoric, and logic he
was considered second to none in Rome; and he also studied law.  Such
education, however, fell some­what short of what we should now call a
liberal one, leaving him, as it did, entirely unacquainted. with any
language but his own, and so a stranger to all Greek literature; with no
apparent taste, that he anywhere displays in his writings, for art,
poetry, or philosophy; and with scanty historical knowledge.  He was,
with regard to intellectual <span id="page_xivb">p. xivb</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xivb"></span>equipment, an educated Roman gentleman of
his day, and no more; regarding the Roman nation as paramount in the
world, and not aspiring beyond the studies thought sufficient for Roman
citizens of rank, at a time when study of Greek literature and
scientific culture had died out at Rome.  In later life also, when he
had time to devote himself to study and contemplation, he confined
himself, with a purely devotional purpose, to Holy Scripture, in which
(though of course only in the Latin version) he was thoroughly versed,
or to the orthodox Latin Fathers, St. Augustine being his favourite. 
His condemnation of the study of classical heathen literature by
Christians, appears strikingly in his letter to Desiderius (*Lib*. XI.,
*Ep*. 54).  Still his early education, though thus limited, fitted him
well for dealing with practical matters, for grasping the bearings of
subjects that came before him, and for expressing himself clearly and
often forcibly thereon; though his style is not free from the
artificiality that was probably encouraged by the rhetorical training of
his day.  He was intended for, and at first pursued, secular occupations
suitable to his rank in life; and at an unusually early age (certainly
before 573, when he would be little more than 30 years of age) he was
appointed by the Emperor Justin II. to the dignified office of *Prætor
Urbanus*.  In this early period he does not appear to have been
distinguished by any peculiar saintliness of practice or demeanour.  He
dressed, at any rate, conformably to his rank:  for Gregory of Tours
speaks of the striking contrast of the monastic garb which he afterwards
assumed with the silk attire, the sparkling gems, and the purple-striped
trabea, with which he had formerly paced the streets of Rome.  But, on
the other hand, there is not the least reason to suppose that he had
ever been loose or irreligious.

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span>He had been religiously brought up.  His
father Gordianus is said to have been himself a religious man:  his
mother Silvia (who lived in ascetic seclusion after her husband’s
death), and the sisters of Gordianus, Tarsilla and Æmiliana (who lived
in their own house as dedicated virgins), have obtained a place in the
calendar of saints:  and his biographer, John the Deacon, speaks of his
early training having been that of a saint among saints.  He never, in
his own writings, alludes to any crisis in his early life at which he
had become convinced of sin, saying rather (as in one of his letters)
that, while living in the world, he had tried to live to God also, but
had found it hard.  But on the death of his father (the date of which is
not known) his religious aspirations took a decided form; he kept but a
small part of the patrimony that came to him, employing the rest in
charitable uses, and especially in founding monasteries, of which he
endowed six in Sicily, and one, dedicated to St. Andrew, on the site of
his own house near the Church of St. John and St. Paul on the Cælian,
“ad clivum Scauri” which he himself entered as a monk, and of which he
was eventually elected abbot.  The religious views of his age, in which
he fully shared, would of necessity suggest to him the monastic life as
the highest form of saintliness; and he may have been especially moved
by the recent example of St. Benedict of Nursia, whom he greatly
admired, and of whom he has left us in his Dialogues many interesting
records.  In the ardour of his devotion, his life in the monastery
appears to have been ascetic to an extreme degree.  He is said by his
biographer to have been fed on raw vegetables (*crudo legumine*),
supplied to him by his mother, who had become a recluse in a
neighbouring cell; and his fasts made him continually ill, and
endangered his life.  He tells us himself in his Dialogues of one Holy
Week towards the end of which he fainted from exhaustion, and was hardly
kept alive:  but before losing consciousness, being shocked at the idea
of breaking his fast before Easter Day, he had requested the prayers of
a very holy monk called Eleutherius; and the result was that, returning
to consciousness, he remembered nothing of his previous pangs, felt no
longer any craving for food, and could have continued his fast a day
longer than was required.  (*Dialog., Lib*. iii. c. 33.)  Such was the
idea then entertained, and by him shared, of the way of attaining to the
highest holiness.  However he survived all, though the very weak <span
id="page_xvb">p. xvb</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_xvb"></span>health of
which in his subsequent life he continually complains may have been due
in part to such extreme self-discipline.  Nor did he, it is said, relax
his habits of study and prayer in consequence of the debility induced by
his asceticism.  It seems not to have precluded even energetic action of
a practical kind.  For it was at this period of his life that, according
to John the Deacon his biographer, the well-known incident occurred of
his seeing the English youths in the Roman slave-market, and obtaining
the leave of pope Benedict I. to undertake a missionary enterprise for
the conversion of the Angli, on an expedition for which purpose he had
already set forth when the pope, moved by the remonstrances of the Roman
people, recalled him to Rome.

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span>Having thus become a devout monk, he
remained one in heart throughout his life.  His habits of life were, as
far as they could be, still monastic while he sat upon the papal chair;
and he never lost, and often gave expression to, his ardent longing for
a return to monastic seclusion, as alone allowing closeness to God, as
well as peace and happiness.  See, for instance, what he says on this
subject soon after his accession to the Emperor’s sister Theoctista
(*Epp., Lib*. I., *Ep*. 5), or, after longer experience, to his old
friend Leander of Seville (*Lib*. IX., *Ep*. 121).

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span>But he was not allowed to enjoy for long
the seclusion he so much desired; being sum­moned from his monastery by
the pope to be ordained one of the seven deacons of Rome, and afterwards
sent to Constantinople to be the pope’s *apocrisiarius* (or
*responsalis*) at the imperial court.  There is some doubt as to which
pope it was that thus ordained and com­missioned him.  From a
combination of what is said by his biographers, Paul the Deacon and John
the Deacon respectively, it seems most probable that it was Pope
Benedict I. who summoned him from his monastery and ordained him,
perhaps with the view of sending him to Constantinople, and that it was
Pelagius II. (who succeeded Benedict <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>a.d.</span> 578) under whom he was actually
sent.  The office of apocrisiarius was usually filled by a deacon; and
hence it is not unlikely that his employment in that office had been in
view from the first, when he was called from his monastery and
ordained.  The popes at this time were in special need of an able
representative at Constantinople for procuring, if possible, some
effective aid against the Lombards, the Exarch at Ravenna having been
appealed to in vain.  Gregory remained at Constantinople for several
years, probably from <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p20.2"></span>a.d.</span> 578 to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p20.3"></span>a.d.</span> 585, first under the Emperor
Tiberius, and then under Mauricius, who succeeded to the Empire <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p20.4"></span>a.d.</span> 582.  There is no
extant record of instructions sent to him from Rome till <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p20.5"></span>a.d.</span> 584, when Pope
Pelagius wrote to him, representing the miserable state of Italy under
the Lombards, the imminent danger of Rome, and the inaction of the
Exarch, and directing him to press the Emperor for succour.  He also
desired him to send back to Rome the monk Maximianus, who, together with
other monks of his monastery, had accompanied Gregory to
Constantinople.  This, his official residence in the imperial city,
could not fail to be of advantage to him in the way of preparation for
his subsequent position, as giving him a practical knowledge of the
state of parties there, the ways of the court, and the conduct of
political affairs.  He also made friends of position and influence
there, with whom he afterwards corresponded; among whom may be named
Theoctista, the Emperor’s sister, who had charge of the imperial
children, Narses a patrician, Theodorus, physician to the Emperor,
Gregoria, lady of the bedchamber to the Empress, and two patrician
ladies, Clementina and Rusticiana.  All these were religious persons,
over whom he had gained influence, which he did not allow to die.  He
also formed at this time the intimate acquaintance of Leander, Bishop of
Seville, who happened to be sojourning in Constantinople, and to whom he
wrote afterwards very affectionate letters.  It was at his instigation
that he began, while at Constantinople, the *Magna Moralia*, or
Exposition of the Book of Job, which he also dedicated to him in its
completed form (*Moral. Libri., Epist. Missoria*, c. 1; *Epp., Lib*. V.
<span id="page_xvib">p. xvib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xvib"></span>*Ep*. 49).  For he found time from secular
business for devotion and study with the monks who had followed him from
Rome, including his particular friend Maximianus, as has been already
mentioned.

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span>“By their example (he writes in his
Introduction to the *Magna Moralia*, above referred to) I was bound, as
it were by the cable of an anchor, when tossing in the incessant
buffeting of secular affairs, to the placid shore of prayer.  For to
their society, as to the bosom of a most safe harbour, I fled for escape
from the rollings and the billows of earthly action; and, though that
ministry had torn me from the monastery, and cut me off by the sword of
its occupation from my former life of quiet, yet among them, through the
converse of studious reading, the aspiration of daily compunction gave
me life.”  He was engaged also at one time in a long dispute with
Eutychius, the Constantinopolitan patriarch, who had written a treatise
on the nature of the body after the resurrection, maintaining that it
would be impalpable, and more subtle than air.  Gregory maintained its
palpability, alleging in proof that of the risen body of Christ.  The
Emperor Tiberius at length took cognizance of the dispute, and decided
it in favour of Gregory, ordering the book of Eutychius to be burnt. 
The disputants are said to have been so exhausted by the long
controversy that both had to take to their beds at its close (*Joan.
Diac., Lib*. I., c. 28, 29).

<span id="iii.iii-p22"></span>Gregory was at length (probably <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 585) allowed by
Pelagius to return to Rome and re­enter his beloved monastery; and it
was now probably that he was elected to be its abbot.  But Pelagius
appears still to have made use of him, a letter from that pope to Elias
bishop of Aquileia on the subject of “The Three Chapters” being
attributed by Paul the Deacon to the pen of Gregory (*De gestis
Longobard*., *Lib*. III.).

<span id="iii.iii-p23"></span>That period of peace, lasting some five
years, Gregory constantly refers to, and doubtless with complete
sincerity, as the happiest part of his life.  It was interrupted by the
death of Pelagius II., who fell a victim to an epidemic disease then
raging on the 8th of February, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p23.1"></span>a.d.</span> 590, when we are informed that the
whole clergy and people of Rome concurred in electing Gregory to the
popedom, as the only man for the place at that time of peculiar trial. 
In addition to the general distress and alarm caused by the advancing
Lombards, the Tiber had overflowed its banks, destroying property and
stores of corn, famine was feared, and fatal disease prevailed.  Men’s
hearts were failing them for fear, and for looking after those things
that were coming on the earth.  Gregory himself often speaks of the
signs of the time as betokening the coming end of all things; and in one
of his letters he compares Rome to an old and shattered ship, letting in
the waves on all sides, tossed by a daily storm, its planks rotten and
sounding of wreck.  If anyone could pilot the ship through the storm,
there seems to have been a general feeling that the man was Gregory.  He
was most unwilling to undertake the task.  When an embassy was sent to
Constantinople for obtaining the Emperor’s confirma­tion of the
election, he sent at the same time a letter imploring him to withhold
it.  But the letter was intercepted by the prefect of the city, and
another sent in its place, entreating confirmation.  Meanwhile Gregory
employed himself in preaching to the people, and calling them to
repentance, in view of so many symptoms of the wrath of God.  He
instituted at this time the “Septiform Litany,” to be chanted through
the streets of the city by seven com­panies—of clergy, of laymen, of
monks, of nuns, of married women, of widows, and of children and
paupers—who, setting out from different churches, were to meet for
common supplication.  It was at the close of one such procession that
the vision (not mentioned by any contemporaries, or by Bede) was
afterwards said to have been seen, to which the name of the Castle of
St. Angelo is attributed; the story being that, on approaching the
basilica of St. Peter on the Vatican, Gregory saw above the monument of
Hadrian an angel sheathing his sword in token that the plague was
stayed.  At length, the Emperor’s confirmation of his election having
arrived at Rome, he is said to have fled in disguise from the city, and
hid himself in a <span id="page_xviib">p. xviib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xviib"></span>forest cave, to have been pursued and
discovered by means of a pillar of light that disclosed his
hiding-place, to have been brought back to the city in triumph,
conducted to the church of St. Peter, and there at once ordained, on the
3rd of September, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p23.2"></span>a.d.</span> 590 (*Paul. Diac*., c. 13; *Joan.
Diac*., I. 44).

<span id="iii.iii-p24"></span>The four Eastern patriarchs at this time,
to whom, according to custom, he sent letters immediately after his
accession continuing his confession of faith, were John (known as
Jejunator, or the Faster) of Constantinople, Eulogius of Alexandria,
Gregory of Antioch, and John of Jerusalem; to whom is added in the
address at the head of the circular letter, “Anastasius, ex-patriarch of
Antioch,” who was indeed the true patriarch, having been deposed by the
mere secular authority of the Emperor, Justin II. (*Evagr. H. E*., V.
5).  Conse­quently Gregory, though not venturing to ignore the patriarch
in possession, addressed the deposed one also in his circular, and wrote
him also separate letters, in which he recognized him as the rightful
patriarch, and undertook to intercede with the Emperor Maurice in his
behalf (I. 8, 25, 26).  On the restoration of Anastasius to his See
(<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p24.1"></span>a.d</span>. 593) by
the Emperor on the death of the interloper, Gregory wrote him a warm
congratulatory letter (V. 39).

<span id="iii.iii-p25"></span>Of the other patriarchs John of
Constantinople was succeeded during Gregory’s pontificate (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p25.1"></span>a.d.</span> 596) by Cyriacus,
and John of Jerusalem by Amos, and he (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p25.2"></span>a.d.</span> 600 or 601) by Isacius (see XI.
46).  But the patriarchs of Jerusalem, though their position was
recognized, were not at that time of any great influence or importance.

<span id="iii.iii-p26"></span>A brief summary may now suitably be given
of some leading events of Gregory’s pontificate in the order suggested
by the successive Books of his Epistles, which correspond to the years
of his reign.  His biographer John the Deacon says of him that, having
been pope for a little more than thirteen and a half years, he left in
the archives (*in scrinio*) as many books of Epistles as he had reigned
years, the last, or 14th, book being left incomplete because of his not
having completed the 14th year of his reign (*Joan. Diac. Vit. S.
Greg*., IV. 71).  Accordingly the Benedictine Editors of his works have
arranged his extant epistles, according to what, to the best of their
judgment, they conceived to have been the original order, in 14 books,
answering to the successive years of his pontificate.  Previous editions
had given them in 12 books only, and many of them evidently placed
wrongly in order of time.  (See *Patrologiæ Tomus LXXV*.  *Sancti
Gregorii magni; Præfatio in Epistolas*.)  Hence, supposing the
Benedictine arrangement to be on the whole correct, we have in the
successive books as now arranged reference to the historical events of
the successive years to which the books are assigned.  The dates given
to the books are according to the Roman method of Indictions, one
Indiction being a period of 15 years, and the successive years of each
of such periods being called the 1st, 2nd, 3rd year of the Indiction, or
the 1st, 2nd, 3rd Indiction, and so on to the 15th.  Each Indiction year
began with September; and Gregory, having been ordained on the 3rd of
September, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p26.1"></span>a.d.</span>
590, which was the commencement of the 9th year of the then Indiction,
the date of the first book of the epistles, corresponding to the first
year of his reign, is given as Indiction IX.

<span id="iii.iii-p27"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p27.1"></span>Book I.  Indiction IX. (a.d. 590–1.)</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p28"></span>This first book introduces us at once to a
view of the new pope’s immediate vigilance and activity in affairs
secular and sacred that demanded his attention.  (1.)  We find him
providing without delay for the efficient and just management of the
patrimony of St. Peter, which has been spoken of above; and this
especially in Sicily, whither (as has been also said above) he sent
Peter the subdeacon as his agent with large powers.  To him also he gave
charge to keep him fully informed of all that was going on, and further
committed to him ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the bishops of the
island, directing him among other things to convene synods annually,
<span id="page_xviiib">p. xviiib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xviiib"></span>and requiring the bishops to submit to
his control (*Ep*. I).  This, however, seems to have been only a
temporary arrangement, since in the following year he appointed
Maximian, bishop of Syracuse, who had been a monk with himself and his
peculiar friend in the Monastery of St. Andrew, to act as his vicar in
the island.  Such vicarial jurisdiction, how­ever, was only conferred on
Maximian personally, as was specified at the time (*Lib*. II., *Ep*. 7),
and was not continued to his successor, though he also received the
*pallium*.  \[It may be here observed that this decoration, in the time
of Gregory, though usually conferred on Metropolitans, did not of
necessity imply metropolitan jurisdiction.  Cf. *Epp., Lib*. IX., *Note
to Ep*. 11.\]  At a later date we find Romanus the *Defensor*, who had
been made *Rector patrimonii* in Sicily, charged apparently with an
oversight of the churches similar to what had been entrusted to Peter
(*Lib*. IX., *Ep*. 18; *Lib*. XI, *Ep*. 37).  (2.)  We find him also,
through his commissioned subdeacons, at once careful to correct the
irregularities of monks in Campania, Sicily, Corsica, and other smaller
islands; such as their migrating from mon­astery to monastery, wandering
about exempt from rule, and even taking to themselves wives, or having
women resident in the same buildings with themselves (*Epp*. 41, 42, 50,
51, 52).  (3.)  Frequent directions are given for charitable donations
to such as needed them (e.g. *Epp*. 18, 24, 39); and his *apocrisiarius*
at Constantinople is charged to move the Emperors in behalf of the
natives of Sardinia, who were said to be oppressed illegally by the duke
of the island (*Ep*. 49).  (4.)  For the due election of bishops to
vacant Sees, and the visitation of Sees during vacancy, in the case of
Churches under his acknowledged jurisdiction, he gives careful orders,
as e.g. in the case of Ariminum (*Epp*. 57, 58), of Menavia in Umbria
(*Ep*. 81), and Saona in Corsica (*Ep*. 78).  The canonical rule, which
he was careful to observe, was to leave the people of the place (clergy,
nobles, and commonalty) free to elect their own bishop; but still
reserving to himself power to reject any unfit person.  Thus, in one
case, he rejects one Ocleatinus as a candidate for the See of Ariminum
(*Epp*. 57, 58), and in another, in consequence of delay on the part of
the electors, he departs from his usual practice by himself appointing a
bishop of Saona (*Ep*. 80).  Over remiss or criminal bishops, as soon as
he hears of their defaults—whereof, as of other things, he seems to have
been speedily informed by his agents—he loses no time in bringing his
authority to bear.  It was in this, his first year, that he began a long
continued correspondence with and with respect to Januarius, Bishop of
Cagliari in Sardinia, who appears to have been a frivolous old man of
very doubtful character (see *Ep*. 62, and *reff*.).  Also with and with
respect to Natalis, the convivial bishop of Salona in Western Illyricum,
with reference both to his own habits and to his quarrel with the
archdeacon Honoratus (see *Ep*. 19, and note with *reff*.).  (5.)  There
will be found also in this first book letters of sympathy and
friendship, such as he never ceased to write, some of which are to pious
ladies of rank, including one to Theoctista, the Emperor’s sister (*Ep*.
5), which is further interesting as containing a specimen of his usual
way of interpreting Holy Scripture allegorically.  Peculiarly charming
as illustrative of his warm and abiding friendship is his long continued
correspondence, begun in this year, with or with regard to Venantius,
who had relinquished monastic for married life (see *Ep*. 34, and *note*
with *reff*.).  (6.)  To be noted also in this Book, are his ineffectual
attempts, though apparently sup­ported by the Emperor, to bring the
Istrian bishops to submission in the matter of the” Three Chapters” (see
*Ep*. 16, and *notes*), and his invoking of the secular arm for
suppression of what remained of the Donatist schism in Africa (see *Ep*.
74, and *notes*).  (7.)  Lastly, we find, in *Ep*. 43 to Leander of
Seville, the first intimation of the important event of the conversion
to Catholicity of Reccared, the Visigothic King of Spain.

<span id="iii.iii-p29"></span>Most, if not all, of the subjects above
noted, or the like, recur frequently in subsequent years.  It may
suffice to have drawn attention to them here, noting only in connexion
with the following books any new subjects that appear of special
interest.

<span id="iii.iii-p30"></span> <span id="page_xixb">p. xixb</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xixb"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p30.1"></span>Book II.  Indiction X. (a.d. 591–2.)</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p31"></span>(1.)  We meet in this book with the first
allusion to the operations of the Lombards in Italy (*Ep*. 3); and hence
this may be a suitable place for giving a brief sketch of Gregory’s
dealings with regard to them in the light thrown on the subject by his
epistles.  The Lombard King, Agilulf (as has been said above, p. vii.),
had his headquarters at Ticinum (*Pavia*), the extensive dukedoms of
Beneventum and Spoletum in Southern Italy being in the possession of his
dukes.  Early in the year before us (the 10th Indiction), it appears
that Ariulf, duke of Spoletum, was believed to be marching either
towards Ravenna or Rome.  (See *Ep*. 3, which is dated in the
*Collection* of Paul the Deacon and in *Cod. Colbert*. “die V. Kalend.
Octob. Indict. 10,” i.e. 27 Sept., <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p31.1"></span>a.d.</span> 591.)  Later in the same Indiction
Gregory becomes aware of his approach, and addresses letters (*Epp*. 29,
30) to officers in command of the imperial forces with the purpose of
urging them to meet the impending danger.  Subsequently in the same year
it appears from a letter to the Bishop of Ravenna (*Ep*. 46) that Ariulf
was already besieging Rome.  Gregory in this letter gives a sad account
of the savagery of the besieger outside the walls, his own illness and
depression, and the difficulties he had to contend with.  He complains,
in this as in other letters, of the conduct of Romanus Patricius, the
Exarch at Ravenna, who would neither send aid nor sanction terms of
peace.  Further, troops had, he says, been withdrawn from Rome before
the siege, so as to leave it insufficiently defended; and the soldiers
of a legion that remained there, not receiving their pay, had refused to
man the walls.  In these straits Gregory appears at length to have come
to terms with Ariulf on his own responsibility; for doing which he was
afterwards blamed and reproached as having been duped by Ariulf.  (See
*Lib*. V., *Ep*. 40.)  The peace, however, was not of long duration. 
The Exarch (probably soon afterwards, though the date is not clear)
marched himself to Rome, and on his return seized certain
cities—Satrium, Polimartium, Horta, Tudertua, Ameria, Perusia, Luceoli,
and others—which had been ceded to the Lombards under treaty—perhaps
that which Gregory himself had made.  (Paul. Diac. *De gestis
Longobard*, IV. 8.  Cf. *Epp*., *Lib*. V., *Ep*. 40.)  Agilulf, the
Lombard King, incensed by this breach of faith, now came with an army
from Ticinum, recaptured Perusia, and again besieged Rome.  In a letter
addressed some time afterwards to the Emperor (*Lib*. V., *Ep*. 40),
Gregory gives a lamentable account of the misery that had ensued.  Since
the departure of Ariulf, he says, “troops had still further been
withdrawn from the city for the fruitless defence of Perusia, the supply
of corn had failed, while from the walls they saw Romans led away with
ropes round their necks like dogs to be sold in France.”  He, with the
præfect of the city, also called Gregory, and the military commander
Castorius, had done all they could under extreme difficulty to guard the
walls, for which he complains they afterwards got no thanks, but rather
blame for neglect of duty in letting the corn run short.  He himself,
when the besiegers arrived, had been delivering his well-known course of
homilies on Ezekiel, which he had been obliged to break off abruptly. 
The last ends thus:—“Let no one blame me if henceforth I cease my
speaking, since, as you all see, our tribulations have increased; we are
surrounded on all sides by swords; on all sides we are afraid for
imminent danger of death.  Some return to us with their hands cut off;
others are reported to us as taken captive or slain.  I am now forced to
withhold my tongue from exposition, for my soul is weary of life.”  How
long this siege lasted, or on what terms of agreement Agilulf at length
departed, we are not told.  Whatever arrangement was made, it was
evidently due to Gregory alone.  Paul the Deacon says only (*De gest.
Longob*., IV. 8), “that King Agilulf, matters being arranged, returned
to Ticinum;” and adds, “and not long after­wards, at the suggestion
especially of his wife Queen Theodelinda, as the blessed Gregory <span
id="page_xxb">p. xxb</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_xxb"></span>often
admonished her in his letters, he concluded a most firm peace with the
same most holy Pope Gregory, and with the Romans.”  But it is plain from
epistles written subsequently that it was not till some years later that
anything like a settled truce was concluded:  for it was not till the
second indiction, i.e. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p31.2"></span>a.d.</span> 598–9 (if the letters are rightly
arranged, as they appear to be, by the Benedictine editors), that we
find letters of thanks from Gregory to King Agilulf for peace at length
concluded, and to Theodelinda for her good offices (*Lib*. IX., *Epp*.
42, 43).  In the meantime, as appears from various letters, Gregory
continued to urge the Emperor or the Exarch to arrange terms of peace,
for which he asserts, though he was not believed, that Agilulf was
prepared.  He declares also that he could have himself made a separate
peace with him so as to secure himself and Rome; but that he had been
unwilling to do so, having the welfare of the whole republic at heart. 
He implies that the Exarch and his adherents were but serving their own
ends in opposing terms of peace, their own exactions and oppressions
during the continuance of hostilities being even more intolerable than
the ravages of the Lombards (see *Lib*. V., *Epp*. 40, 42).  In an
urgent letter to the Empress Constantina he complains also of the cruel
oppression of the natives of Sicily and Corsica under colour of raising
funds for the war, and begs her to plead with the Emperor, for his own
soul’s sake as well as for real advantage to the republic, against the
use of such iniquitous means (*Lib*. V., *Ep*. 41).  These letters (if
rightly placed) were written in the 13th Indiction (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p31.3"></span>a.d.</span> 394–5), and in
the next we find a letter to one Secundus at Ravenna, in which
negotiations with Agilulf with a view to peace are spoken of as still
going on, which this Secundus is urged to further (*Lib*. VI., Ep.
30<span id="iii.iii-p31.4"></span>).  But it was not, as has been
already said, till the 2nd Indiction (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p31.5"></span>a.d.</span> 598–9) that any definite terms
appear to have been agreed to (see *Lib*. IX., *Epp*. 4, 6, 42, 43,
98):  and then, it seems, only for a limited time (see *Lib* X., *Ep*.
37;—“indicantes cum Langobardorum rege *usque ad mensem Martiam futuræ
quartæ indictionis* de pace, propitiante Domino, convenisse”); and even
so, Gregory does not appear to have felt secure:  for in a letter
written at this time to Januarius, bishop of Cagliari in Sardinia,
alluding to the peace that had been made, he warns him to guard the
island well in view still of possible danger from the Lombards (*Lib*.
IX., *Ep*. 6.  Cf. also *Lib*. X., *Ep*. 37).  After the expiration of
this truce (which, as has been seen, was from some time in the 2nd
Indiction (588–9) to March in the 4th Indiction (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p31.6"></span>a.d.</span> 601), probably for two years),
hostilities having again broken out, a second truce was concluded in
September, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p31.7"></span>a.d.</span>
603, as appears from Paul the Deacon (*De gest. Longob*., IV. 29), until
April, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p31.8"></span>a.d.</span>
605:  and that Gregory had been instrumental in procuring it through the
influence of Queen Theodelinda on her husband, may be concluded from
what he says in the last letter he addressed to her, not long before his
death (*Lib*. XIV., *Ep*. 12).

<span id="iii.iii-p32"></span>We thus see how indefatigably active
Gregory was in the political sphere of things.  Lasting peace or
security for Italy at that trying time it was beyond the power of man to
bring about:  but whatever was done towards mitigation of distress, and
temporary cessation of hostilities, or approaches to better
understanding with the Lombard King, appears plainly to have been due to
Gregory.  Nor should we leave out of sight his provision for the
redemption of captives taken in war, whether out of ecclesiastical funds
or others entrusted to him for the purpose, or by the sale, which he
cordially sanctioned, of the sacred vessels of churches (IV. 17, 31;
VII. 13, 26, 28, 38; IX. 17, &c.).

<span id="iii.iii-p33"></span>(2.)  Attention may be directed to
epistles 22, 23 in this book in connexion with the spiritual
jurisdiction exercised by Rome over East as well as West Illyricum.

<span id="iii.iii-p34"></span>(3.)  We may observe also the important
import of epistle 41, with regard to the exemption of monasteries from
episcopal control by Gregory.  The constitutions, *De privelegiis
monasteriorum*, therein contained were afterwards promulged by a council
under him (called *Conciliæ Romanum III., sive Lateranense*) in April,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p34.1"></span>a.d.</span> 601, being
signed by 20 bishops, 14 presbyters, and 3 or 4 deacons.

<span id="iii.iii-p35"></span> <span id="page_xxib">p. xxib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xxib"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p35.1"></span>Book III.  Indiction XI. (a.d. 592–3).</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p36"></span>The following notable incidents are
referred to in this Book :­

<span id="iii.iii-p37"></span>(1.)  Two instances of the authority
exercised (as above said) over the Illyrian Churches being, for a time
at least, resisted or disregarded, and of the support of the Emperor
being sought, and more or less obtained, in such resistance or
disregard.  The first instance was in the case of Adrian, bishop of
Thebæ Phthioticæ in Eastern Illyricum, as to which see note to *Ep*. 6. 
The second and more serious one (which has been already alluded to) was
in the case of Maximus, elected and consecrated bishop of Salona in
Western Illyricum, in defiance of Gregory’s prohibition and
excommunication.  In this case the resistance was pertinacious and long
continued, and it was not till after seven years that the matter was
compromised and communion restored.  A summary of the proceedings, with
reference to all the epistles bearing on the case, will be found in a
note to *Ep*. 47.

<span id="iii.iii-p38"></span>(2.)  As illustrative of the relations
between Rome and Constantinople, the case of John of Chalcedon and
Athanasius of Isauria, whose appeal to the Roman See was enter­tained by
Gregory.  See note to *Lib*. III., *Ep*. 53.

<span id="iii.iii-p39"></span>(3.)  The beginning of remonstrances,
continued through two years, with the metro­politan bishops of Ravenna
with regard to their assumption of dignity above that of other
metropolitans, expressed especially by their use of the pallium on other
occasions than during Mass.  From the letters on this subject we may
detect, as has been said above, some jealousy at the seat of the Exarch
of the authoritative claims of the Roman See.  See *Lib*. III., *Ep*.
56, with note and *reff*.

<span id="iii.iii-p40"></span>(4.)  The conduct of Gregory, at once
outspoken and submissive to imperial edicts, with respect to the recent
prohibition by the Emperor of soldiers becoming monks.  See *Ep*. 65,
note and *reff*.  The incident illustrates well Gregory’s habitual
deference to the authority of the state, except in matters purely
spiritual.

<span id="iii.iii-p41"></span>(5.)  His requirement of Jews not being
allowed to obtain or keep possession of Christian slaves.  There are
other letters on this subject, viz. IV. 9, 21; VI. 32; VII. 24; IX. 36,
110.  Even slaves already in the lawful possession of Jews, on declaring
their desire to become Christians, were to be thenceforth free without
any compensation to their owners; only that pagans bought by Jews simply
with a view to sale might, on their declaring such desire, be sold by
such Jews within three months after their purchase of them; but only to
Christian masters.  It may be here observed that, though such provisions
seem hard upon Jewish owners, and though Jews were legally prohibited
from proselytising or building new synagogues, yet we find Gregory in
other respects very tender towards them, repeatedly forbidding their
being at all molested in the synagogues they had, or being in any way
persecuted into accepting baptism (I. 10, 35, 47; VIII. 25; IX. 6, 55;
XIII. 12).  Those on the estates of the Church might indeed be drawn
towards Christianity by the prospect of reduced rents (II. 32, V. 8),
but all compulsory conversion of them is denounced as wrong and
unavailing (e.g. I. 47).  On the other hand, with some apparent
inconsistency, pagan peasants on the estates might be compelled to
conform by intolerable exactions being laid upon them in case of their
refusal (IV. 26), and idolaters or diviners were to be reclaimed, if
freemen, by imprisonment, or, if slaves, by stripes and torments (IX.
65).

<span id="iii.iii-p42"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p42.1"></span>Book IV.  Indiction XII. (a.d. 593–4).</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p43"></span>In this book we may note:

<span id="iii.iii-p44"></span>(1)  The continued refusal of many at
least of the bishops in Liguria, as well as in Istria and Venetia, to
assent to the condemnation of the “Three Chapters” by the fifth Council,
and with them of Theodelinda, the Catholic Lombard queen.  See *Ep*. 2
and notes, with *Epp*. 3, 4, 38, 39.

<span id="iii.iii-p45"></span> <span id="page_xxiib">p. xxiib</span>
<span id="iii.iii-Page_xxiib"></span>(2.)  The case of Paul, a bishop in
Numidia, as indicating the continuance of dis­inclination to submit
fully to the Roman See in the African provinces.  See *Ep*. 34, with
note.  Cf. also *Ep*. 7, and IX. 58, 59.

<span id="iii.iii-p46"></span>(3.)  The directions given by Gregory,
and, as thereby shewn, the custom of the Church, with regard to the
anointing of the baptized (*Ep*. 9, and *Ep*. 26, with note); and also
his belief in the miraculous efficacy of the relics of saints, shewn in
many other Epistles, but especially in Ep. 30<span
id="iii.iii-p46.1"></span> of this book.

<span id="iii.iii-p47"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p47.1"></span>Book V.  Indiction XIII. (a.d. 594–5).</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p48"></span>(1.)  This year is memorable for the
commencement of Gregory’s earnest protest, continued through his
subsequent life, against the title of Œcumenical, or Universal, Bishop
(or Patriarch) assumed by the Patriarch of Constantinople.  The title
itself was not a new one.  It appears to have been occasionally given
during the fifth century as a title of honour to patriarchs generally,
the first known instance being when Olympius Episc. Evazensis gave it to
Dioscorus at Concil. [Ephes. ii.](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#000)<span
id="iii.iii-p48.1"></span> (*Giesler’s Eccles. Hist*. 2nd Period, 1st
Division, Ch. iii., § 93, note 20; with *ref*. to Mansi, vi. 855). 
Justinian also had styled the patriarch of Constantinople “Œcumenical
Patriarch” (Cod. i. 1, 7; Novell. iii., v., vi., vii., xvi., xiii.). 
The first known protest against it from Rome was on its assumption,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p48.2"></span>a.d.</span> 587 <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) , by John Jejunator at a synod at
Constantinople, when Gregory’s predecessor, Pelagius II., had disallowed
the acts of the synod in consequence, and had withdrawn his
apocrisiarius from communion with the patriarch (*Epp*. V. 18, 43; IX.
68).  Gregory himself also had, as appears from the epistles above
referred to, remonstrated through his representatives at Constantinople
with the patriarch on the subject, and had received a letter from the
emperor desiring him to let the matter rest (V. 19).  But he was now
provoked to resolute action by having received a communication from the
patriarch in reference to the case of John the Presbyter, wherein the
title of “Œcumenical Patriarch” was repeatedly assumed (*ib*.).  The
peculiar warmth of feeling and strength of language that mark his
lengthened correspondence on the subject, are accounted for not only by
the old jealousy felt at Rome (which has been noticed above) of any
claim of Constantinople, in mere virtue of being the imperial city, to
the prerogatives of an ancient Apostolic See, but also by the title
being viewed as not being one of honour only, but as meaning really
assumption of spiritual authority over the Church at large.  Such
assumption could only rest on the fact of Constantinople having come to
be the imperial city:  it had neither a shew of divine right, nor
Apostolic tradition, nor canonical authority to go on.  Rome, though for
himself also Gregory earnestly disclaimed the title of Universal Bishop,
was at any rate an. ancient apostolic See, and viewed at that time
generally as representing the authority of the Prince of the Apostles,
to whom Christ himself had given the keys.  But no such ancient prestige
or apostolical commission could possibly be claimed for Constantinople: 
its ascendency over the whole Church would simply mean imperialism, and
imperial domination over the whole Church would in fact have been likely
to be its practical result:  and thus, in his determined protest,
Gregory might well feel himself to be contending for heavenly as against
earthly jurisdiction, for Christ as against the world, for God as
against Cæsar.

<span id="iii.iii-p50"></span>The following is a summary of the
correspondence that ensued in this and following years:—­

<span id="iii.iii-p51"></span>In this year Gregory despatched five
letters to Sabinianus, his apocrisiarius at Constantinople:—1.  <span
id="page_xxiiib">p. xxiiib</span> <span id="iii.iii-Page_xxiiib"></span>
A long one to be delivered to John Jejunator, the Patriarch (*Ep*. 18),
dated Kal. Jan. Indict. 13 (i.e. Jan., <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p51.1"></span>a.d.</span> 595), containing earnest
remonstrances against pride in general, and against this display of it
in particular, and expressing the hope that stronger measures may not be
needed.  2.  A private one to Sabinianus (*Ep*. 19), in a bitter tone
against the patriarch, attributing the mildness of the letter now
addressed to the latter to the Emperor’s orders, but promising another
by and by, such as would not be relished.  3.  A long one to the Emperor
Maurice (*Ep*. 20), earnestly desiring him to disallow the title, and,
if necessary, coerce the patriarch to compliance.  While acknowledging
the Emperor’s pious desire to promote peace among the Bishops, he
contends that the only means to this end was to quell the assumption of
the patriarch, the inconsistency of which with his ascetic habits, and
his affectation of humility, are pointed out ironically.  4.  Another to
the Empress Con­stantina (*Ep*. 21), whose good disposition towards the
Roman See he had heard of from Sabinianus.  His object is to enlist her
influence with the Emperor and his sons in the matter; and it is
observable how, in addressing her, he speaks in a way he does not
venture on to the Emperor, of the peril to her own soul if St. Peter
should be dishonoured, to whom the power of binding and loosing had been
given.  5.  A long one to be transmitted through Sabinianus to the
patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch (*Ep*. 43), with the purpose of
in­ducing them to join him in his protest.  He represents the offensive
title as an infringement on the rights and dignity of all patriarchs,
not claiming in this letter any peculiar authority for the Roman
patriarchate above the rest.  He bids them not be afraid of the Emperor
in the event, which he hopes will not ensue, of his continuing to
support the Constantinopolitan patriarch, but to be ready to face all
consequences.

<span id="iii.iii-p52"></span>In the following year (*Lib*. VI.,
*Indict*. XIV., i.e. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p52.1"></span>a.d</span>. 595–6) we find an epistle, dated
August (i.e. August, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p52.2"></span>a.d.</span> 596), to Eulogius, the patriarch
of Alexandria only (*Ep*. 60), expressing surprise that the latter, in a
letter received from him had not even alluded to the subject of the
former epistle which had been addressed to the two patriarchs.  It seems
as if Eulogius had either been afraid to provoke the emperor’s
displeasure, or had attached less importance to the title than did
Gregory himself, and so had maintained a discreet silence.  In this
epistle Gregory expresses the view, which has been alluded to above, of
the sees of Rome and Alexandria being both in a sense St. Peter’s, in
virtue of the latter having been founded by St. Mark, whom St. Peter had
sent.  He had previously, in a letter to Anastasius of Antioch (V. 39),
intimated a similar view of the See of Antioch being also in a certain
sense St. Peter’s; and in a subsequent letter to Eulogius (VII. 40) he
sets forth more distinctly and at length his noteworthy position of all
the three patriarchal Sees of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, having
together the prerogatives of St. Peter’s See.

<span id="iii.iii-p53"></span>In the following year (*Indict*. XV.,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p53.1"></span>a.d.</span> 596–7) John
Jejunator died, and was succeeded by Cyriacus, to whom Gregory wrote on
receiving his synodical letter, addressing him in a friendly tone (*Ep*.
4), but urging in the course of his letter the rejection of the
offensive title.  He wrote again (*Ep*. 31) especially on the subject,
still courteously, but pressing the matter strongly.  To the emperor we
find two letters; the first (*Ep*. 6) approving of the appointment of
Cyriacus, but without any allusion to the burning question; the second
(*Ep*. 33), after receiving one from the emperor, in which the desire
had been expressed that the emissaries of the new patriarch should be
honourably received at Rome.  To this request Gregory replies that he
has so received them, and admitted them to communion with him, hoping
for the best; but that his own representatives at Constantinople would
by no means be allowed to communicate with Cyriacus, unless the title
were renounced.  The emperor had said that the matter was a frivolous
one.  “Yes (says Gregory) the title is indeed frivolous, but its meaning
and its consequences are serious;” and he repeals his continual
assertion that whosoever assumes it is the precursor of Antichrist.  In
this year also he continued his <span id="page_xxivb">p. xxivb</span>
<span id="iii.iii-Page_xxivb"></span>efforts to induce the patriarchs
Anastasius and Eulogius to join him in his protest.  Anastasius, it
seems, had not, like Eulogius, ignored the subject in his reply to the
letter that had been addressed to both, but had said that in his opinion
the matter was of little moment and not worth making a disturbance
about; at the same time addressing Gregory in flattering terms. 
Gregory, in his reply (*Ep*. 27), which is somewhat ironical, insists
again.  To Eulogius also he writes again (*Ep*. 40), deprecating the too
deferential manner in which he had been addressed by this patriarch, and
setting forth his view of the oneness of the three sees.  The offensive
title itself is not in this letter specifically referred to.  There is
also a second letter to the two patriarchs jointly, explaining what had
been done so far since the accession of Cyriacus, and reiterating his
protest against allowance of the title.  In the succeeding year (*Lib*.
VIII., *Indict*. I., <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p53.2"></span>a.d.</span> 597–8) there is again a letter
(*Ep*. 30) to Eulogius, who appears to have written a third time to
Gregory, at length alluding to the title so far as to say that he did
not now use proud titles in addressing certain persons, but still
apparently not prepared to take any action.  As if to make up for such
inaction, he had seemingly been profuse in his compliments to Gregory,
using the expression, “as thou hast commanded,” and calling him
“Universal Pope.”  Such language Gregory, in reply, earnestly protests
against, disclaiming for himself, as much as for any other bishop, the
name of Universal.  In the following year (*Lib*. IX., *Indict*. II.,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p53.3"></span>a.d.</span> 598–9) we
find two letters; one of which is an encyclical one (*Ep*. 68), to
Eusebius of Thessalonica and other Eastern bishops, in view of a synod
about to be held at Constantinople, warning them against being cajoled
there into assenting to the title, and threatening them with
excommunication in case of their complying.  From the second letter
assigned to this year, which is again to Eulogius (*Ep*. 78), it would
seem that the synod at Constantinople had been held, and that Eulogius
himself had been there, though what had been done does not appear.  The
letter is in reply to one which had been received with reference to a
different subject from Eulogius; and Gregory complains that the latter
had still said nothing about the most important subject of all, namely
the title.  He supposes Eulogius to be waiting till he himself shall
take decided action; and he accounts for his own apparent delay by
saying that he had been unwilling to be himself the immediate author of
schism.  It seems as if he had felt at a loss what to do.  His
remonstrances with Cyriacus and the emperor had been entirely
unavailing; he had failed to move the two great Eastern patriarchs, or
the bishops of the East generally, to take up the question; and he
shrank from so serious a step as breaking off communion with the whole
Eastern Church.  And so matters appear to have rested.  We find no
further epistle on the subject till four years later (*Lib*. XIII,
*Indict*. VI., <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p53.4"></span>a.d.</span> 602–3), when in a short letter
(*Ep*. 40) to Cyriacus, with whom he appears to be still in communion,
he urges him once more to give up the title.  There are in the same year
two letters, and one in the previous one (XII. 50), as well as two (X.,
35, 39) in the third indiction, to Eulogius, in which the subject is not
alluded to.

<span id="iii.iii-p54"></span>(2)  We observe in this year the sending
of the pallium to Virgilius, bishop of Arles in Gaul, and with it his
delegation (*Epp*. 53, 54, 55) as the Pope’s Vicar in the Kingdom of
Childebert.  As has been said above (see p. xii.), the spiritual
authority of Rome over the Gallican Churches was not disputed; and
Gregory exercised it vigilantly by means of letters to bishops, and to
royal personages, labouring among other things to move them to put down
simony, clerical immorality, and other prevalent abuses, and to assemble
synods under authority from Rome for the correction of crying evils. 
But, though we find no resistance to his spiritual authority, neither do
we find any evidence of his appeals to the consciences of the potentates
of Gaul having had much practical effect in the directions indicated. 
Doubtless in a difficult field of action he did what he could; nor need
we doubt that the <span id="page_xxvb">p. xxvb</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xxvb"></span>authoritative voice from Rome was at any
rate some check on violence and disorder, though the results may not be
very apparent in history.

<span id="iii.iii-p55"></span>The main divisions of Gaul at this time
were Austrasia on the Eastern side, including part of what is now
Germany, Burgundy to the West and South, and the smaller Neustria on the
North-west.  The limits as well as the possession of these territories
were continually changing during the contests between the descendants of
Clovis, some or other of whom ruled the whole of Gaul; all now
professing Catholic Christianity.  In the Indiction now before us
(*Indict*. XIII., <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p55.1"></span>a.d.</span> 594–5), as is pointed out in a
note to *Ep*. 53, Childebert II., then aged about 25, ruled by far the
greatest part of Gaul; and hence the jurisdiction intended to be
conferred on Virgilius, when the pallium was sent him, may be taken as
equally extensive.  We find no instance of spiritual authority so
claimed being disputed in Gaul.

<span id="iii.iii-p56"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p56.1"></span>Book VI.  Indiction XIV. (a.d. 595–6).</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p57"></span>(1)  This year is memorable for the
mission of Augustine to England, the progress of which, as indicated by
the epistles, may be summarized as follows.  The missionaries having
left Rome, probably in the early spring of the year 596, and proceeded
as far as the South coast of France, and having there turned
faint-hearted, Augustine himself returned to Rome for leave to
relinquish the enter­prize.  Gregory sent him back to his companions
with the letter, addressed to them, numbered *Ep*. 51 in this sixth
book.  It is dated X. Kal. Aug. Indict. 14, *i.e.* 23 July, <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p57.1"></span>a.d.</span> 596.  For a view
of the circumstances see note to vi. 51.  He was now charged (as he does
not appear to have been when first sent forth) with various letters of
commendation, intended to speed him on his journey:  viz. to the bishops
of Marseilles, of *Turni* (al. *Turon:—Tours*?), of Arles, Vienne and
Autun, to Arigius, designated as Patrician of Gaul, to Theodebert and
Theoderic, the two boy-kings of Austrasia and of Burgundy, and to their
powerful grandmother Brunehild, who at this time ruled Austrasia as the
guardian of Theodebert.  The course of the missionaries, after leaving
Marseilles, would naturally be up the valley of the Rhone, and so
northward as far as Autun, most at least of the letters above named
being such as might be delivered on the way.  Thence to their place of
embarcation for the Isle of Thanet we find no intimation of their route,
except that, in passing through Neustria, they were well received and
aided by Clotaire II. (nephew of Charibert, the deceased father of
Bertha), who at that time ruled the country, having his capital at
Soissons.  This appears, though there is no extant letter of
commendation on this occasion to Clotaire, from a subsequent letter to
him (XI. 61).

<span id="iii.iii-p58"></span>The landing of the missionaries on the
Isle of Thanet was, according to Bede, in the following year, <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p58.1"></span>a.d.</span> 597 (*H. E*., I.
25, V. 24).  It must have been early in the year, so as to allow time
for the events, to be next noticed, which took place before its close. 
The next allusion to the mission found in the Epistles is Gregory’s
exulting announcement to Eulogius, bishop of Alexandria, of its
remarkable success, and of the baptism of more than ten thousand Angli
as early as the Christmas of the same year, 597 (VIII. 30).  The date is
definitely given in the letter to Eulogius;—“in the solemnity of the
Lord’s Nativity which was kept *in this first indiction*”—The first
indiction being from September, 597, to September, 598.  In the
meantime, as appears from the same letter, Augustine had already been
consecrated bishop.  The letter says vaguely “a Germanis Episcopis”: 
but, according to John the Deacon (*Vit. S. Greg*. II. 36), and Bede
(*H. E*., I. 27), it was to Virgilius, bishop of Arles, that Augustine
had gone, as directed by Gregory, for consecration.

<span id="iii.iii-p59"></span>The next batch of Epistles throwing light
on the progress of the mission (after two others, IX. 11 and 108,
wherein Queen Brunehild and Syagrius Bishop of Autun are thanked for
their attention to the missionaries on their progress) is in Book XI,
and thus assigned <span id="page_xxvib">p. xxvib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xxvib"></span>to Indiction 4, i.e. A. D. 600–1, some
three years after the aforesaid letter to Eulogius.  It comprises
fourteen Epistles, some of which bear their own dates, and others are
shewn by their contents to have been written at the same time.  It is
true that the dates of the dated epistles vary in different <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii-p59.1"></span>mss</span>. with regard to
the time of year; but all the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p59.2"></span>mss</span>. agree in giving the same
Indiction, viz. the fourth.  The occasion of writing was when Augustine,
according to Bede and John the Deacon, had sent the presbyter Laurentius
and the monk Peter to Rome, to seek instructions on certain points, and
to ask for more missionaries:  whereupon, we are told, Gregory sent back
the messengers accompanied by Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, Rufinianus,
and others, with replies to Augustine’s questions, instructions for the
constitution of the Church in Britain, the pallium for himself, and
books, utensils and relics for the Churches (*Joann. Diac. in Vit. S.
Greg*., II. 36, 37; *Bede, H. E*., I. 27, 29).  We might have supposed
from the narratives of John the Deacon and Bede that Augustine had sent
Lawrence and Peter to Rome on his return to Britain after his own
consecration by the bishop of Arles, and that the new band of
missionaries had been sent out without delay.  But the dates of the
epistles shew, as has been seen above, that several years had
intervened, at any rate, between Augustine’s return and the sending out
of the new missionaries.  And indeed Bede himself intimates this in his
recapitulation of events (*H. E*., V. 24), though not in his narrative. 
For, having given <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p59.3"></span>a.d.</span> 597 as the date of Augustine’s
first arrival in Britain, he gives <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p59.4"></span>a.d.</span> 601 as that of the sending of the
pallium with “more ministers, among whom was Paulinus.”

<span id="iii.iii-p60"></span>The letters which these new missionaries
carried with them were to the bishops Virgilius of Arles (*Ep*. 55),
Desiderius of Vienne (*Ep*. 54), Aetherius of Lyons (*Ep*. 56), Arigius
of Vapincum (*Ep*. 57), with a circular to various bishops of Gaul
(*Ep*. 58); also to Queen Brunehild (*Ep*. 62), to kings Theodebert,
Theoderic, and Clotaire (*Epp*. 59, 60, 61):  to Augustine himself
(*Ep*. 65), together with a long reply (*Ep*. 64) to his questions <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258) , to Ethelbert king of Kent (*Ep*.
66), and probably at the same time to Bertha his queen (*Ep*. 29) <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) .

<span id="iii.iii-p63"></span>One more letter relating to the mission in
Book XI. remains to be noticed; viz., *Ep*. 76, to Mellitus, which was
sent after the rest, being intended to overtake the new band of
mis­sionaries on their journey through Gaul.  Its main purpose seems to
have been to modify what had been said in the letter to Ethelbert as to
the destruction of heathen temples.  See Note to *Ep*. 76.  This is the
last extant epistle referring to the English mission.

<span id="iii.iii-p64"></span>(2)  To be noted also in this book is the
first of the ten epistles addressed to the notorious queen Brunehild in
Gaul (VI. 5).  On her alleged character, and Gregory’s mode of
addressing her, see note to the epistle.

<span id="iii.iii-p65"></span> <span id="page_xxviib">p. xxviib</span>
<span id="iii.iii-Page_xxviib"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p65.1"></span>Book VII.  Indiction XV. (a.d. 596–7), and
Book VIII.  Indiction I. (a.d. 597–8).</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p66"></span>Though no historical events of importance
come for the first time before our notice in these books, attention may
be drawn (1) to Gregory’s policy of protecting monasteries from
episcopal domination (VII. 12, 43; VIII. 15); (2) his sanction of the
sale of church plate for charitable purposes (VII. 13, 38); (3)
Specimens of his letters of spiritual counsel, especially to pious
ladies of rank (VII. 25, 26, 30; VIII. 22).

<span id="iii.iii-p67"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p67.1"></span>Book IX.  Indiction II. (a.d. 598–9)</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p68"></span>Noticeable in this book are, (1) Gregory’s
renewed efforts, on Romanus Patricius being succeeded by Callinicus in
the exarchate, to reclaim the Istrian bishops to communion with Rome
(*Ep*. 9, 10, 93, &c.); (2) his interesting letter with reference to the
ancient liturgical usages of the Roman Church (*Ep*. 12); (3) the
correspondence between him and the Visigothic king Reccared in Spain,
assigned to this year (*Epp*. 61, 121, 122); (4) his continued efforts
to bring about the assembling of synods and correction of prevalent
abuses in the Church of Gaul (*Ep*. 106, &c.); (5) the remarkable letter
to him of the Irish saint Columbanus, illustrating the differences with
regard to the computation of Easter between the Roman and Celtic
Churches, and the attitude of the latter towards the Roman See (*Ep*.
127).

<span id="iii.iii-p69"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p69.1"></span>Book XI.  Indiction IV. (a.d. 600–1).</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p70"></span>Noticeable in this book are­—

<span id="iii.iii-p71"></span>(1)  The letter to Serenus, bishop of
Marseilles, with regard to the use and abuse of pictures in Churches
(*Ep*. 13).

<span id="iii.iii-p72"></span>(2)  Two long letters to ladies of rank at
Constantinople (*Epp*. 44, 45), the first of which is interesting, as in
other ways, so for the account contained in it of supposed miracles at
the monastery of St. Andrew in Rome, shewing, as many other epistles do,
Gregory’s firm belief in miraculous interventions; while the second is
remarkable, not only for its spiritual counsels, but also for its
expression of Gregory’s views on the unlawfulness of married persons
entering monasteries without mutual consent; on the efficacy of baptism;
and on various points of doctrine.

<span id="iii.iii-p73"></span>(3)  The letter to the bishops of Iberia,
setting forth the various ways of reconciling various kinds of heretics
to the Church, and containing a specimen of Gregory’s controversial
skill in his refutation of Nestorianism (*Ep*. 67).

<span id="iii.iii-p74"></span>(4)  Evidence of Gregory’s unremitted
efforts to correct the immorality prevalent among the clergy in Gaul,
shewn in his letter to queen Brunehild on the subject (*Ep*. 69).

<span id="iii.iii-p75"></span>(5)  The letters relating to the English
mission, notice of which has been forestalled under Book VI.

<span id="iii.iii-p76"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p76.1"></span>Book XIII.  Indiction V.  (a.d. 602–3).</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p77"></span>In this Book we may note­—

<span id="iii.iii-p78"></span>(1)  Continued correspondence about the
Church in Gaul, with references to a church, monastery, and hospital,
founded by queen Brunehild at Autun, and to the synod for correction of
abuses, long desired by Gregory, for the holding of which she had now
requested a fit person to be sent from Rome (*Epp*. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10).

<span id="iii.iii-p79"></span>(2)  The important event of the accession
of Phocas to the empire (November, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p79.1"></span>a.d.</span> 602), with the letters of Gregory
on the occasion to him and to his wife Leontia (*Epp*. 31, 38, 39).

<span id="iii.iii-p80"></span>The tone of high compliment—nay, of
adulation—which marks these letters has been justly regarded as a blot,
much to be regretted, on the lustre of Gregory’s character.  There <span
id="page_xxviiib">p. xxviiib</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xxviiib"></span>is indeed no reason to conclude that he
knew so far of the peculiar blackness of the usurper’s character, as
depicted by contemporary historians, and evinced by his disastrous and
san­guinary reign.  And, seeing that it appears from Epistle 38 that he
had had no apocrisiarius resident at Constantinople towards the end of
the reign of Mauricius, it may be that he had not been fully informed of
the cruelties that accompanied the accession of Phocas to the imperial
throne;—how, for instance, five sons of the former emperor had been
murdered in succession before their father’s eyes, and then the emperor
himself, their bodies being thrown into the Tiber, and their heads
exposed in Constantinople till putrefaction began.  But, however this
might be, Gregory’s high-flown compliments addressed to the new
potentates, and his excessive exultation on their accession, cannot but
strike one as unseemly as well as premature.  Nor is it pleasant to
observe his exultant way of speaking of the fall of the late emperor,
whose sad fate called for so much sympathy, and to whom he had himself
once written in such terms as these:— “Since a sincere rectitude of
faith shines in you, most Christian of princes, like a light sent from
heaven, and since it is known to all that your Serenity embraces with
all your heart the pure profession which wins the favour of God” (VI.
16).  Again, “Amidst the cares of warfare, and innumerable anxieties
which you sustain in your unwearied zeal for the government of the
Christian republic, it is a great cause of joy to me, along with the
whole world, that your Piety ever keeps guard over the faith whereby the
empire of our lords is resplendent” (VI. 65).  Again, about him, only
some two years before his death, in a letter to the patriarch of
Jerusalem, “Thanks should be given without cease to Almighty God, and
prayer ever made for the life of our most pious and Christian lord the
Emperor, and for his most tranquil spouse, and his most gentle
offspring, in whose times the mouths of heretics are silent, &c.” (XI.
46).  Doubtless Maurice’s inefficiency with regard to the Lombards had
been exceedingly provoking, and perhaps still more so to Gregory
himself, his support of the Patriarch of Constantinople in his
assumption of the offensive title.  And perhaps the gout from which
Gregory appears to have been suffering intensely at the time may partly
account for his having given vent as he did to feelings of irritation
long suppressed.  Then, with regard to his adulation of the new
potentates, some excuse may be found in prevalent usage, or his own
habitual deference to the powers that be, or his policy (apparent also
in his letters to Brunehild) of enlisting their support by flattering
addresses to the cause of religion and the Church.  But still a painful
impression remains; though, on the other hand, it may be observed with
truth that few great historical characters of whom so much is known are
stained by so few disfiguring blots as that of Gregory.  It may be
presumed that a prominent motive of his paying court to the rising suns
was his hope of getting their support against the patriarch.  He does
not indeed refer distinctly to the title; but in his letter to Leontia
(whom, rather than the emperor, with characteristic address, he warns
about her spiritual prospects being dependent on the favour of St.
Peter) we can hardly mistake the covert allusion.  If so, his policy was
not fruitless.  For, though there is no sufficient foundation for the
statement of Baronius, that Phocas formally conferred on pope Boniface
III. the title of “Universal Bishop” which had been assumed by the
patriarch, there seems to be no good reason for doubting that the new
emperor took the pope’s part against Cyriacus, who had offended him by
his protection of Constantina and her daughters, and that, when
Boniface, who had been Gregory’s apocrisiarius at Constantinople,
himself became pope, an imperial edict of some kind was issued in favour
of the claims of Rome.  The words of Anastasius, the biographer of the
popes towards the end of the ninth century, with reference to it are
these:  “He (i.e. Boniface) obtained from the emperor Phocas that the
Apostolic See of St. Peter, that is, the Roman Church, should be the
head of all Churches, because the Church of Constantinople wrote itself
the first of all Churches.”  The authority, however, of Anastasius, who
lived in a time of hierarchical forgeries, cannot be relied on without
reserve.

<span id="iii.iii-p81"></span> <span id="page_xxixb">p. xxixb</span>
<span id="iii.iii-Page_xxixb"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p81.1"></span>Book XIV.  Indiction VII.  (a.d.
603–4.)</span>

<span id="iii.iii-p82"></span>In the course of this indiction (on the
12th of March, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p82.1"></span>a.d.</span> 604) Gregory died.  The seventeen
Epistles assigned to this last half-year of his life (one of which is
dated December) shew no abatement of his care for all the Churches, or
his activity in correspondence, notwithstanding his excessive affliction
from gout, leaving him sometimes hardly able to speak, which he alludes
to in his letter to Theodelinda, the Lombard queen (*Ep*. 12).  This
letter was probably written shortly before his death, since he speaks in
it of the queen’s messengers having left him between life and death,
though he still contemplates the possibility of recovery.  It is a
peculiarly interesting one, not only for this reason, but also as being
his last to her.  He congratulates her in it on the recent baptism of
her infant son Adulouvald in the catholic faith, sends for him a cross
containing, as he alleges, wood from the true one, and also jewelled
rings for his sister; he bids her thank her husband for peace concluded,
and influence him, as she had ever done, to continue it; and he promises
her an answer, in case of his recovery, to certain arguments against the
condemnation of the Three Chapters by the fifth council, which she had
sent for his consideration.  It thus appears that to the end of his life
he had failed to convince the Lombard queen on this subject,
notwithstanding his in­fluence over her, and the cordial relations ever
subsisting between them.

<span id="iii.iii-p83"></span>The view opened to us through this long
series of letters into the mind and character of the great Gregory is of
peculiar interest.  The man himself stands out before us therein
self-disclosed; his very faults and frailties, which a panegyrist would
have veiled, giving life and reality to the picture.  We may observe in
the first place how conspicuous throughout is his un­hesitating faith. 
No cloud of doubt seems to have cast its shadow on his certainty of the
truth of Holy Writ and Christianity, and of the divine authority of the
Catholic Church, speaking through Fathers and Councils as its
exponents.  Nor were either his temperament or his training such as to
expose him to philosophic questionings.  No less clear is the sincerity
of his life as inspired and guided by his religious faith.  Whatever
inferior human motives may appear sometimes, there can be no doubt that
his paramount aim was to devote himself to God’s service.  As was to be
expected from the religious ideas of his age, his theory of the
Christian life was ascetic in the extreme.  Continual compunction, fear
of judgment, fastings, tears, almsgiving, and heavenly contemplation,
formed his ideal of holiness.  Even lawful marriage he seems to
tolerate, as a Zoar of escape from temptation, rather than to approve: 
and for a man to enjoy life as most people aim at doing—to sit, as it
were, under his vine and under his fig-tree—appeared to him at any rate
fraught with danger.  Hence the more of both sexes that were able, and
could be induced, to leave the active duties of life for monastic
seclusion, the better he regarded it for them and for the world in whose
behalf they might thus have leisure to pray.  Still, on the other hand,
such ascetic views were not found incompatible in his case with tender
regard for others in their earthly joys and sorrows, and interest in
their family life, as expressed in many kind and sympathetic letters to
friends; and he was ever ready to meet their temporal as well as
spiritual needs.  His charitable donations in all directions were
bounded only by his means; all oppression of the poor had in him a
resolute opponent; nor can we but be struck by his keen sense of justice
and regard for it in all his dealings.  His gentle breeding, aided by
Christian culture, induced a tone of courtesy, with delicate
consideration for the feelings of others, in his letters generally; and
he usually softens even rebuke with gentleness.  Partly, it may be, to
this habit may be traced the tone of flattery, which has been remarked
on elsewhere, in his letters to potentates, or to others whom it was his
purpose to conciliate; which was such indeed in some cases as to lay him
open to a charge of insincerity.  On the other hand, however, it is to
be remembered <span id="page_xxxb">p. xxxb</span> <span
id="iii.iii-Page_xxxb"></span>that, when strongly moved, he could write
with very outspoken boldness, not without a vein of cutting irony, even
to the Emperor.  Witness his two letters (V. 40; VII. 33) to Mauri­cius
on the two subjects that appear above all others to have distressed and
irritated him.  In such letters—and especially in some to various
correspondents about the title of “Universal Bishop”—there are symptoms,
no doubt, of much personal irritation, intensified perhaps by gout,
under provoking circumstances.  But, if his politic flattery in some
cases, and his irritability in others, are to some minds disappointing
in a saint, they are interesting to a student of human nature:  and it
is greatly to his credit that they nowhere indicate any merely selfish
aims, but rather zeal—however alloyed by policy or by bitterness—for
what he honestly believed to be the cause of God.

<span id="iii.iii-p84"></span>As a divine he merits his title of a
Doctor of the Church.  He was, indeed, neither original nor deeply
learned; as a mystical interpreter of Scripture he was fanciful, and
often, from our point of view, absurd; owing to his visionary turn and
his uncritical credulity he may have fostered, and perhaps originated,
some fond fables and superstitions, such as in­fected the general belief
of Christians in the middle ages:  but he grasped and set forth clearly
the orthodox doctrines of the Church; in treating difficult theological
questions he displays from time to time no small power of thought and
argument; as a preacher of essential Christian morality he was ever
sound and true; nor has anyone more insisted on spiritual communion of
the individual soul with God, or more strongly maintained the principle
of justice, mercy and truth being of the essence of religion.

<span id="iii.iii-p85"></span>His diplomatic and practical talents, and
his unwearied industry, have been already spoken of, and need no further
notice in this brief final survey, the intention of which is to view him
rather in his character as a saint and a divine.

<span id="iii.iii-p86"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[ixb:1257](2120230.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span> “Prayer should ever be made for the life
of our most pious and Christian lord the Emperor, and his most tranquil
consort, &c., in whose times the mouths of heretics are silent, since,
though their hearts seethe with the madness of perverse opinion, they
presume not in the time of the catholic Emperor to utter the wrong
things they think” (*Lib*. IX., *Ep*. 49).

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[xxiib:1258](2120230.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="iii.iii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p49"></span> That this was the date may be inferred
from Gregory, in Epistle XLIII. of this fifth book, speaking of the
synod having been held eight years ago.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[xxvib:1259](2120230.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="iii.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p61"></span> Another letter to Augustine (*Ep*. 28),
though placed in Book XI. by the Benedictine editors, may have been
written in some previous year.  It is one of congratulation on reported
success, and of warning against elation.  It seems to refer to the same
news, received from Britain, that Gregory announced to Eulogius of
Alexandria in his letter to him, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii-p61.1"></span>a.d.</span> 598, and resembles that letter in
its exultant tone.  Containing in itself no intimation of its own date,
it seems more likely that it was written about the same time with the
letter to Eulogius than that Gregory should have let several years
elapse before finding an opportunity of congratulating Augustine on his
success.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[xxvib:1260](2120230.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="iii.iii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p62"></span> The only reason for doubting whether the
letter to Bertha was sent at the same time with that to Ethelbert, is
that in the former the queen is exhorted to move her husband to follow
her faith, whereas in the latter the king is addressed as already a
Christian.  The letter to Bertha is shewn by what is said in it to have
been written after the arrival in Rome of Laurence and Peter, and that
to Ethelbert, from its date, to have been sent by Mellitus and his
companions when they left Rome for Britain.  But there is nothing to
shew that the letter to Bertha might not have been sent previously.  It
may be that the news of the king’s conversion did not reach Rome till
after the arrival there of Lawrence and Peter, and that Gregory had
found an opportunity, before sending to Britain the new band of
missionaries, of despatching a letter to the queen, urging her to bring
it about.  There would be time enough for his doing so, since the
sending of Mellitus seems to have been delayed for a considerable time,
owing, it may be, to Gregory’s state of health at the time.  See Preface
to XI. 64.  On the other hand, the language used in the letter to Bertha
may possibly only mean that she ought to move her husband to greater
zeal in propagating the faith, already embraced by himself, among his
subjects.  The exact date of Ethelbert’s baptism is not known.  Bede
only says that he allowed the missionaries to preach freely before being
himself converted, and that, after his conversion, he compelled no one
to accept Christianity.  It may, then, be only his reported lukewarmness
in this regard that Gregory’s exhortation to Bertha refers to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Book of Pastoral Rule.](2120231)
