[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120528)  [Next](2120530) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p2"></span>*To Gennadius, Patrician* <span
id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p4"></span>Gregory to Gennadius, Patrician of
Africa.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p5"></span>We doubt not that your Excellency
remembers how two years ago we wrote in behalf of Paul our brother and
fellow-bishop, asking you to afford him the support of your Dignity in
his desire to come to us on account of the trouble he was said to be
undergoing from persecution on the part of the Donatists, to the end
that, since it had been reported to us that he could get no aid against
them there, we might, after ascertaining the truth, give him advice with
fraternal sympathy, and treat with him as to what should be done in the
way of a wholesome arrangement against the madness of pestiferous
presumption.  And, so far as our aforesaid brother gave us to
understand, he not only failed to get succour from any one, but was
prevented by various hindrances from being able to come with safety to
the Roman city.  Yet, when we had caused your epistle to be read to him,
he replied that he is not suffering from the ill-will of certain persons
because he repressed the Donatists, but rather says that he is in
disfavour with many for his defence of the Catholic faith; and he told
me many things besides, which, since this is not a fit time for
mentioning them, we have thought best to keep to ourselves.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p6"></span> <span id="page_208b">p. 208b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-Page_208b"></span>Since, then, the question
before us is not one of earthly affairs, but of the health of souls, and
your assertion and his are different, we have been unable to say
anything particularly in reply, not having investigated the truth,
seeing that, when we received the letters of your Excellency, we were
confined by bodily sickness.  But when Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p6.1"></span>God</span>, if it should please Him,
shall have restored us to our former health, we will sift the truth as
we can by diligent enquiry.  And according to what we may be able to
learn we will so settle the case through the mercy of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p6.2"></span>God</span> that not
only the health of souls in the cure whereof you deign to take an
interest, lost now by them that err, may be restored, but also that
which the maintainers of the true faith still possess may, through the
protecting grace of our Redeemer, be preserved.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p7"></span>But with regard to the above-named
bishop, whom you assert to be deprived of communion, we greatly wonder
how it is that a letter from your Excellency, and not from his primate,
has announced this to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[207b:1680](2120529.htm#fr_1679) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xliii-p3"></span> On the subject of this letter, see
IV. 34, 35.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXV](2120530)
