[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120251)  [Next](2120253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p2"></span>That the ruler should be, through
humility, a companion of good livers, but, through the zeal of
righteousness, rigid against the vices of evildoers.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p3"></span>The ruler should be, through
humility, a companion of good livers, and, through the zeal of
righteousness, rigid against the vices of evil-doers; so that in nothing
he prefer himself to the good, and yet, when the fault of the bad
requires it, he be at once conscious of the power of his priority; to
the end that, while among his subordinates who live well he waives his
rank and accounts them as his equals, he may not fear to execute the
laws of rectitude towards the perverse.  For, as I remember to have said
in my book on morals (*Lib.* xxi., *Moral, cap.* 10, *nunc. n.* 22), it
is clear that nature produced all men equal; but, through variation in
the order of their merits, guilt puts some below others.  But the very
diversity which has accrued from vice is ordered by divine judgment, so
that, since all men cannot stand on an equal footing, one should be
ruled by another.  Hence all who are over others ought to consider in
themselves not the authority of their rank, but the equality of their
condition and rejoice not to be over men, but to do them good.  For
indeed our ancient fathers are said to have been not kings of men, but
shepherds of flocks.  And, when the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>Lord</span> said to Noe and his children,
*Increase and multiply, and replenish the earth* ([Gen. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p3.2"></span>), He at once added, *And let the fear of
you and the dread of you be upon all the beasts of the earth.*  Thus it
appears that, whereas it is ordered that the fear and the dread should
be upon the beasts of the earth, it is forbidden that it should be upon
men.  For man is by nature preferred to the brute beasts, but not to
other men; and therefore it is said to him that he should be feared by
the beasts, but not by men; since to wish to be feared by one’s equal is
to be proud against nature.  And yet it is necessary that rulers should
be feared by their subjects, when they find that <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p3.3"></span>God</span> is not feared by them; so that
those who have no dread of divine judgments may at any rate, through
human dread, be afraid to sin.  For superiors by no means shew
themselves proud in seeking to inspire this fear, in which they seek not
their own glory, but the righteousness of their subordinates.  For in
exacting fear of themselves from such as live perversely, they lord it,
as it were, not over men, but over beasts, inasmuch as, so far as their
subordinates are bestial, they ought also to lie subdued to dread.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p4"></span>But commonly a ruler, from the very
fact of his being pre-eminent over others, is puffed up with elation of
thought; and, while all things serve his need, while his commands are
quickly executed after his desire, while all his subjects extol with
praises what he has done well, but have no authority to speak against
what he has done amiss, and while they commonly praise even what they
ought to have reproved, his mind, seduced by what is offered in
abundance from below, is lifted up above itself; and, while outwardly
surrounded by unbounded favour, he loses his inward sense of truth; and,
forgetful of himself, he scatters himself on the voices of other men,
and believes himself to be such as outwardly he hears himself called
rather than such as he ought inwardly to have judged himself to be.  He
looks down on those who are under him, nor does he acknowledge them as
in the order of nature his equals; and those whom he has surpassed in
the accident of power he believes himself to have transcended also in
the merits of his life; he esteems himself wiser than all whom he sees
himself to excel in power.  For indeed he establishes himself in his own
mind on a certain lofty eminence, and, though bound together in the same
condition of nature with others, he disdains to regard others from the
same level; and so he comes to be even like him of whom it is written,
*He beholdeth all high things:  he is a king over all the children of
pride* ([Job xli. 25](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>).  Nay, aspiring to a singular eminence,
and despising the social life of the angels, he says, *I will place my
seat in the north, and I will be like unto the Most High* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p4.2"></span>).  Wherefore through a marvellous
judgment he finds a pit of downfall within himself, while outwardly he
exalts himself on the summit of power.  For he is indeed made like unto
the apostate angel, when, being a <span id="page_15b">p. 15b</span>
<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi-Page_15b"></span>man, he disdains to be like
unto men.  Thus Saul, after merit of humility, became swollen with
pride, when in the height of power:  for his humility he was preferred,
for his pride rejected; as the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p4.3"></span>Lord</span> attests, Who says, *When thou
wast little in thine own sight, did I not make thee the head of the
tribes of Israel* ([1 Sam. xv. 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#017)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p4.4"></span>)?  He had before seen himself little in
his own eyes, but, when propped up by temporal power, he no longer saw
himself little.  For, preferring himself in comparison with others
because he had more power than all, he esteemed himself great above
all.  Yet in a wonderful way, when he was little with himself, he was
great with <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p4.5"></span>God</span>; but, when he appeared great
with himself, he was little with <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p4.6"></span>God</span>.  Thus commonly, while the
mind is inflated from an affluence of subordinates, it becomes corrupted
to a flux of pride, the very summit of power being pander to desire. 
And in truth he orders this power well who knows how both to maintain it
and to combat it.  He orders it well who knows how through it to tower
above delinquencies, and knows how with it to match himself with others
in equality.  For the human mind commonly is exalted even when supported
by no authority:  how much more does it lift itself on high when
authority lends itself to its support!  Nevertheless he dispenses this
authority aright, who knows how, with anxious care, both to take of it
what is helpful, and also to reject what tempts, and with it to perceive
himself to be on a par with others, and yet to put himself above those
that sin in his avenging zeal.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p5"></span>But we shall more fully understand
this distinction, if we look at the examples given by the first pastor. 
For Peter, who had received from <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>God</span> the principality of Holy
Church, from Cornelius, acting well and prostrating himself humbly
before him, refused to accept immoderate veneration, saying, *Stand up;
do it not; I myself also am a man* ([Acts x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p5.2"></span>).  But, when he discovers the guilt of
Ananias and Sapphira, he soon shews with how great power he had been
made eminent above all others.  For by his word he smote their life,
which he detected by the penetration of his spirit; and he recollected
himself as chief within the Church against sins, though he did not
acknowledge this, when honour was eagerly paid him, before his brethren
who acted well.  In one case holiness of conduct merited the communion
of equality; in the other avenging zeal brought out to view the just
claims of authority.  Paul, too, knew not himself as preferred above his
brethren who acted well, when he said, *Not for that we have dominion
over your faith, but are helpers of your joy* ([2 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p5.3"></span>).  And he straightway added, *For by
faith ye stand:*  as if to explain his declaration by saying, For this
cause we have not dominion over your faith, because by faith ye stand;
for we are your equals in that wherein we know you to stand.  He knew
not himself as preferred above his brethren, when he said, *We became
babes in the midst of you* ([1 Thess. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p5.4"></span>); and again, *But ourselves your
servants through Christ* ([2 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p5.5"></span>).  But, when he found a fault that
required to be corrected, straightway he recollected himself as a
master, saying, *What will ye?  Shall I come unto you with a rod* ([1
Cor. iv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p5.6"></span>)?

<span id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6"></span>Supreme rule, then, is ordered well,
when he who presides lords it over vices, rather than over his
brethren.  But, when superiors correct their delinquent subordinates, it
remains for them anxiously to take heed how far, while in right of their
authority they smite faults with due discipline, they still, through
custody of humility, acknowledge themselves to be on a par with the very
brethren who are corrected; although for the most part it is becoming
that in our silent thought we even prefer the brethren whom we correct
to ourselves.  For their vices are through us smitten with the vigour of
discipline; but in those which we ourselves commit we are lacerated by
not even a word of upbraiding.  Wherefore we are by so much the more
bounden before the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> as among men we sin
unpunished:  but our discipline renders our subordinates by so much the
freer from divine judgment, as it leaves not their faults without
retribution here.  Therefore, in the heart humility should be
maintained, and in action discipline.  And all the time there is need of
sagacious insight, lest, through excessive custody of the virtue of
humility, the just claims of government be relaxed, and lest, while any
superior lowers himself more than is fit, he be unable to restrain the
lives of his subordinates under the bond of discipline.  Let rulers,
then, maintain outwardly what they undertake for the benefit of others: 
let them retain inwardly what makes them fearful in their estimate of
themselves.  But still let even their subjects perceive, by certain
signs coming out becomingly, that in themselves they are humble; so as
both to see something to be afraid of in their authority, and to
acknowledge something to imitate with respect to humility.  Therefore
let those who preside study without intermission that in proportion as
their power is seen to be great externally it be kept down within
themselves internally; that it vanquish not their thought; that the
<span id="page_16b">p. 16b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-Page_16b"></span>heart be not carried away to delight
in it; lest the mind become unable to control that which in lust of
domination it submits itself to.  For, lest the heart of a ruler should
be betrayed into elation by delight in personal power, it is rightly
said by a certain wise man *They have made thee a leader:  lift not up
thyself, but be among them as one of them* ([Ecclesiasticus
32.1](../../../bib/apo/sir032.htm#001)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.2"></span>).  Hence also Peter says, *Not as being
lords over <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.3"></span>God’s</span> heritage, but being made
ensamples to the flock* ([1 Pet. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.4"></span>).  Hence the Truth in person, provoking
us to higher virtuous desert, says, *Ye know that the princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are greater exercise
authority upon them.  It shall not be so among you, but whosoever will
be greater among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will be
chief among you, let him be your servant; even as the San of Man came
not to be ministered to, but to minister* ([Matth. xx.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.5"></span>).  Hence also He indicates what
punishments are in store for the servant who has been elated by his
assumption of government, saying, *But and if that evil servant shall
say in his heart, My <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.6"></span>Lord</span> delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to smite his fellow-servants, and to eat and drink with the
drunken, the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.7"></span>Lord</span> of that servant shall come in
a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware
of, and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the
hypocrites* ([Matth. xxiv. 48](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.8"></span>, *seq.*).  For he is rightly numbered
among the hypocrites, who under pretence of discipline turns the
ministry of government to the purpose of domination.  And yet sometimes
there is more grievous delinquency, if among perverse persons equality
is kept up more than discipline.  For Eli, because, overcome by false
affection, he would not punish his delinquent sons, smote himself along
with his sons before the strict judge with a cruel doom ([1 Sam.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.9"></span>).  For on this account it is said to him
by the divine voice, *Thou hast honoured thy sons more than Me* ([1 Sam.
2.29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#029)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.10"></span>).  Hence, too, He upbraids the
shepherds through the prophet, saying, *That which was broken ye have
not bound up, and that which was cast away ye have not brought back*
([Ezek. xxxiv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.11"></span>).  For one who had been cast away is
brought back, when any one who has fallen into sin is recalled to a
state of righteousness by the vigour of pastoral solicitude.  For
ligature binds a fracture when discipline subdues a sin, lest the wound
should bleed mortally for want of being compressed by the severity of
constraint.  But often a fracture is made worse, when it is bound
together unwarily, so that the cut is more severely felt from being
immoderately constrained by ligaments.  Hence it is needful that when a
wound of sin in subordinates is repressed by correction, even constraint
should moderate itself with great carefulness, to the end that it may so
exercise the rights of discipline against delinquents as to retain the
bowels of loving-kindness.  For care should be taken that a ruler shew
himself to his subjects as a mother in loving-kindness, and as a father
in discipline.  And all the time it should be seen to with anxious
circumspection, that neither discipline be rigid nor loving-kindness
lax.  For, as we have before now said in our book on Morals (*Lib.* xx.,
*Moral* n. 14, c. 8, *et ep.* 25, *lib.* 1), there is much wanting both
to discipline and to compassion, if one be had without the other.  But
there ought to be in rulers towards their subjects both compassion
justly considerate, and discipline affectionately severe.  For hence it
is that, as the Truth teaches ([Luke x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.12"></span>), the man is brought by the care of the
Samaritan half dead into the inn, and both wine and oil are applied to
his wounds; the wine to make them smart, the oil to soothe them.  For
whosoever superintends the healing of wounds must needs administer in
wine the smart of pain, and in oil the softness of loving-kindness, to
the end that through wine what is festering may be purged, and through
oil what is curable may be soothed.  Gentleness, then, is to be mingled
with severity; a sort of compound is to be made of both; so that
subjects be neither exulcerated by too much asperity, nor relaxed by too
great kindness.  Which thing, according to the words of Paul ([Heb. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.13"></span>), is well signified by that ark of the
tabernacle, in which, together with the tables, there as a rod and
manna; because, if with knowledge of sacred Scripture in the good
ruler’s breast there is the rod of constraint, there should be also the
manna of sweetness.  Hence David says, *Thy rod and thy staff, they have
comforted me* ([Ps. xxiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.vi-p6.14"></span>).  For with a rod we are smitten, with
a staff we are supported.  If, then, there is the constraint of the rod
for striking, there should be also the comfort of the staff for
supporting.  Wherefore let there be love, but not enervating; let there
be vigour, but not exasperating; let there be zeal, but not immoderately
burning; let there be pity; but not sparing more than is expedient;
that, while justice and mercy blend themselves together in supreme rule,
he who is at the head may both soothe the hearts of his subjects in
making them afraid, and yet in soothing them constrain them to
reverential awe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the ruler relax not his care for the things that are within
in his occupation among the things that are without, nor neglect to
provide for the things that are without in his solicitude for the things
that are within.](2120253)
