[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120459)  [Next](2120461.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p2"></span>To John, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p3"></span>Gregory to John, Bishop of Ravenna.

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p4"></span>In the first place this makes me sad;
that thy Fraternity writes to me with a double heart, exhibiting one
sort of blandishment in letters, but another sort with the tongue in
secular intercourse.  In the next place, it grieves me that my brother
John even to this day retains on his tongue those gibes which notaries
while still boys are wont to indulge in.  He speaks bitingly, and seems
to delight in such pleasantry.  He flatters his friends in their
presence, and maligns them in their absence.  Thirdly, it is to me
grievous and altogether execrable, that <span id="page_165b">p.
165b</span> <span id="iii.v.v.vi-Page_165b"></span>he imputes shameful
crimes to his servants <span id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580.md) ,
whatever the hour may be, calling them “effeminate;” and, what is still
more grievous, this is done openly.  Then there is this in addition that
there is no discipline for keeping guard over the life of the clergy,
but that he exhibits himself only as their lord.  The last thing, but
first in importance as evidence of elation, is about his use of the
pallium outside the church, which is a thing he never presumed to do in
the times of my predecessors, and what none of his predecessors ever
presumed to do, as our delegates testify (except it might be when relics
were deposited, though with regard to relics one person only could be
found to say that it was so); yet this in my days, in contempt of me,
with extreme audacity, he not only did, but even made a habit of doing.

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p6"></span>From all these things I find that the
dignity of the Episcopacy is with him all in outside show, not in his
mind.  And indeed I return thanks to Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.vi-p6.1"></span>God</span> that at the time when this came
to my knowledge, which had never reached the ears of my predecessors,
the Lombards were posted between me and the city of Ravenna.  For
perchance I had it in my mind to shew to men how severe I can be <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581.md) .

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p8"></span>Lest, however, thou shouldest suppose
that I wish thy church to be depressed or lessened in dignity, remember
where the deacon of Ravenna used to stand in solemnization of mass at
Rome, and enquire where he stands now; and thou wilt recognize the fact
that I desire to honour the church of Ravenna.  But that any one
whatever should snatch at anything out of pride, this I cannot tolerate.

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p9"></span>Nevertheless I have already written on
this matter to our deacon at Constantinople, that he should enquire of
all who have under them even thirty or forty bishops.  And if there is
anywhere this custom of their walking in litanies wearing the pallium,
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.vi-p9.1"></span>God</span> forbid
that through me the dignity of the church of Ravenna should seem to be
in any way lessened.

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p10"></span>Reflect, therefore, dearest brother, on
all that I have said above:  think of the day of thy call:  consider
what account thou wilt render of the burden of episcopacy.  Amend those
manners of a notary.  See what becomes a bishop in tongue and in deed. 
Be entirely sincere to thy brethren.  Do not speak one thing, and have
another in thy heart.  Do not desire to seem more than thou art, that so
thou mayest be able to be more than thou seemest.  Believe me, when I
came to my present position, I had such consideration and charity
towards thee that, if thou hadst wished to keep hold of this my charity,
thou still wouldest not have ever found such a brother as myself, or one
so sincerely loving thee, or so concurring with thee in all devotion: 
but when I came to know of thy words and thy manners, I confess I
started back.  I beseech thee, then, by Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.vi-p10.1"></span>God</span>, amend all that I have spoken
of, and especially the vice of duplicity.  Allow me to love thee; and
for the present and the future life it may be of advantage to thee to be
loved of thy brethren.  Reply, however, to all this, not by words, but
by behaviour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[165b:1581](2120460.htm#fr_1580.md) <span
id="iii.v.v.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p5"></span> “Servis tuis turpia crimina
imponis,”—apparently meaning that at all hours he was accustomed to call
them by opprobrious names.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[165b:1582](2120460.htm#fr_1581.md) <span
id="iii.v.v.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.vi-p7"></span> The meaning may be, “I am thankful now
that the fact of communication between Rome and Ravenna being blocked by
the Lombards when the matter first reached my ears prevented my acting
so peremptorily as I might then have been disposed to do.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XVII](2120461.md)
