[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120371)  [Next](2120373) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p2"></span>To Peter, Subdeacon of Sicily.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Peter, &c.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p4"></span>By information received from Romanus
the guardian (*defensore*) I have learnt that the monastery of
handmaidens of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>God</span> which is on the farm of
Monotheus has suffered wrong from our church of Villa Nova with respect
to a farm belonging to the latter, which is said to have been leased to
the said monastery.  If this is so, let thy Experience restore to them
the farm, and also the payments from the same farm for the two
indictions during which thou hast exacted them.  Moreover, since many of
the Jews dwell on the estates of the Church, I desire that, if any of
them should be willing to become Christians, some little of their dues
be remitted to them, to the end that others also, incited by this
benefit, may be moved to a like desire.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p5"></span>Cows which are now barren from age,
or bulls which appear to be quite useless, ought to be sold, so that at
least some profit may accrue from their price.  But as to the herds of
mares which we keep very unprofitably, I wish them all to be dispersed,
and four hundred only of the younger kept for breeding; which four
hundred ought to be presented to the farmers <span
id="fr_1422"></span>[1423](#fn_1422) —so many to each, to the end that
they may make some return to us from them in successive years:  for it
is very hard for us to spend sixty *solidi* on the herdsmen, and not get
sixty pence from these same herds.  Let then thy Experience so proceed
that some may be divided among all the farmers, and others dispersed and
converted into money.  But so arrange with the herdsmen themselves
throughout our possessions that they may be able to make some profit by
cultivation of the ground.  All the implements which, either at Syracuse
or at Panormus, can be claimed by the Church must be sold before they
perish entirely from age.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p7"></span>On the arrival of the servant of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>God</span>,
brother Cyriacus, at Rome I questioned him closely as to whether he had
communicated with thee about the receiving of a bribe in the cause of a
certain woman.  And the same brother says that he had learnt the state
of the case from thy telling him, for that he had been commissioned by
thee to ascertain who was the person commissioned to pay the bribe. 
This I believed, and immediately received him familiarly into favour,
introduced him to the people and clergy, increased his stipend <span
id="fr_1423"></span>[1424](#fn_1423) , placed him in a superior rank
among the guardians, praising his fidelity before all, in that he had
acquitted himself so faithfully in thy service; and I have consequently
sent him back to thee.  But, inasmuch as thou art in great haste, and I,
though sick, am desirous of seeing thee, do thou leave some one whom
thou hast fully proved to take thy place in the Syracusan district, and
thyself make haste to come to me, that, if it should please Almighty
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p8.1"></span>God</span>, we may
consult together as to whether thou thyself oughtest to return thither
or another person should be appointed in thy place.  At the same time I
have sent Benenatus the notary to occupy thy place in the patrimony in
the district of Panormus till such time as Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p8.2"></span>God</span> may ordain
what pleases Him.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p9"></span>I have strongly rebuked Romanus for
his levity, because in the Guest-house (*xenodochium*) which he kept, as
I have now discovered, he has been taken up more with his own profits
than with \[heavenly\] rewards.  Him, therefore, if it should haply seem
good to thee, leave in thy place.  See how thou mayest best fortify him,
by alarming and admonishing him, that he may act kindly and carefully
towards the peasants (*rusticos* <span
id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424) ); and shew himself towards
strangers and townspeople changed and active.  In saying this, however,
I am not selecting any person, but leave this to thy judgment.  It is
enough for me to have selected an occupier of thy place in the district
of Panormus; and I wish thee to see thyself to providing one for the
Syracusan district.  When thou comest, bring with thee the moneys and
ornaments (*ornamenta*) on the part, or of the substance of Antoninus. 
Bring also the payments of the ninth and tenth indictions which thou
hast exacted, and with them all thy accounts.  Take care, if it should
please <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>God</span>, to cross the sea for this
city before the anniversary of Saint Cyprian, lest any danger should
ensue (which <span id="page_109b">p. 109b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-Page_109b"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p10.2"></span>God</span> forbid) from the
constellation which always threatens the sea at that season.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p11"></span>Furthermore, I would have thee know
that I have no slight compunctions of mind for having been grievously
set against the servant of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p11.1"></span>God</span> Pretiosus for no grievous
fault of his, and driven him from me, sad and embittered.  And I wrote
to the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p11.2"></span>Lord</span> bishop <span
id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425) requesting him to send the man to
me, if willing to do so; but he was altogether unwilling.  Now him I
ought not to distress, nor can I do so; since, occupied as he is in the
causes of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>God</span>, he ought to be supported by
comfort, not depressed by bitterness.  But the said Pretiosus, as I
hear, is altogether distressed because he cannot return to me.  I,
however, as I have said, cannot distress the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p12.2"></span>Lord</span> bishop, who is not willing
to send him, and I am doubtful between the two.  Do thou then, if in thy
little diminutive body thou hast the greater wisdom, manage the matter
so that I may have my will, and the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p12.3"></span>Lord</span> bishop be not distressed. 
Yet, if thou see him to be at all distressed, say no more about it.  I
have, however, taken it amiss that he has excommunicated the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p12.4"></span>Lord</span>
Eusebius <span id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426) , a man of so great
age and in such bad health.  Wherefore it is needful for thee to speak
privately to the said <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>Lord</span> bishop, that he be not hasty
in pronouncing sentences, since cases which are to be decided by
sentences must needs be weighed beforehand with careful and very
frequent consideration.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p14"></span>When the recruiting officers <span
id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427) come, who, as I hear, are already
raising recruits in Sicily, charge thy substitute to offer them some
little present <span id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428) , so as to
render them well-disposed towards him.  But, before thou comest away,
give also something, according to ancient custom, to the prætor’s
officials; but do it by the hands of him thou leavest in thy place, so
as to conciliate their favour towards him.  Also, lest we should seem to
them to be at all uncivil, direct thy substitutes to carry out in all
respects the orders we have given to thy Experience as to what is to be
given to any individuals or monasteries.  But when thou comest, we will,
with the help of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p16.1"></span>God</span> consider together how these
things should be arranged.  The three hundred *solidi* which I sent to
be given through thee to the poor I do not think ought to be committed
to their discretion.  Let them carry out, then, those directions I have
spoken of with reference to particular places and persons.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p17"></span>Now I remember having written before
now to say that the legacies, which, according to the representation of
Antoninus the guardian (*defensoris*), are due from us to monasteries or
others, were to be paid as had been appointed.  And I know not why thy
Experience has delayed to accomplish this.  Wherefore we desire thee to
pay in full our portion of these legacies from the moneys of the church,
that when thou comest to me, thou mayest not leave there the groans of
the poor against thee.  Bring also with thee at the same time the
securities which have been found relating to the substance of the same
Antoninus.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p18"></span>I have learnt on the information of
Romanus that the wife of Redemptus, when dying, directed by word of
mouth one silver shell to be sold, and the proceeds given to her
freedmen, and also left a silver platter to a certain monastery; in
respect of both of which bequests we desire her wishes to be fully
carried out, lest from the least things we be betrayed into greater
sins.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p19"></span>Further, I have learnt on the
information of the Abbot Marinianus that the building in the Prætorian
Monastery is not yet even half completed:  which being the case, what
can we praise for it but thy Experience’s fervour <span
id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429) ?  But even now let this admonition
rouse thee; and, as far as thou canst, assert thyself in the
construction of this same monastery.  I said that nothing was to be
given them for the cost; but I did not prohibit their building the
monastery.  But so proceed as to enjoin in all ways on him whom thou
mayest depute in thy place at Panormus that he construct this same
monastery at the charge of the ecclesiastical revenue, and that I may
have no more private complaints from the abbot.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p21"></span>Moreover, I have learnt that thou
knowest certain things on the farms, even in considerable numbers, to
belong to others; but, owing to the entreaty of certain persons or to
timidity, thou art afraid to restore them to their owners.  But, if thou
wert truly a Christian, thou wouldest be afraid of the judgment of <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p21.1"></span>God</span> more than of
the voices of men.  Take notice that I unceasingly admonish thee on this
matter; which if thou neglect to set right, thou wilt have also my voice
for witness against thee.  If thou shouldest find any of the laity
fearing <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p21.2"></span>God</span> who might receive the tonsure
and become agents under the rector <span
id="fr_1430"></span>[1431](#fn_1430) , I give my full con <span
id="page_110b">p. 110b</span> <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-Page_110b"></span>sent.  It will be necessary that
letters also be sent to them.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p23"></span>Concerning the case of the son of
Commissus the *scholasticus* <span id="fr_1431"></span>[1432](#fn_1431)
, thou hast taken advice; and it appears that what he claims is not just
in law.  We are unwilling to burden the poor to their disadvantage; but,
inasmuch as he has given himself trouble in this matter, we desire thee
to give him fifty *solidi*, which must certainly be charged in thy
accounts.  As to the expense thou hast incurred on the business of the
Church in the case of Prochisus, either reimburse thyself there out of
his revenues, or, should his revenues be clearly insufficient for the
repayment, thou must needs receive what is due to thee here from the
deacon.  But presume not to say anything about Gelasius the subdeacon,
since his crime calls for the severest penance even to the end of his
life.

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p25"></span>Furthermore, thou has sent me one
sorry nag and five good asses.  That nag I cannot ride, he is such a
sorry one; and those good asses I cannot ride, because they are asses. 
But we beg that, if you are disposed to content us, you will let us have
something suitable.  We desire thee to give to the abbot Eusebius a
hundred *solidi* of gold, which must certainly be charged in thy
accounts.  We have learnt that Sisinnius, who was a judge at Samnium, is
suffering from grievous want in Sicily, to whom we desire thee to supply
twenty *decimates* <span id="fr_1432"></span>[1433](#fn_1432) of wine
and four *solidi* yearly.  Anastasius, a religious person
(*religiosus* <span id="fr_1433"></span>[1434](#fn_1433) ), is said to
be living near the city of Panormus in the oratory of Saint Agna, to
whom we desire six *solidi* of gold to be given.  We desire also six
*solidi*, to be charged in thy accounts, to be given to the mother of
Urbicus the Prior <span id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434) .  As to
the case of the handmaiden of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p28.1"></span>God</span>, Honorata, what seems good to
me is this:  that thou shouldest bring with thee when thou comest all
her substance which evidently existed before the time of the episcopate
of John, bishop of Laurinum <span id="fr_1435"></span>[1436](#fn_1435)
.  But let the same handmaiden of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p29.1"></span>God</span> come with her son, that we
may speak with her, and do whatever may please <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p29.2"></span>God</span>.  The volume of the
Heptateuch <span id="fr_1436"></span>[1437](#fn_1436) out of the goods
of Antoninus we desire to be given to the Prætorian monastery, and the
rest of his books to be brought hither by thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[108b:1423](2120372.htm#fr_1422) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p6"></span> *Conductores*.  See I. 44, note 6.

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[108b:1424](2120372.htm#fr_1423) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p8"></span> *Presbyterium*.  The term, as here
used, means apparently a pecuniary allowance to presbyters.  Cf. V. 33,
*Ad Gaudentiam Episcopum*; “Fraternitatem tuam præsentibus hortamur
affatibus ut clericis Capuanæ Ecclesiæ quartam in *presbyterium* eorum
de hoc quod ante dictæ ecclesiæ singulis annis accesserit juxta antiquam
consuetudinem distribuere secundum personarum studeat qualitatem,
quatenus aliquod stipendiorum habentes solatium, ministerium officiumque
suum circa eamdem ecclesiam devotiore mente provocentur impendere.”

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[108b:1425](2120372.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p10"></span> See I. 44, note 1.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[109b:1426](2120372.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p12"></span> Maximianus (as appears from Epistle
34), whom Gregory had himself appointed bishop of Syracuse.  Cf. II. 7,
and note.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[109b:1427](2120372.htm#fr_1426) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p13"></span> This Eusebius was an abbot in
Sicily.  Letters follow about him to Maximianus (*Ep*. 34), and to him
(*Ep*. 36).

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[109b:1428](2120372.htm#fr_1427) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p15"></span> *Scribonibus*.  The term denoted
officers sent from the imperial court into the provinces for executing
certain duties; in this case for raising recruits for the imperial
army.  Cf. V. 30, note 8.

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[109b:1429](2120372.htm#fr_1428) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p16"></span> *Parum aliquid xenii*.  On *xenia*,
see II. 23, note 8.

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[109b:1430](2120372.htm#fr_1429) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p20"></span> We note here the sarcastic vein in
which Gregory from time to time pleasantly stimulates Peter to activity.

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[109b:1431](2120372.htm#fr_1430) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p22"></span> I.e. the *rector patrimonii*.  The
purport of this direction seems be that agents from the laity might be
appointed with advantage to assist the *rector patrimonii*; and these
must first be made *clerici* by receiving the tonsure, so as to be
qualified to act for the Church.  The rectors themselves were usually at
least subdeacons.

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[110b:1432](2120372.htm#fr_1431) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p24"></span> *Scholastici*.  The designation
appears to have been applied generally to scholarly and learned
persons.  Cf. Hieron. *in Catal. Scriptor. Eccles*., “Serapion ob
elegantiam ingenii cognomen scholastici meruit.”  In Gregory’s Epistles
it seems to denote usually men learned in the law, who might advise on
legal points or sit as assessors.  In I. 44 (to Peter the subdeacon)
*scholastici* are spoken of as having given a legal opinion, Epistle 36
in Bk. IX. is addressed “Severo scholastico exarchi,” and he is spoken
of as one of those “qui assistant judicibus.”  Cf. also IX. 58, 59, for
the employment of “Martinus Scholasticus, vir eloquentissimus,” in a
case of disputed jurisdiction over the primate of the African province
of Bizacia.  Such *scholastici* were evidently persons of importance. 
Gregory addresses them by the title of “Gloria vestra” (IV. 40), and of
“Magnitudo tua” (IX. 58).  In IX. 12 he speaks of the form of prayer
which followed the words of institution in the Canon of the Mass as
having been composed by a *scholasticus* (*precem quam scholasticus
composuerat*), perhaps using the term in the general sense of a scholar.

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[110b:1433](2120372.htm#fr_1432) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p26"></span> See I. 46, note.

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[110b:1434](2120372.htm#fr_1433) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p27"></span> See I. 61, note 7.

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[110b:1435](2120372.htm#fr_1434) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p28"></span> *Præpositi*.  The word, though used
also in a more general sense, usually denotes the Prior of a monastery,
appointed as the Abbot’s vice-gerent.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[110b:1436](2120372.htm#fr_1435) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p29"></span> *Episcopi Laurinensis*.  If the
reading is correct, the See intended is unknown.  Holstein (*Annot. in
Geograph. Sacra*, p. 21) suggests *Carinensem*, denoting the Sicilian
See of Carine, or Camarina.

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[110b:1437](2120372.htm#fr_1436) <span
id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii.xvii-p30"></span> I.e. the first seven books of the
Bible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Justinus, Prætor.](2120373)
