[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120113)  [Next](2120115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.civ"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.civ-p1.1"></span>Letter CIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.civ-p2.1"></span>To Julian, Bishop of Cos.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p3"></span>Leo, the pope, to Julian, the bishop.

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p4"></span>I.  *He laments over the recent rioting
in Palestine.*

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p5"></span>The information which you give, brother,
about the riotous doings of the false monks <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) is serious and to no slight degree
lamentable; for they are due to the war which the wicked Eutyches by the
madness of deceivers is waging against the preaching of the Gospel and
the Apostles, though it will end in his own destruction and that of his
followers:  but this is delayed by the long-suffering of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.civ-p6.1"></span>God</span>, in order that it
may appear how greatly the enemies of the cross of Christ are enslaved
to the devil; because heretical depravity, breaking through its ancient
veil of pretence can no longer restrain itself within the limits of its
hypocrisy, and has poured forth all its long-concealed poison, raging
against the disciples of the Truth not only with pen but also with deeds
of violence <span id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) , in order to wrest
consent from unlearned simplicity or from panic-stricken faith.  But the
sons of light ought not to be so afraid of the sons of darkness, as
being sane to acquiesce in the ideas of madmen or to think that any
respect should be shown to men of this kind; for, if they would rather
perish than recover their senses, provision must be made lest their
escape from punishment should do wider harm, and long toleration of them
should lead to the destruction of many.

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p8"></span>II.  *The ringleaders must be removed to
a distance.*

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p9"></span>I am not unaware what love and favour is
due to our sons, those holy and true monks, who forsake not the
moderation of their profession, and carry into practice what they
promised by their vows.  But these insolent disturbers, who boast of
their insults and injuries to priests <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) , are to be held not the slaves of
Christ, but the soldiers of Antichrist, and must be chiefly humiliated
in the person of their leaders, who incite the ignorant mob to uphold
their insubordination.  And hence, seeing that our most merciful Prince
loves the catholic Faith with all the devotion of a religious heart, and
is greatly offended at the effrontery of these rebel heretics, as is
everywhere reported, we must appeal to his clemency that the instigators
of these seditions be removed from their mad congregations; and not only
Eutyches and Dioscorus but also any who have been forward in aiding
their wrongheaded madness, be placed where they can hold no intercourse
with their partners in blasphemy:  for the simpleness of some may chance
to be healed by this method, and men will be more easily recalled to
soundness of mind, if they be set free from the incitements of
pestilential teachers.

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p11"></span>III.  *He sends a letter of S.
Athanasius to show that the present heresy is only a revival of former
exploded heresies.*

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p12"></span>But lest the instruction necessary for
the confirmation of faithful spirits or the refutation of heretics
should be wanting or not expressed, I have sent the letter of bishop
Athanasius of holy memory addressed to bishop Epictetus <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) , whose testimony Cyril of holy memory
made use of at the Synod of Ephesus against Nestorius, because it has so
clearly and carefully set forth the Incarnation of the Word, as to
overthrow both Nestorius and Eutyches by anticipation in the heresies of
those times.  Let the followers of Eutyches and Dioscorus dare to accuse
such an authority as this of ignorance or of heresy, who assert that our
preaching goes astray from the teaching and the knowledge of the
Fathers.  But it ought to avail for the confirmation of the minds of all
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.civ-p13.1"></span>Lord’s</span>
priests, who, having been already detected and condemned of heresy in
respect of the authorities they followed, now begin more openly to set
forth their blasphemous dogma, lest, if their meaning were hid beneath
the cloke of silence it might still be doubtful whether the triple error
of Apollinaris <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) , and the mad
notion of the Manichees was really revived in them.  And as they no
longer seek to hide themselves but rise boldly against the churches of
Christ, must we not take care to destroy all the strength of their
attempts, <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="ii.iv.civ-Page_82"></span>observing, as I have said, such
discrimination as to separate the incorrigible from the more docile
spirits:  for “evil conversations corrupt good manners <span
id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) ,” and “the wise man will be sharper
than the pestilent person who is chastised <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) ;” in order that in whatever way the
society of the wicked is broken up, some vessels may be snatched from
the devil’s hand?  For we ought not to be so offended at scurrilous and
empty words as to have no care for their correction.

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p17"></span>IV.  *He expresses a hope that Juvenal’s
timely acknowledgment of error will be imitated by the rest.*

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p18"></span>But bishop Juvenal, whose injuries are
to be lamented, joined himself too rashly to those blasphemous heretics,
and by embracing Eutyches and Dioscorus, drove many ignorant folk
headlong by his example, albeit he afterwards corrected himself by wiser
counsels.  These men, however, who drank in more greedily the wicked
poison, have become the enemies of him, whose disciples they had been
before, so that the very food he had supplied them was turned to his own
ruin:  and yet it is to be hoped they will imitate him in amending his
ways, if only the holy associations of the neighbourhood in which they
dwell will help them to recover their senses.  But the character of
him <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) who has usurped the place of
a bishop still living cannot be doubted from the character of his
actions, nor is it to be disputed that he who is loved by the assailants
of the Faith must be a misbeliever.  Meanwhile, brother, do not hesitate
to continue with anxious care to keep me acquainted with the course of
events by more frequent letters.  Dated November 25th in the consulship
of Herculanus (452).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_466"></span>[81:467](2120114.htm#fr_466) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p6"></span> These were the monks of Palestine who
immediately on Theodosius’ return from the Synod stirred up great riots
first in Jerusalem and then throughout Palestine.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[81:468](2120114.htm#fr_467) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p7"></span> Letters of the Emperor Marcion (quoted
by Ball.) speak (1) of a letter written by Theodosius *quas solus
poterat fingere diabolus*; and (2) of cruelties, tortures, and insults
committed particularly *in mulieres honestas et nobiles,* whereby the
rioters had not hesitated to force many to acquiesce in their wicked
teaching.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[81:469](2120114.htm#fr_468) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p10"></span> They had slain Severian, Bishop of
Scythopolis, and would also have slain Juvenal, Bishop of Jerusalem, if
he had not taken refuge in flight (Ball.).

<span id="fn_469"></span>[81:470](2120114.htm#fr_469) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p13"></span> A portion of this letter is among the
quotations added at the end of Letter CLXV.  See also Vol. IV. p. 570.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[81:471](2120114.htm#fr_470) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p14"></span> What this triple error was will be
found in Lett. LIX., chap. v. (q.v.):  cf. also Lett. CXXIV. and CLXVII.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[82:472](2120114.htm#fr_471) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p15"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="ii.iv.civ-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[82:473](2120114.htm#fr_472) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p16"></span> [Prov. xxi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv.civ-p16.1"></span>,
LXX

<span id="fn_473"></span>[82:474](2120114.htm#fr_473) <span
id="ii.iv.civ-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.civ-p19"></span> Sc. Theodosius

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Marcian Augustus.](2120115)
