[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120334)  [Next](2120336.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p2"></span>To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate
(Arles) and Theodorus, Bishop of Massilia (Marseilles).

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p3"></span>Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of
Arelate, and Theodorus, Bishop of Massilia, in Gaul.

<span id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p4"></span>Though the opportunity of a suitable
time and suitable persons has failed me so far for writing to your
Fraternity and duly returning your salutation, the result has been that
I can now at one and the same time acquit myself of what is due to love
and fraternal relationship, and also touch on the complaint of certain
persons which has reached us, with respect to the way in which the souls
of the erring should be saved.  Very many, though indeed of the Jewish
religion, resident in this province, and from time to time travelling
for various matters of business to the regions of Massilia, have
apprized us, that many of the Jews settled in those parts have been
brought to the font of baptism more by force than by preaching.  Now, I
consider the intention in such cases to be worthy of praise, and allow
that it proceeds from the love of our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span>.  But I fear lest this same
intention, unless adequate enforcement from Holy Scripture accompany it,
should either have no profitable result, or even (which <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>God</span> forbid) the
loss of the souls which we wish to save should further ensue.  For, when
any one is brought to the font of baptism, not by the sweetness of
preaching, but by compulsion, he returns to his former superstition, and
dies the worse from having been born again.  Let, therefore, your
Fraternity stir up such men by frequent preaching, to the end that
through the sweetness of their teacher they may desire the more to
change their old life.  For so our purpose is rightly accomplished, and
the mind of the convert returns not again to his former vomit. 
Wherefore discourse must be addressed to them, such as may burn up the
thorns of error in them, and illuminate what is dark in them by
preaching, so that your Fraternity may through your frequent admonition
receive a reward for them, and lead them, so far as <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.i.xxxiii-p4.3"></span>God</span> may grant
it, to the regeneration of a new life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theodorus, Duke of Sardinia.](2120336.md)
