[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120555)  [Next](2120557.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiv-p2"></span>To Donus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiv-p3"></span>Gregory to Donus, Bishop of Messana
(*Messene*).

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxiv-p4"></span>The ordinances both of the sacred
canons and of the laws allow the utensils of the Church to be sold for
the redemption of captives.  And so, seeing that Faustinus, the bearer
of these presents, is proved to have contracted a debt of three hundred
and thirty *solidi* for the purpose of redeeming his daughters from the
yoke of captivity, and that, thirty thereof having been repaid, it is
certain that he has not sufficient means for the repayment of the
remaining sum, we exhort thy Fraternity by this communication that thou
by all means give him fifteen pounds, taking his receipt for the same,
out of the silver in thy hands belonging to the Meriensian Church, of
which he is known to be a soldier; so that, it being sold, and the debt
paid, he may be freed from the bond of his obligation.  But of this also
your Fraternity should be careful, that in case of the aforesaid Church
having so much current coin, he should receive from it the amount
above-written; but otherwise you must needs supply him for the purpose
in view with the sum we have stated from the consecrated vessels.  For,
as it is a very serious thing to sell idly ecclesiastical utensils, so
on the other hand it is wrong, under pressing necessity of this kind,
for an exceedingly desolated Church to prefer its property to its
captives, or to loiter in redeeming them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop.](2120557.md)
