[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120083)  [Next](2120085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p2.1"></span>To Pulcheria Augusta.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p3"></span>Leo, bishop of the city of Rome to
Pulcheria Augusta.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p4"></span>I.  *He rejoices at Pulcheria’s zeal
both against Nestorius and Eutyches.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p5"></span>That which we have always anticipated
concerning your Grace’s holy purposes, we have now proved fully true,
viz. that, however varied may be the attacks of wicked men upon the
Christian Faith, yet when you are present and prepared by the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> for its
defence, it cannot be disturbed.  For <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p5.2"></span>God</span> will not forsake either the
mystery of His mercy or the deserts of your labours, whereby you long
ago repelled the crafty foe of our holy religion from the very vitals of
the Church:  when the impiety of Nestorius failed to maintain his heresy
because it did not escape you the handmaid and pupil of the Truth, how
much poison was instilled into simple folk by the coloured falsehoods of
that glib fellow.  And the sequel to that mighty struggle was that
through your vigilance the things which the devil contrived by means of
Eutyches, did not escape detection, and they who had chosen to
themselves one side in the twofold heresy, were overthrown by the one
and undivided power of the catholic Faith.  <span id="page_65">p.
65</span> <span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-Page_65"></span>This then is your second
victory over the destruction of Eutyches’ error:  and, if he had had any
soundness of mind, that error having been once and long ago routed and
put to confusion in the person of his instigators, he would easily have
been able to avoid the attempt to rekindle into life the smouldering
ashes, and thus only share the lot of those, whose example he had
followed, most glorious Augusta.  We desire, therefore, to leap for joy
and to pay due vows for your clemency’s prosperity to <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p5.3"></span>God</span>, who has
already bestowed on you a double palm and crown through all the parts of
the world, in which the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p5.4"></span>Lord’s</span> Gospel is proclaimed.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p6"></span>II.  *He thanks her for her aid to the
catholic cause, and explains his wishes about the restoration of the
lapsed bishops.*

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p7"></span>Your clemency must know, therefore,
that the whole church of Rome is highly grateful for all your faithful
deeds, whether that you have with pious zeal helped our representatives
throughout and brought back the catholic priests, who had been expelled
from their churches by an unjust sentence, or that you have procured the
restoration with due honour of the remains of that innocent and holy
priest, Flavian, of holy memory, to the church, which he ruled so well. 
In all which things assuredly your glory is increased manifold, so long
as you venerate the saints according to their deserts, and are anxious
that the thorns and weeds should be removed from the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p7.1"></span>Lord’s</span> field.  But
we learn as well from the account of our deputies as from that of my
brother and fellow-bishop, Anatolius, whom you graciously recommend to
me, that certain bishops crave reconciliation for those who seem to have
given their consent to matters of heresy, and desire catholic communion
for them:  to whose request we grant effect on condition that the boon
of peace should not be vouchsafed them till, our deputies acting in
concert with the aforesaid bishop, they are corrected, and with their
own hand condemn their evil doings; because our Christian religion
requires both that true justice should constrain the obstinate, and love
not reject the penitent.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p8"></span>III.  *He commends certain bishops and
churches to her care*.

<span id="ii.iv.lxxiv-p9"></span>And because we know how much pious care
your Grace deigns to bestow on catholic priests, we have ordered that
you should be informed that my brother and fellow-bishop, Eusebius, is
living with us, and sharing our communion, whose church we commend to
you; for he that is improperly asserted to have been elected in his
place, is said to be ravaging it.  And this too we ask of your Grace,
which we doubt not you will do of your own free will, to extend the
favour which is due as well to my brother and fellow-bishop, Julian, as
to the clergy of Constantinople, who clung to the holy Flavian with
faithful loyalty.  On all things we have instructed your Grace by our
deputies as to what ought to be done or arranged.  Dated April 13, in
the consulship of the illustrious Adelfius (451).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Anatolius, Bishop of Constantinople.](2120085)
