[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120028)  [Next](2120030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Letter XIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>To Dorus, Bishop of Beneventum.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p3"></span>Leo, bishop, to Dorus his well-beloved
brother.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p4"></span>I.  *He rebukes Dorus for allowing a
junior presbyter to be promoted over the heads of the seniors, and the
first and second in seniority for acquiescing.*

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p5"></span>We grieve that the judgment, which we
hoped to entertain of you, has been frustrated by our ascertaining that
you have done things which by their blame-worthy novelty infringe the
whole system of Church discipline:  although you know full well with
what care we wish the provisions of the canons to be kept through all
the churches of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>Lord</span>, and the priests of all the
peoples to consider it their especial duty to prevent the violation of
the rules of the holy constitutions by any extravagances.  We are
surprised, therefore, that you who ought to have been a strict observer
of the injunctions of the Apostolic See have acted so carelessly, or
rather so contumaciously, as to show yourself not a guardian, but a
breaker of the laws handed on to you.  For from the report of your
presbyter, Paul, which is subjoined, we have learnt that the order of
the presbyterate has been thrown into confusion with you by strange
intrigues and vile collusion; in such a way that one man has been
hastily and prematurely promoted, and others passed over whose
advancement was recommended by their age, and who were charged with no
fault.  But if the eagerness of an intriguer or the ignorant zeal of his
supporters demanded that which custom never allowed, viz., that a
beginner should be preferred to veterans, and a mere boy to men of
years, it was your duty by diligence and teaching to check the improper
desires of the petitioners with all reasonable authority:  lest he whom
you advanced hastily to the priestly rank should enter on his office to
the detriment of those with whom he associated and become demoralized by
the growth within him, not of the virtue of humility, but of the vice of
conceit <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) .  For you were not
unaware that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> had said that “he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted:  but he that exalteth <span id="page_32">p.
32</span> <span id="ii.iv.xix-Page_32"></span>himself shall be
humbled <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) ,” and also had said,
“but ye seek from little to increase, and from the greater to be
less <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) .”  For both actions are
out of order and out of place <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) : 
and all the fruit of men’s labours is lost, all the measure of their
deserts is rendered void, if the gaining of dignity is proportioned to
the amount of flattery used:  so that the eagerness to be eminent
belittles not only the aspirer himself, but also him that connives at
him.  But if, as is asserted, the first and second presbyter were so
agreeable to Epicarpius being put over their heads as to demand his
being honoured to their own disgrace, that which they wished ought not
to have been granted them when they were voluntarily degrading
themselves:  because it would have been worthier of you to oppose than
to yield to such a pitiable wish.  But their base and cowardly
submission could not be to the prejudice of others whose consciences
were good, and who had not done despite to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p9.1"></span>God’s</span> grace; so that, whatever the
transaction was whereby they gave up their precedence to another, they
could not lower the dignity of those that came next to them, nor because
they had placed the last above themselves, could he take precedence of
the rest.

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p10"></span>II.  *The presbyters, who gave way, to
be degraded with the usurper to the bottom:  the rest to keep their
places.*

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p11"></span>The aforesaid presbyters, therefore, who
have declared themselves unworthy of their proper rank, though they even
deserved to be deprived of their priesthood; yet, that we may show the
gentleness of the Apostolic See in sparing them, are to be put last of
all the presbyters of the Church:  and that they may bear their own
sentence, they shall be below him also whom they preferred to themselves
by their own judgment:  all the other presbyters remaining in the order
which the time of his ordination assigns to each.  And let none except
the two aforesaid suffer any loss of dignity, but let this disgrace
attach to those only who chose to put themselves below a junior who had
only lately been ordained:  that they may feel that that sentence of the
gospels applies to themselves when it is said:  “with what judgment ye
judge, ye shall be judged:  and with what measure ye mete, the same
shall be measured unto you <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) .” 
But let Paul the presbyter retain his place from which with praiseworthy
firmness he did not budge:  and let no further encroachments be made to
any one’s harm:  so that you, beloved, who not undeservedly get the
discredit of the whole matter, may with all speed take measures to cure
it at least by putting these our injunctions into effect; lest, if a
second time a just complaint be lodged with us, we be forced into
stronger displeasure:  for we would rather restore discipline by
correcting what is done wrong, than increase the punishment.  Know that
we have entrusted the carrying out of our commands to our brother and
fellow-bishop Julius, that all things may straightway be established, as
we have ordained.  Dated 8th March, in the consulship of the illustrious
Postumianus (448).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_206"></span>[31:207](2120029.htm#fr_206) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p6"></span> *Ne quem sacerdotali propere provehebas
honore, ad iniuriam eorum quibis sociabatur, inciperet minorque se
fieret*:  the text is no doubt corrupt, though the general sense is
clear:  the emendation *minorque se* for *miror quis* is made almost
certain by the quotations that follow, especially the second.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[32:208](2120029.htm#fr_207) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p7"></span> [Luke
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011), [Luke
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[32:209](2120029.htm#fr_208) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p8"></span> *Vos autem quæritis de pusillo crescere
et de maiore minores esse*.  This remarkable addition to S. [Matt. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span id="ii.iv.xix-p8.1"></span> is
found in Cod. D, in some Syriac and many Latin copies:  read Westcott’s
note in Appendix C. 3 to *Introduction to Study,* &c.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[32:210](2120029.htm#fr_209) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p9"></span> *Inordinatum præposterum*.  Cf. Lett.
XII., chap. 2, n. 8.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[32:211](2120029.htm#fr_210) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p12"></span> [Matt.
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002), [Mark
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#024), [Luke
6:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#036)<span
id="ii.iv.xix-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eutyches, an Abbot of Constantinople.](2120030)
