[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120559)  [Next](2120561.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxviii-p2"></span>To Marinianus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxviii-p3"></span>Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of
Ravenna.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxviii-p4"></span>It has for some time reached us
from the <span id="page_230b">p. 230b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxviii-Page_230b"></span>report of many that the
monasteries constituted in the district of Ravenna are everywhere
aggrieved by the domination of your clergy; so that—grievous to be
said—under the pretext of government they take possession of them as if
they were their own.  Condoling in no small degree with these
monasteries, we sent letters to your predecessor bidding him correct
this evil.  But, seeing that he was soon overtaken by the close of life,
we remember having written in like manner to your Fraternity, lest this
burden on the monasteries should continue.  And because, as we have
discovered, there has been loitering so far in the correction of this
thing, we have thought fit to address you a second time by this letter. 
We exhort you, then, that, putting aside all delay and all excuses, you
so study to relieve these monasteries from this kind of grievance that
clerics, or such as are in sacred orders, may henceforth have no leave
of access to them on any other ground except only for the purpose of
praying, or if perchance they should be invited for solemnizing the
sacred mysteries of mass.  But, lest haply the monasteries should
sustain a burden through the promotion of any monk or abbot, you must
take care that, if any of the abbots or monks of any monastery should
accede to any clerical office or sacred order, he shall have, as we have
said, no power there any longer, lest under cover of this occasion the
monasteries should be compelled to sustain the burdens which we
prohibit.  Let not your Holiness, then, after this second admonition,
delay correcting all this with vigilant care, lest, if we should after
this perceive you to be negligent (as we do not believe will be the
case), we be compelled to provide otherwise for the quiet of the
monasteries.  For be it known to you that we will no longer suffer the
congregations of the servants of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>God</span> to be subjected to such
requirements.  Lest, however, any excuse should be put forward with
regard to the monks, let your Fraternity without fail send hither such
person as you may see to be serviceable, and we will depute monks to go
with him to you, to provide for whom you must place them in monasteries,
if indeed there are among you places such as may afford them a
maintenance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII](2120561.md)
