[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120215)  [Next](2120217.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>(On the Lord’s Ascension, II.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p3"></span>I.  *The Ascension completes our faith
in Him, who was <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>God</span> as well as man.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4"></span>The mystery of our salvation,
dearly-beloved, which the Creator of the universe valued at the price of
His blood, has now been carried out under conditions of humiliation from
the day of His bodily birth to the end of His <span id="page_188">p.
188</span> <span id="ii.v.xxxviii-Page_188"></span>Passion.  And
although even in “the form of a slave” many signs of Divinity have
beamed out, yet the events of all that period served particularly to
show the reality of His assumed Manhood.  But after the Passion, when
the chains of death were broken, which had exposed its own strength by
attacking Him, Who was ignorant of sin, weakness was turned into power,
mortality into eternity, contumely into glory, which the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ
showed by many clear proofs in the sight of many, until He carried even
into heaven the triumphant victory which He had won over the dead.  As
therefore at the Easter commemoration, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Resurrection was the cause
of our rejoicing; so the subject of our present gladness is His
Ascension, as we commemorate and duly venerate that day on which the
Nature of our humility in Christ was raised above all the host of
heaven, over all the ranks of angels, beyond the height of all powers,
to sit with <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4.3"></span>God</span> the Father.  On which
Providential order of events we are founded and built up, that <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4.4"></span>God’s</span> Grace might
become more wondrous, when, notwithstanding the removal from men’s sight
of what was rightly felt to command their awe, faith did not fail, hope
did not waver, love did not grow cold.  For it is the strength of great
minds and the light of firmly-faithful souls, unhesitatingly to believe
what is not seen with the bodily sight, and there to fix one’s
affections whither you cannot direct your gaze.  And whence should this
Godliness spring up in our hearts, or how should a man be justified by
faith, if our salvation rested on those things only which lie beneath
our eyes?  Hence our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4.5"></span>Lord</span> said to him who seemed to
doubt of Christ’s Resurrection, until he had tested by sight and touch
the traces of His Passion in His very Flesh, “because thou hast seen Me,
thou hast believed:  blessed are they who have not seen and yet have
believed <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129.md) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p6"></span>II.  *The Ascension renders our faith
more excellent and stronger.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p7"></span>In order, therefore, dearly-beloved,
that we may be capable of this blessedness, when all things were
fulfilled which concerned the Gospel preaching and the mysteries of the
New Testament, our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, on the fortieth
day after the Resurrection in the presence of the disciples, was raised
into heaven, and terminated His presence with us in the body, to abide
on the Father’s right hand until the times Divinely fore-ordained for
multiplying the sons of the Church are accomplished, and He comes to
judge the living and the dead in the same flesh in which He ascended. 
And so that which till then was visible of our Redeemer was changed into
a sacramental presence <span id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130.md) , and
that faith might be more excellent and stronger, sight gave way to
doctrine, the authority of which was to be accepted by believing hearts
enlightened with rays from above.

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p9"></span>III.  *The marvellous effects of this
faith on all*.

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p10"></span>This Faith, increased by the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Ascension
and established by the gift of the Holy Ghost, was not terrified by
bonds, imprisonments, banishments, hunger, fire, attacks by wild beasts,
refined torments of cruel persecutors.  For this Faith throughout the
world not only men, but even women, not only beardless boys, but even
tender maids, fought to the shedding of their blood.  This Faith cast
out spirits, drove off sicknesses, raised the dead:  and through it the
blessed Apostles themselves also, who after being confirmed by so many
miracles and instructed by so many discourses, had yet been
panic-stricken by the horrors of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p10.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion and had not
accepted the truth of His resurrection without hesitation, made such
progress after the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p10.3"></span>Lord’s</span> Ascension that everything
which had previously filled them with fear was turned into joy.  For
they had lifted the whole contemplation of their mind to the Godhead of
Him that sat at the Father’s right hand, and were no longer hindered by
the barrier of corporeal sight from directing their minds’ gaze to That
Which had never quitted the Father’s side in descending to earth, and
had not forsaken the disciples in ascending to heaven.

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p11"></span>IV.  *His Ascension refines our
Faith:  the ministering of angels to Him shows the extent of His
authority.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p12"></span>The Son of Man and Son of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>God</span>, therefore,
dearly-beloved, then attained a more excellent and holier fame, when He
betook Himself back to the glory of the Father’s Majesty, and in an
ineffable manner began to be nearer to the Father in respect of His
Godhead, after having become farther away in respect of His manhood.  A
better instructed faith then began to draw closer to a conception of the
Son’s equality with the Father without the necessity of handling the
corporeal substance in Christ, whereby He is less than the Father,
since, while the Nature of the glorified Body still remained the faith
of believers was called upon <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-Page_189"></span>to touch not with the hand of flesh,
but with the spiritual understanding the Only-begotten, Who was equal
with the Father.  Hence comes that which the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>Lord</span> said after His Resurrection,
when Mary Magdalene, representing the Church, hastened to approach and
touch Him:  “Touch Me not, for I have not yet ascended to My
Father <span id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131.md) :”  that is, I would
not have you come to Me as to a human body, nor yet recognize Me by
fleshly perceptions:  I put thee off for higher things, I prepare
greater things for thee:  when I have ascended to My Father, then thou
shalt handle Me more perfectly and truly, for thou shalt grasp what thou
canst not touch and believe what thou canst not see.  But when the
disciples’ eyes followed the ascending <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p13.2"></span>Lord</span> to heaven with upward gaze of
earnest wonder, two angels stood by them in raiment shining with
wondrous brightness, who also said, “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye
gazing into heaven?  This Jesus Who was taken up from you into heaven
shall so come as ye saw Him going into heaven <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132.md) .”  By which words all the sons of
the Church were taught to believe that Jesus Christ will come visibly in
the same Flesh wherewith He ascended, and not to doubt that all things
are subjected to Him on Whom the ministry of angels had waited from the
first beginning of His Birth.  For, as an angel announced to the blessed
Virgin that Christ should be conceived by the Holy Ghost, so the voice
of heavenly beings sang of His being born of the Virgin also to the
shepherds.  As messengers from above were the first to attest His having
risen from the dead, so the service of angels was employed to foretell
His coming in very Flesh to judge the world, that we might understand
what great powers will come with Him as Judge, when such great ones
ministered to Him even in being judged.

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p15"></span>V.  *We must despise earthly things
and rise to things above, especially by active works of mercy and love.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p16"></span>And so, dearly-beloved, let us
rejoice with spiritual joy, and let us with gladness pay <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>God</span> worthy thanks
and raise our hearts’ eyes unimpeded to those heights where Christ is. 
Minds that have heard the call to be uplifted must not be pressed down
by earthly affections <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) , they
that are fore-ordained to things eternal must not be taken up with the
things that perish; they that have entered on the way of Truth must not
be entangled in treacherous snares, and the faithful must so take their
course through these temporal things as to remember that they are
sojourning in the vale of this world, in which, even though they meet
with some attractions, they must not sinfully embrace them, but bravely
pass through them.  For to this devotion the blessed Apostle Peter
arouses us, and entreating us with that loving eagerness which he
conceived for feeding Christ’s sheep by the threefold profession of love
for the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p17.2"></span>Lord</span>, says, “dearly-beloved, I
beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts which
war against the soul <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) .”  But
for whom do fleshly pleasures wage war, if not for the devil, whose
delight it is to fetter souls that strive after things above, with the
enticements of corruptible good things, and to draw them away from those
abodes from which he himself has been banished?  Against his plots every
believer must keep careful watch that he may crush his foe on the side
whence the attack is made.  And there is no more powerful weapon,
dearly-beloved, against the devil’s wiles than kindly mercy and
bounteous charity, by which every sin is either escaped or vanquished. 
But this lofty power is not attained until that which is opposed to it
be overthrown.  And what so hostile to mercy and works of charity as
avarice from the root of which spring all evils <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md) ?  And unless it be destroyed by
lack of nourishment, there must needs grow in the ground of that heart
in which this evil weed has taken root, the thorns and briars of vices
rather than any seed of true goodness.  Let us then, dearly-beloved,
resist this pestilential evil and “follow after charity <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) ,” without which no virtue can
flourish, that by this path of love whereby Christ came down to us, we
too may mount up to Him, to Whom with <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p20.2"></span>God</span> the Father and the Holy Spirit
is honour and glory for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[188:1130](2120216.htm#fr_1129.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4.6"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p5"></span> S. [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[188:1131](2120216.htm#fr_1130.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p8"></span> *In sacramenta transivit*, i.e.
Christ’s presence is now vouchsafed us only after a spiritual manner in
His sacraments and means of grace.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[189:1132](2120216.htm#fr_1131.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p13"></span> S. [John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[189:1133](2120216.htm#fr_1132.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p14"></span> [Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[189:1134](2120216.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p17"></span> *Sursum vocatos animos*.  The
allusion no doubt is to the V. *Sursum corda*.  R. *habemus ad Dominum*,
with which the Church Liturgy has always ushered us into the most solemn
part of the Eucharistic worship ([Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>).  Cf. Bright’s n. 122, and Serm. LXVII.
chap. i.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[189:1135](2120216.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p18"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[189:1136](2120216.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p19"></span> Cf. [1 Tim.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010.md), [1 Cor.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[189:1137](2120216.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p20"></span> Cf. [1 Tim.
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010.md), [1 Cor.
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXV](2120217.md)
