[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120026)  [Next](2120028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>Letter XVII <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xvii-p3.1"></span>To All the Bishops of Sicily.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p4"></span>(Forbidding the sale of church property
except for the advantage of the church).

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p5"></span>Leo, the pope <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) , to all the bishops of Sicily.

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p7"></span>The occasion of specific complaints
claims our attention as having “the care of all the churches,” that we
should make a perpetual decree precluding all bishops from adopting as a
practice what in two churches of your province has been unscrupulously
suggested and wrongfully carried out.  Upon the clergy of the church in
Tauromenium deploring the destitution they were in from the bishop
having squandered all its estates by selling, giving away, and otherwise
disposing of them, the clergy of Panormus, who have lately had a new
bishop, raised a similar complaint about the misgovernment of the former
bishop in the holy synod, at which we were presiding.  Although,
therefore, we have already given instructions as to what is for the
advantage of both Churches, yet lest this vicious example of abominable
plundering should hereafter be taken as a precedent, we wish to make
this our formal command binding on you, beloved, for ever.  We decree,
therefore, that no bishop without exception shall dare to give away, or
to exchange, or to sell any of the property of his church:  unless he
foresees an advantage likely to accrue from so doing, and after
consultation with the whole of the clergy, and with their consent he
decides upon what will undoubtedly profit that church.  For presbyters,
or deacons, or clerics of any rank who have connived at the churches
losses, must know that they will be deprived of both rank and
communion:  because it is absolutely fair, beloved brethren, that not
only the bishop, but also the whole of the clergy should advance the
interests of their church and keep the gifts unimpaired of those who
have contributed their own substance to the churches for the salvation
of their souls.  Dated 20 Oct., in the consulship of the illustrious
Calepius (447).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[30:201](2120027.htm#fr_200) <span
id="ii.iv.xvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p2"></span> This letter is suspected by Quesnel as
being, if not spurious, at least the production of some later Leo than
our own:  but he would seem to have hardly sufficient ground for his
conjecture and the document is interesting as showing the existence of
Church endowments at the time, and alas! of their mismanagement.  Two
centuries before indeed we have Cyprian in Africa uttering a somewhat
similar complaint:  e.g. *de laps*. vi., *de unit*. *eccl*. xxvi., Lett.
XV. 3.  It does not appear, however, there that the clergy actually
misappropriated Church funds, only that they were greedy and intent on
worldly gain.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[30:202](2120027.htm#fr_201) <span
id="ii.iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xvii-p6"></span> *Papa*.  This title, which in later
times came throughout the West to denote exclusively the Bishop of Rome,
was originally in the West no less than it is still in the East, the
common appellation of all priests and spiritual fathers of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Januarius, Bishop of Aquileia.](2120028)
