[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120206)  [Next](2120208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p1.1"></span>Sermon LVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p2.1"></span>(On the Passion, VII.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p3"></span>I.  *The reason of Christ suffering at
the Paschal Feast.*

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p4"></span>I know indeed, dearly-beloved, that the
Easter festival partakes of so sublime a mystery as to surpass not only
the slender perceptions of my humility, but even the powers of great
intellects.  But I must not consider the greatness of the Divine work in
such a way as to distrust or to feel ashamed of the service which I owe;
for we may not hold our peace upon the mystery of man’s salvation, even
if it cannot be explained.  But, your prayers aiding us, we believe
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> Grace
will be granted, to sprinkle the barrenness of our heart with the dew of
His inspiration: <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxix-Page_169"></span>that by the pastor’s mouth things may be
proclaimed which are useful to the ears of his holy flock.  For when the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p4.2"></span>Lord</span>, the Giver
of all good things, says:  “open thy mouth, and I will fill it <span
id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998) ,” we dare likewise to reply in the
prophet’s words:  “<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p5.2"></span>Lord</span>, Thou shalt open my lips, and my
mouth shall shew forth Thy praise <span
id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) .”  Therefore beginning,
dearly-beloved, to handle once more the Gospel-story of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p6.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion, we
understand it was part of the Divine plan that the profane chiefs of the
Jews and the unholy priests, who had often sought occasion of venting
their rage on Christ, should receive the power of exercising their fury
at no other time than the Paschal festival.  For the things which had
long been promised under mysterious figures had to be fulfilled in all
clearness; for instance, the True Sheep had to supersede the sheep which
was its antitype, and the One Sacrifice to bring to an end the multitude
of different sacrifices.  For all those things which had been divinely
ordained through Moses about the sacrifice of the lamb had prophesied of
Christ and truly announced the slaying of Christ.  In order, therefore,
that the shadows should yield to the substance and types cease in the
presence of the Reality, the ancient observance is removed by a new
Sacrament, victim passes into Victim, blood is wiped away by Blood, and
the law-ordained Feast is fulfilled by being changed.

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p7"></span>II.  *The leading Jews broke their own
Law, as well as failed to apprehend the new dispensation in destroying
Christ.*

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p8"></span>And hence, when the chief priests
gathered the scribes and elders of the people together to their council,
and the minds of all the priests were occupied with the purpose of doing
wrong to Jesus, the teachers of the law put themselves without the law,
and by their own voluntary failure in duty abolished their ancestral
ceremonies.  For when the Paschal feast began, those who ought to have
adorned the temple, cleansed the vessels, provided the victims, and
employed a holier zeal in the purifications that the law enjoined,
seized with the fury of traitorous hate, give themselves up to one work,
and with uniform cruelty conspire for one crime, though they were doomed
to gain nothing by the punishment of innocence and the condemnation of
righteousness, except the failure to apprehend the new mysteries and the
violation of the old.  The chiefs, therefore, in providing against a
tumult arising on a holy day <span id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000)
, showed zeal not for the festival, but for a heinous crime; and their
anxiety served not the cause of religion, but their own incrimination. 
For these careful pontiffs and anxious priests feared the occurrence of
seditious riots on the principal feast-day, not lest the people should
do wrong, but lest Christ should escape.

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p10"></span>III.  *Jesus instituting the Blessed
Sacrament showed mercy to the traitor Judas to the last*.

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p11"></span>But Jesus, sure of His purpose and
undaunted in carrying out His Father’s will, fulfilled the New Testament
and founded a new Passover.  For while the disciples were lying down
with Him at the mystic Supper, and when discussion was proceeding in the
hall of Caiaphas how Christ might be put to death, He, ordaining the
Sacrament of His Body and Blood, was teaching them what kind of Victim
must be offered up to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p11.1"></span>God</span>, and not even from this mystery
was the betrayer kept away, in order to show that he was exasperated by
no personal wrong, but had determined beforehand of his own free-will
upon his treachery.  For he was his own source of ruin and cause of
perfidy, following the guidance of the devil and refusing to have Christ
as director.  And so when the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p11.2"></span>Lord</span> said, “Verily I say to you that
one of you is about to betray Me,” He showed that His betrayer’s
conscience was well known to Him, not confounding the traitor by harsh
or open rebukes, but meeting him with mild and silent warnings that he
who had never been sent astray by rejection, might the easier be set
right by repentance.  Why, unhappy Judas, dose thou not make use of so
great long-suffering?  Behold, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p11.3"></span>Lord</span> spares thy wicked attempts;
Christ betrays thee to none save thyself.  Neither thy name nor thy
person is discovered, but only the secrets of thy heart are touched by
the word of truth and mercy.  The honour of the apostolic rank is not
denied thee, nor yet a share in the Sacraments.  Return to thy right
mind; lay aside thy madness and be wise.  Mercy invites thee, Salvation
knocks at the door, Life recalls thee to life.  Lo, thy stainless and
guiltless fellow-disciples shudder at the hint of thy crime, and all
tremble for themselves till the author of the treachery is declared. 
For they are saddened not by the accusations of conscience, but by the
uncertainty of man’s changeableness; fearing lest what each knew against
himself be less true than what the Truth Himself foresaw.  But thou
abusest the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p11.4"></span>Lord’s</span> patience in this panic of the
saints, and believest that thy bold front hides thee.  Thou addest
impudence to guilt, and art not frightened by so clear a test.  And when
the others refrain from <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxix-Page_170"></span>the food in which the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p11.5"></span>Lord</span> had set His
judgment, thou dost not withdraw thy hand from the dish, because thy
mind is not turned aside from the crime.

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p12"></span>IV.  *Various incidents of the Passion
further explained and the reality of Christ’s sufferings asserted.*

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p13"></span>And thus it followed, dearly-beloved,
that as John the Evangelist has narrated, when the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p13.1"></span>Lord</span> offered the
bread which He had dipped to His betrayer, more clearly to point him
out, the devil entirely seized Judas, and now, by his veritable act of
wickedness, took possession of one whom he had already bound down by his
evil designs.  For only in body was he lying there with those at meat: 
in mind he was arming the hatred of the priests, the falseness of the
witnesses, and the fury of the ignorant mob.  At last the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p13.2"></span>Lord</span>, seeing on what
a gross crime Judas was bent says, “What thou doest, do quickly <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001) .”  This is the voice not of
command but of permission, and not of fear but of readiness:  He, that
has power over all times, shows that He puts no hindrance in the way of
the traitor, and carries out the Father’s will for the redemption of the
world in such a way as neither to promote nor to fear the crime which
His persecutors were preparing.  When Judas, therefore, at the devil’s
persuasion, departed from Christ, and cut himself off from the unity of
the Apostolic body, the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p14.2"></span>Lord</span>, without being disturbed by any
fear, but anxious only for the salvation of those He came to redeem,
spent all the time that was free from His persecutors’ attack on mystic
conversation and holy teaching, as is declared in St. John’s gospel: 
raising His eyes to heaven and beseeching the Father for the whole
Church that all whom the Father had and would give the Son might become
one and remain undivided to the Redeemer’s glory, and adding lastly that
prayer in which He says, “Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass
from Me <span id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002) .”  Wherein it is not
to be thought that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p15.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus wished to escape the
Passion and the Death, the sacraments of which He had already committed
to His disciples’ keeping, seeing that He Himself forbids Peter, when he
was burning with devoted faith and love, to use the sword, saying, “The
cup which the Father hath given Me, shall I not drink it <span
id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003) ?” and seeing that that is certain
which the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p16.2"></span>Lord</span>
also says, according to John’s Gospel, “For <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p16.3"></span>God</span> so loved the world that He gave
His only begotten Son, that everyone who believes in Him may not perish,
but have eternal life <span id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004) ;” as
also what the Apostle Paul says, “Christ loved us and gave Himself for
us, a victim to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p17.2"></span>God</span> for a sweet-smelling savour <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005) .”  For the saving of all through
the Cross of Christ was the common will and the common plan of the
Father and the Son; nor could that by any means be disturbed which
before eternal ages had been mercifully determined and unchangeably
fore-ordained.  Therefore in assuming true and entire manhood He took
the true sensations of the body and the true feelings of the mind.  And
it does not follow because everything in Him was full of sacraments,
full of miracles, that therefore He either shed false tears or took food
from pretended hunger or feigned slumber.  It was in our humility that
He was despised, with our grief that He was saddened, with our pain that
He was racked on the cross.  For His compassion underwent the sufferings
of our mortality with the purpose of healing them, and His power
encountered them with the purpose of conquering them.  And this Isaiah
has most plainly prophesied, saying, “He carries our sins and is pained
for us, and we thought Him to be in pain and in stripes and in
vexation.  But He was wounded for our sins, and was stricken for our
offences, and with His bruises we are healed <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p20"></span>V.  *The resignation of Christ is an
undying lesson to the Church.*

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p21"></span>And so, dearly beloved, when the Son of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p21.1"></span>God</span> says,
“Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from Me <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007) ,” He uses the outcry of our
nature, and pleads the cause of human frailty and trembling:  that our
patience may be strengthened and our fears driven away in the things
which we have to bear.  At length, ceasing even to ask this now that He
had in a measure palliated our weak fears, though it is not expedient
for us to retain them, He passes into another mood, and says,
“Nevertheless, not as I will but as Thou;” and again, “If this cup can
not pass from Me, except I drink it, Thy will be done <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) .”  These words of the Head are the
salvation of the whole Body:  these words have instructed all the
faithful, kindled the zeal of all the confessors, crowned all the
martyrs.  For who could overcome the world’s hatred, the blasts of
temptations, the terrors of persecutors, had not Christ, in the name of
all and for all, said, to the Father, “Thy will be done?”  Then let the
words be learnt by all the Church’s sons who have been purchased at so
great a price, so freely justified:  and when the <span id="page_171">p.
171</span> <span id="ii.v.xxix-Page_171"></span>shock of some violent
temptation has fallen on them, let them use the aid of this potent
prayer, that they may conquer their fear and trembling, and learn to
suffer patiently.  From this point, dearly-beloved, our sermon must pass
to the consideration of the details of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p23.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Passion, and lest we should
burden you with prolixity, we will divide our common task, and put off
the rest <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009) till the fourth day
of the week.  <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p24.1"></span>God’s</span> grace will be vouchsafed to you
if you pray Him to give me the power of carrying out my duty:  through
our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxix-p24.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus
Christ, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_998"></span>[169:999](2120207.htm#fr_998) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p5"></span> [Ps. lxxxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[169:1000](2120207.htm#fr_999) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p6"></span> [Ps. li.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[169:1001](2120207.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p9"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. xxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[170:1002](2120207.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p14"></span> S. [John xiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[170:1003](2120207.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p15"></span> S. [Matt. xxvi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[170:1004](2120207.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p16"></span> S. [John xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[170:1005](2120207.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p16.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p17"></span> [John
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.v.xxix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[170:1006](2120207.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p18"></span> [Eph. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[170:1007](2120207.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p19"></span> [Is. liii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#045)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p19.1"></span>. 
Leo’s version is a very literal translation of the LXX., which varies a
good deal from the Vulgate and the A.V.; he omits however, the clause,
“the chastisement of our peace,” &c., which is common to all three.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[170:1008](2120207.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p22"></span> [Matt.
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[170:1009](2120207.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p23"></span> [Matt.
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042)<span id="ii.v.xxix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[171:1010](2120207.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p24"></span> This is Sermon LIX. which follows *in
extenso*.  See Serm. LIV., chap. vi. n. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LIX](2120208)
