[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120228)  [Next](2120230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span> <span id="page_iiib">p. iiib</span> <span
id="iii.ii-Page_iiib"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Prefatory Note.</span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Text followed in these Translations
is the Benedictine one, as given by Migne in *Patrologia, Vol. LXXVII.,
Sancti Gregorii Magni, Vol. III. * The same Text of the *Regula
Pastoralis* has been published with an English Translation by the Rev.
H. R. Bramley (James Parker and Co., 1874).  The Translation now given
is an original one, though the translator desires to express his
obligations to his predecessor in the same task.  The selection of
Epistles translated has been made with the view of exhibiting Gregory’s
various activities, his various styles of correspondence, his views and
character, as well as of illustrating the history of his time. Those
which relate to certain important subjects—such as the Lombard invasion,
the English Mission, the dispute about the title of ‘Œcumenical Bishop,’
correspondence with the Emperors and with the Potentates of Gaul—have
been given in their entirety.  Of such as relate to subjects of less
moment specimens only have been selected, but sufficient, it is hoped,
for presenting a picture of the writer under his various aspects, and in
his various spheres of work.  It is hoped also that the appended notes
may serve to shew the connexion of the several Epistles with each other,
and with the circumstances they refer to, as well as to explain obscure
words or passages.  For a better understanding of the correspondence
relating to the Church in Gaul, a pedigree of the contemporary
Merovingian Kings is appended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prolegomena.](2120230)
