[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120132)  [Next](2120134.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p2.1"></span>To Proterius, Bishop of Alexandria.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p3"></span>Leo to Proterius, bishop of
Alexandria.

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p4"></span>I.  *He commends his persistent
loyalty to the Faith.*

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p5"></span>Your letter, beloved, which our
brother and fellow-bishop Nestorius duly brought us, has caused me great
joy.  For it was seemly that such an epistle should be sent by the head
of the church of Alexandria to the Apostolic See, as showed that the
Egyptians had from the first learnt from the teaching of the most
blessed Apostle Peter through his blessed disciple Mark <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555.md) , that which it is agreed the Romans
have believed, that beside the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ “there is no
other name given to men under heaven, in which they must be saved <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556.md) .”  But because “all men have not
faith <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557.md) ” and the crafty Tempter
never delights so much in wounding the hearts of men as when he can
poison their unwary minds with errors that are opposed to Gospel Truth,
we must strive by the mighty teaching of the Holy Ghost to prevent
Christian knowledge <span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-Page_96"></span>from being perverted by the devil’s
falsehoods.  And against this danger it behoves the rulers of the
churches especially to guard and to avert from the minds of simple folk
lies which are coloured by a certain show of truth <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558.md) .  “For narrow and steep is the way
which leads to life <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559.md) .”  And they
seek to entrap men not so much by watching their actions as by nice
distinctions of meaning, corrupting the force of sentences by some very
slight addition or alteration, whereby sometimes a statement, which made
for salvation, by a subtle change is turned to destruction.  But since
the Apostle says, “there must be heresies, that they which are approved
may be made manifest among you <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560.md)
,” it tends to the progress of the whole Church, that, whenever
wickedness reveals itself in setting forth wrong opinions, the things
which are harmful be not concealed, and that what will inevitably end in
ruin may not injure the innocence of others.  Wherefore they must put
down their blind wanderings and downfalls to themselves, who with rash
obstinacy prefer to glory in their shame than to accept the offered
remedy.  You do right, brother, to be displeased at their stubbornness,
and we commend you for holding fast that teaching which has come down to
us from the blessed Apostles and the holy Fathers.

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p12"></span>II.  *Let him fortify the faithful by
the public reading aloud of quotations from the Fathers bearing on the
question and of the Tome.*

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p13"></span>For there is no new preaching in the
letter which I wrote in reply to Flavian of holy memory, when he
consulted me about the Incarnation of our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p13.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ; for in nothing
did I depart from that rule of Faith which was outspokenly maintained by
your ancestors and ours.  And if Dioscorus had been willing to follow
and imitate them, he would have abided in the Body of Christ, having in
the works of Athanasius <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) of
blessed memory the materials for instruction, and in the discourses of
Theophilus <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md) and Cyril <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563.md) of holy remembrance the means rather
of praise-worthily opposing the already condemned dogma than of choosing
to consort with Eutyches in his blasphemy.  This therefore, beloved
brother, I advise in my anxiety for our common Faith that, because the
enemies of Christ’s cross lie in watch for all our words and syllables,
we give them not the slightest occasion for falsely asserting that we
agree with the Nestorian doctrine.  And you must so diligently exhort
the laity and clergy and all the brotherhood to advance in the Faith as
to show that you teach nothing new but instil into all men’s breasts
those things, which the Fathers of revered memory have with harmony of
statement taught, and with which in all things our epistle agrees.  And
this must be shown not only by your words but also by the actually
reading aloud of previous statements, that <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p16.1"></span>God’s</span> people may know that what
the Fathers received from their predecessors and handed on to their
descendants, is still instilled into them in the present day.  And to
this end, when the statements of the aforesaid priests have first been
read, then lastly let my writings also be recited, that the ears of the
faithful may attest that we preach nothing else than what we received
from our forefathers.  And because their understandings are but little
practised in discerning these things, let them at least learn from the
letters of the Fathers, how ancient this evil is, which is now condemned
by us in Nestorius as well as in Eutyches, who have both been ashamed to
preach the gospel of Christ according to the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p16.2"></span>Lord’s</span> own teaching.

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p17"></span>III.  *The ancient precedents are to
be maintained throughout.*

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p18"></span>Accordingly, both in the rule of
Faith and in the observance of discipline, let the standard of antiquity
be maintained throughout, and do thou, beloved, display the firmness of
a prudent ruler, that the church of Alexandria may get the benefit of my
earnest resistance to the unprincipled ambition of certain people in
maintaining its ancient privileges, and of my determination that all
metropolitans should retain their dignity undiminished, as you will
ascertain from the tenor of my letters, which I have addressed, whether
to the holy Synod or to the most Christian Emperor, or to the Bishop of
Constantinople; for you will perceive that I have made it my special
care to allow no deviation from the rule of Faith in the Lord’s
churches, nor any diminution of their privileges through any
individual’s unscrupulousness.  And as this is so, hold fast, brother,
to the custom of your predecessors, and keep due authority over your
comprovincial bishops, who by ancient constitution are subject to the
See of Alexandria; so that they resist not ecclesiastical usage, and
refuse not to meet together under your presidency, either at fixed times
or when any reasonable cause demands it:  and that if anything has to be
discussed in a general meeting which will be to the benefit of the
Church, when the brethren have thus met together, they may unanimously
come to <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-Page_97"></span>some resolution thereupon.  For there
is nothing which ought to recall them from this obedience, seeing that
both for faith and conduct we have such good knowledge of you, brother,
that we will not allow you to lose any of your predecessor’s authority,
nor to be slighted with impunity.  Dated March 10th, in the consulship
of the illustrious Aetius and Studius (454).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_555"></span>[95:556](2120133.htm#fr_555.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p6"></span> S. Mark was the reputed founder of
the church of Alexandria.  Cf. Letter IX. chap. 1.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[95:557](2120133.htm#fr_556.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p7"></span> [Acts iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[95:558](2120133.htm#fr_557.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p8"></span> [2 Thess. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#002.md)<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[96:559](2120133.htm#fr_558.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p9"></span> See chap. ii. and more particularly
Lett. CXXX. chap. 3 from which it is evident that the Eutychians had
sought to foist upon certain passages in the Tome a Nestorian
interpretation.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[96:560](2120133.htm#fr_559.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p10"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[96:561](2120133.htm#fr_560.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019.md)<span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[96:562](2120133.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p14"></span> Who as he himself says in the next
letter, *eidem ecclesiæ præfuerunt* (CXXX. ii.).

<span id="fn_562"></span>[96:563](2120133.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p15"></span> Who as he himself says in the next
letter, *eidem ecclesiæ præfuerunt* (CXXX. ii.).

<span id="fn_563"></span>[96:564](2120133.htm#fr_563.md) <span
id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.cxxiii-p16"></span> Who as he himself says in the next
letter, *eidem ecclesiæ præfuerunt* (CXXX. ii.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Marcian Augustus.](2120134.md)
