[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120537)  [Next](2120539.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.vi-p2"></span>To Rufinus, Bishop of Ephesus.

<span id="iii.v.vii.vi-p3"></span>Gregory to Rufinus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.vii.vi-p4"></span>The charity of your acts of friendship
in the past has moved us to visit your Fraternity with the present
letter.  For we have been refreshed with great joy by learning from
reports given us of your health that all is well with you.  But, while
this is so, we implore Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.vi-p4.1"></span>God</span>, that as in the present life,
which is as it were a shadow of the future one, He has granted you to
rejoice in the transitory welfare of your body, so in that heavenly
country wherein is true life He may cause us to give thanks and rejoice
with a common exultation for the perfected salvation of your soul.  Now
the bearer of this, desiring to be commended to you by a letter from us,
having been asked by us whether he had learnt letters as becomes a
clerk, replied that he was ignorant of them.  What further commendation,
then, with regard to him I should give to your Fraternity I know not;
except that you should be solicitous about his soul, and watch over him
with pastoral zeal, so that, as he cannot read, your tongue may be a
book to him, and that in the goodness of your preaching and work he may
see what to follow.  For the living voice usually draws the heart more
closely than perfunctory reading.  But, while, as his master, you supply
him inwardly with this spiritual teaching, let not outward care for him
also be wanting, that by its aid he come to long for spiritual things,
and lest, if such aid is slighted, you should no longer have one to
preach to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Respecta, Abbess.](2120539.md)
