[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120256)  [Next](2120258.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p2"></span>How intent the ruler ought to be on
meditations in the Sacred Law.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p3"></span>But all this is duly executed by a
ruler, if, inspired by the spirit of heavenly fear and love, he meditate
daily on the precepts of Sacred Writ, that the words of Divine
admonition may restore in him the power of solicitude and of provident
circumspection with regard to the celestial life, which familiar
intercourse with men continually destroys; and that one who is drawn to
oldness of life by secular society may by the aspiration of compunction
be ever renewed to love of the spiritual country.  For the heart runs
greatly to waste in the midst of human talk; and, since it is
undoubtedly evident that, when driven by the tumults of external
occupations, it loses its balance and falls, one ought incessantly to
take care that through keen pursuit of instruction it may rise again. 
For hence it is that Paul admonishes his disciple who had been put over
the flock, saying, *Till I come, give attendance to reading* ([1 Tim.
iv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>).  Hence David says, *How have I loved
Thy Law, O <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p3.2"></span>Lord</span>!  It is my meditation all the
day* ([Ps. cix. 97](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#097.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p3.3"></span>).  Hence the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p3.4"></span>Lord</span> commanded Moses concerning
the carrying of the ark, saying. *Thou shalt make four rings of gold,
which thou shalt put in the four corners of the ark, and thou shalt make
staves of shittim-wood, and overlay them with gold, and shalt put them
through the rings which are by the sides of the ark, that it may be
borne with them, and they shall always be in the rings, nor shall they
ever be drawn out from them* ([Exod. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p3.5"></span>, *seq.*).  What but the holy Church is
figured by the ark?  To which four rings of gold in the four corners are
ordered to be adjoined, because, in that it is thus extended towards the
four quarters of the globe, it is declared undoubtedly to be equipped
for journeying with the four books of the holy Gospel.  And staves of
shittim-wood are made, and are put through the same rings for carrying,
because strong and persevering teachers, as incorruptible pieces of
timber, are to be sought for, who by cleaving ever to instruction out of
the sacred volumes may declare the unity of the holy Church, and, as it
were, carry the ark by being let into its rings.  For indeed to carry
the ark by means of staves is through preaching to bring the holy Church
before the rude minds of unbelievers by means of good teachers.  And
these are also ordered to be overlaid with gold, that, while they are
resonant to others in discourse, they may also themselves glitter in the
splendour of their lives.  Of whom it is further fitly added, *They
shall always be in the rings, nor shall they ever be drawn out from
them;* because it is surely necessary that those who attend upon the
office of preaching should not recede from the study of sacred lore. 
For to this end it is that the staves are ordered to be always in the
rings, that, when occasion requires the ark to be carried, no tardiness
in carrying may arise from the staves having to be put in; because, that
is to say, when a pastor is enquired of by his subordinates on any
spiritual matter, it is exceedingly ignominious, should he then go about
to learn, when he ought to solve the question.  But let the staves
remain ever in the rings, that teachers, ever meditating in their own
hearts the words of Sacred Writ, may lift without delay the ark of the
covenant; as will be the case if they teach at once whatever <span
id="page_24b">p. 24b</span> <span id="iii.iv.iii.xi-Page_24b"></span>is
required.  Hence the first Pastor of the Church well admonishes all
other pastors saying, *Be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you* ([1 Pet. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.xi-p3.6"></span>):  as though he should say plainly, That
no delay may hinder the carrying of the ark, let the staves never be
withdrawn from the rings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III](2120258.md)
