[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120568)  [Next](2120570) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.viii-p2"></span>*To Boniface, First Guardian
(Defensorem).*

<span id="iii.v.viii.viii-p3"></span>Gregory to Boniface concerning the
privileges of Guardians <span id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737) .

<span id="iii.v.viii.viii-p5"></span>Those who labour faithfully in the
interests of the Church should receive the benefit of suitable
remuneration, so that both we may be seen to have made a worthy return
for their services, and they may shew themselves the more useful for the
favour of the solace granted them.  Seeing, then, that those who hold
the office of Guardians are known to labour in the causes of the Church
and in the service of the pontiffs, we have thought fit that they should
enjoy the following prerogatives, granted to them for
recompense;—appointing that, as in the school (*schola*) of notaries and
subdeacons, through the indulgence of pontiffs long ago, there have been
constituted *regionarii*, so also among the Guardians seven who may have
commended themselves by proved utility shall be distinguished by the
dignity of *regionarii*.  And we appoint that these, in the absence of
the pontiff, shall have leave to sit anywhere in any assembly of clergy,
and enjoy in all respects the privileges of their dignity.  Furthermore,
if any one, attaining to this position of priority, should by any chance
live in another province for his own advantage, he must needs still
occupy in all respects his place of priority, so that he may be the
chief of all the guardians, as being one who, even before he obtained
his position of priority, had not ceased by assiduous personal attention
to devote himself to the interests of the Church and the service of the
pontiff.  These decrees, then, by us constituted, which have been
ordained for the privileges and constitution of Guardians, we appoint to
be kept in perpetual force and irrefragably;—whether such things as we
have decreed in writing, or such as are seen to have been ordained in
our presence:  and we decree also that they shall not be upset or
changed in whole or in part on any occasion whatever by any of the
pontiffs.  For it is a very harsh proceeding, and especially contrary to
good conduct in priests, that any one should endeavour, under any manner
of excuse, to rescind what has been well ordained, and also by his
example to teach others to dissolve his own constitutions after his own
time.  The month of April, first Indiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[235b:1738](2120569.htm#fr_1737) <span
id="iii.v.viii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.viii-p4"></span> See *Prolegom*., p. vii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.](2120570)
