[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120198)  [Next](2120200.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Sermon XXXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p2.1"></span>On Lent, I.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p3"></span>I.  *The benefits of abstinence shown by
the example of the Hebrews.*

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p4"></span>In former days, when the people of the
Hebrews and all the tribes of Israel were oppressed for their scandalous
sins by the grievous tyranny of the Philistines, in order that they
might be able to overcome their enemies, as the sacred story declares,
they restored their powers of mind and body by the injunction of a
fast.  For they understood that they had deserved that hard and wretched
subjection for their neglect of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p4.1"></span>God’s</span> commands, and evil ways, and that
it was in vain for them to strive with arms unless they had first
withstood their sin.  Therefore abstaining from food and drink, they
applied the discipline of strict correction to themselves, and in order
to conquer their foes, first conquered the allurements of the palate in
themselves.  And thus it came about that their fierce enemies and cruel
taskmasters yielded to them when fasting, whom they had held in
subjection when full.  And so we too, dearly beloved, who are set in the
midst of many oppositions and conflicts, may be cured by a little
carefulness, if only we will use the same means.  For our case is almost
the same as theirs, seeing that, as they were attacked by foes in the
flesh so are we chiefly by spiritual enemies.  And if we can conquer
them by <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxi-p4.2"></span>God’s</span>
grace enabling us to correct our ways, the strength of our bodily
enemies also will give way before us, and by our self-amendment we shall
weaken those who were rendered formidable to us, not by their own merits
but by our shortcomings.

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p5"></span>II.  *Use Lent to vanquish the enemy, and
be thus preparing for Eastertide.*

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p6"></span>Accordingly, dearly-beloved, that we may
be able to overcome all our enemies, let us seek Divine aid by the
observance of the heavenly bidding, knowing that we cannot otherwise
prevail against our adversaries, unless we prevail against our own
selves.  For we have many encounters with our own selves:  the flesh
desires one thing against the spirit, and the spirit another thing
against the flesh <span id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903.md) .  And in this
disagreement, if the desires of the body be stronger, the mind will
disgracefully lose its proper dignity, and it will be most disastrous
for that to serve which ought to have ruled.  But if the mind, being
subject to its Ruler, and delighting in gifts from above, shall have
trampled under foot the allurements of earthly pleasure, and shall not
have allowed sin to reign in its mortal body <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904.md) , reason will maintain a well-ordered
supremacy, and its strongholds no strategy of spiritual wickednesses
will cast down:  because man has then only true peace and true freedom
when the flesh is ruled by the judgment of the mind, and the mind is
directed by the will of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p8.2"></span>God</span>.  And although this state of
preparedness, dearly-beloved, should always be maintained that our
ever-watchful foes may be overcome by unceasing diligence, yet now it
must be the more anxiously sought for and the more zealously cultivated
when the designs of our subtle foes themselves are conducted with keener
craft than ever.  For knowing that the most hallowed days of Lent are
now at hand, in the keeping of which all past slothfulnesses are
chastised, all negligences alerted for, they direct all the force of
their spite on this one thing, that they who intend to celebrate the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxi-p8.3"></span>Lord’s</span> holy
Passover may be found unclean in some matter, and that cause of offence
may arise where propitiation ought to have been obtained.

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p9"></span>III.  *Fights are necessary to prove our
Faith*.

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p10"></span>As we approach then, dearly-beloved, the
beginning of Lent, which is a time for the more careful serving of the
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxi-p10.1"></span>Lord</span>, because
we are, as it were, entering on a kind of contest in good works, let us
prepare our souls for fighting with temptations, and understand that the
more zealous we are for our salvation, the more determined must be the
assaults of our opponents.  But “stronger is He that is in us than He
that is against us <span id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905.md) ,” and
through Him are we powerful in whose strength we rely:  because it was
for this that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p11.2"></span>Lord</span> <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>
<span id="ii.v.xxi-Page_153"></span>allowed Himself to be tempted by the
tempter, that we might be taught by His example as well as fortified by
His aid.  For He conquered the adversary, as ye have heard <span
id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906.md) , by quotations from the law, not by
actual strength, that by this very thing He might do greater honour to
man, and inflict a greater punishment on the adversary by conquering the
enemy of the human race not now as <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p12.2"></span>God</span> but as Man.  He fought then,
therefore, that we too might fight thereafter:  He conquered that we too
might likewise conquer.  For there are no works of power,
dearly-beloved, without the trials of temptations, there is no faith
without proof, no contest without a foe, no victory without conflict. 
This life of ours is in the midst of snares, in the midst of battles; if
we do not wish to be deceived, we must watch:  if we want to overcome,
we must fight.  And therefore the most wise Solomon says, “My son in
approaching the service of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p12.3"></span>God</span> prepare thy soul for
temptation <span id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907.md) .”  For He being a
man full of the wisdom of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p13.2"></span>God</span>, and knowing that the pursuit of
religion involves laborious struggles, foreseeing too the danger of the
fight, forewarned the intending combatant; lest haply, if the tempter
came upon him in his ignorance, he might find him unready and wound him
unawares.

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p14"></span>IV.  *The Christian’s armour is both for
defence and for attack*.

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p15"></span>So, dearly-beloved, let us who instructed
in Divine learning come wittingly to the present contest and strife,
hear the Apostle when he says, “for our struggle is not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the rulers of
this dark world, against spiritual wickedness in heavenly things <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908.md) ,” and let us not forget that these
our enemies feel it is against them all is done that we strive to do for
our salvation, and that by the very fact of our seeking after some good
thing we are challenging our foes.  For this is an old-standing quarrel
between us and them fostered by the devil’s ill-will, so that they are
tortured by our being justified, because they have fallen from those
good things to which we, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p16.2"></span>God</span> helping us, are advancing.  If,
therefore, we are raised, they are prostrated:  if we are strengthened,
they are weakened.  Our cures are their blows, because they are wounded
by our wounds’ cure.  “Stand, therefore,” dearly-beloved, as the Apostle
says, “having the loins of your mind girt in truth, and your feet shod
in the preparation of the gospel of peace, in all things taking the
shield of faith in which ye may be able to extinguish all the fiery
darts of the evil one, and put on the helmet of salvation and the sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p16.3"></span>God <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909.md)
</span>.”  See, dearly-beloved, with what mighty weapons, with what
impregnable defences we are armed by our Leader, who is famous for His
many triumphs, the unconquered Master of the Christian warfare.  He has
girt our loins with the belt of chastity, He has shod our feet with the
bonds of peace:  because the unbelted soldier is quickly vanquished by
the suggester of immodesty, and he that is unshod is easily bitten by
the serpent.  He has given the shield of faith for the protection of our
whole body; on our head has He set the helmet of salvation; our right
hand has He furnished with a sword, that is with the word of Truth: 
that the spiritual warrior may not only be safe from wounds, but also
may have strength to wound his assailant.

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p18"></span>V.  *Abstinence not only from food but
from other evil desires, especially from wrath, is required in Lent.*

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p19"></span>Relying, therefore, dearly-beloved, on
these arms, let us enter actively and fearlessly on the contest set
before us:  so that in this fasting struggle we may not rest satisfied
with only this end, that we should think abstinence from food alone
desirable.  For it is not enough that the substance of our flesh should
be reduced, if the strength of the soul be not also developed.  When the
outer man is somewhat subdued, let the inner man be somewhat refreshed;
and when bodily excess is denied to our flesh, let our mind be
invigorated by spiritual delights.  Let every Christian scrutinise
himself, and search severely into his inmost heart:  let him see that no
discord cling there, no wrong desire be harboured.  Let chasteness drive
incontinence far away; let the light of truth dispel the shades of
deception; let the swellings of pride subside; let wrath yield to
reason; let the darts of ill-treatment be shattered, and the chidings of
the tongue be bridled; let thoughts of revenge fall through, and
injuries be given over to oblivion.  In fine, let “every plant which the
heavenly Father hath not planted be removed by the roots <span
id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910.md) .”  For then only are the seeds of
virtue well nourished in us, when every foreign germ is uprooted from
the field of wheat.  If any one, therefore, has been fired by the desire
for vengeance against another, so that he has given him up to prison or
bound him with chains, let him make haste <span id="page_154">p.
154</span> <span id="ii.v.xxi-Page_154"></span>to forgive not only the
innocent, but also one who seems worthy of punishment, that he may with
confidence make use of the clause in the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p20.2"></span>Lord’s</span> prayer and say, “Forgive us our
debts, as we also forgive our debtors <span
id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911.md) .”  Which petition the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxi-p21.2"></span>Lord</span> marks with
peculiar emphasis, as if the efficacy of the whole rested on this
condition, by saying, “For if ye forgive men their sins, your Father
which is in heaven also will forgive you:  but if ye forgive not men,
neither will your Father forgive you your sins <span
id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912.md) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p23"></span>VI.  *The right use of Lent will lead to
a happy participation in Easter*.

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p24"></span>Accordingly, dearly-beloved, being
mindful of our weakness, because we easily fall into all kinds of
faults, let us by no means neglect this special remedy and most
effectual healing of our wounds.  Let us remit, that we may have
remission:  let us grant the pardon which we crave:  let us not be eager
to be revenged when we pray to be forgiven.  Let us not pass over the
groans of the poor with deaf ear, but with prompt kindness bestow our
mercy on the needy, that we may deserve to find mercy in the judgment. 
And he that, aided by <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p24.1"></span>God’s</span> grace, shall strain every nerve
after this perfection, will keep this holy fast faithfully; free from
the leaven of the old wickedness, in the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth <span id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913.md) , he will reach the
blessed Passover, and by newness of life will worthily rejoice in the
mystery of man’s reformation through Christ our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxi-p25.2"></span>Lord</span> Who with the Father and the Holy
Spirit lives and reigns for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_903"></span>[152:904](2120199.htm#fr_903.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p7"></span> Cf. [Gal.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md), [Rom.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[152:905](2120199.htm#fr_904.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p8"></span> Cf. [Gal.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017.md), [Rom.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[152:906](2120199.htm#fr_905.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p11"></span> [1 John iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[153:907](2120199.htm#fr_906.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p12"></span> *Ut audistis*, viz. in the Gospel for
Quadragesima, or the First Sunday in Lent then apparently as now S.
[Matt. iv. 1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxi-p12.1"></span>:  cf. Serm. XL. 3.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[153:908](2120199.htm#fr_907.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p13"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
2.1](../../../bib/apo/sir002.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[153:909](2120199.htm#fr_908.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p16"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[153:910](2120199.htm#fr_909.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p16.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p17"></span> [Eph. vi.
14-17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.v.xxi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[153:911](2120199.htm#fr_910.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p20"></span> S. [Matt. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[154:912](2120199.htm#fr_911.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p21"></span> S. [Matt.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[154:913](2120199.htm#fr_912.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p22"></span> S. [Matt.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[154:914](2120199.htm#fr_913.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxi-p25"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008.md)<span id="ii.v.xxi-p25.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon XL](2120200.md)
