[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120517)  [Next](2120519) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p2"></span>*To the Brethren going to England
(Angliam)* <span id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p4"></span>Gregory, servant of the servants of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p4.1"></span>God</span>, to
the servants of our <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p4.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p5"></span> <span id="page_203b">p. 203b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-Page_203b"></span>Since it had been better not
to have begun what is good than to return back from it when begun, you
must, most beloved sons, fulfil the good work which with the help of the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> you
have begun.  Let, then, neither the toil of the journey nor the tongues
of evil-speaking men deter you; but with all instancy and all fervour go
on with what under <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p5.2"></span>God’s</span> guidance you have
commenced, knowing that great toil is followed by the glory of an
eternal reward.  Obey in all things humbly Augustine your provost
(*præposito*), who is returning to you, whom we also appoint your abbot,
knowing that whatever may be fulfilled in you through his admonition
will in all ways profit your souls.  May Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p5.3"></span>God</span> protect you with His grace,
and grant to me to see the fruit of your labour in the eternal country;
that so, even though I cannot labour with you, I may be found together
with you in the joy of the reward; for in truth I desire to labour. 
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p5.4"></span>God</span> keep
you safe, most beloved sons.  Given the tenth day of the Kalends of
August, the fourteenth year of the Emperor our lord Mauricius Tiberius,
the most pious Augustus, the thirteenth year of the consulship of our
said lord, Indiction 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[202b:1666](2120518.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p3"></span> This, with the eight following
letters (51–59), were committed to Augustine, who is spoken of in
several of them as the bearer, when he was sent back from Rome to rejoin
his companions.  Bede (*H. E*. I. 23), and John the deacon (*Vit. S.
Greg*. II. 33), say that the missionaries—“cum aliquantulum itinerus
confecissent” (Bede)—“post dies aliquot” (John Diac.)—were deterred by
what they had heard of the difficulties of their undertaking, and sent
Augustine to Rome to request leave to give it up and that Gregory sent
him back to them with letters of admonition and of commendation.  No
commendatory letters seem to have been given them when they first set
out.  Those now sent are addressed to the bishops of Turni (*al.
Turon*), Marseilles, Arles, Vienne, Autun, and Aix in Provenee, to the
abbot of Lerins, to Arigius, Patrician of Gaul, to Theodoric and
Theodebert, the two boy-kings of Burgundy and Austrasia, and to queen
Brunechild their grandmother, who at this time ruled Austrasia as
Theodebert’s guardian.  See *Pedigree of Kings of Gaul*, p. xxx.  The
letters which come first in order, 51 and 52, being dated 22 July <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 596, we may
conclude that the missionaries had been originally despatched in the
spring of the same year.  They appear to have got as far as the southern
coast of Provence, since the letters to the bishop of Aix and the Abbot
of Lerins shew that Augustine had already visited them, though not,
apparently, any others to whom letters are now addressed.  The mission
was accompanied by Candidus, sent out as *Rector* of the patrimony in
Gaul (cf. Ep. VII.), who is also commended in the letter.  The patrimony
appears to have been attended to previously in a way not satisfactory to
Gregory by the bishops of Arles (see below, Epp. LIII., LV.).  This
letter is not found in the *Registrum Epistolorum*; but given by Bede
(I. 23), and by John the Deacon (*Vit. S. Greg*. lib. ii. c. 34).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Pelagius and Serenus, Bishops.](2120519)
