[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120218)  [Next](2120220.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xli-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xli-p2.1"></span>(On the Whitsuntide Fast, I.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p3"></span>I.  *Since the Apostles’ day till now
self-restraint is the best defence against the Devil’s assaults.*

<span id="ii.v.xli-p4"></span>To-day’s festival, dearly-beloved,
hallowed by the descent of the Holy Ghost, is followed, as you know by a
solemn fast, which being a salutary institution for the healing of soul
and body, we must keep with devout observance.  For when the Apostles
had been filled with the promised power, and the Spirit of Truth had
entered their hearts, we doubt not that among the other mysteries of
heavenly doctrine this discipline of spiritual self-restraint was first
thought of at the prompting of the Paraclete in order that minds
sanctified by fasting might be fitter for the chrism to be bestowed on
them <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161.md) .  The disciples of
Christ had the protection of the Almighty aid, and the chiefs of the
infant Church were guarded by the whole Godhead of the Father and the
Son through the presence of the Holy Ghost.  But against the threatened
attacks of persecutors, against the terrifying shouts of the ungodly,
they could not fight with bodily strength or pampered flesh, since that
which delights the outer does most harm to the inner man, and the more
one’s fleshly substance is kept in subjection, the more purified is the
reasoning soul.

<span id="ii.v.xli-p6"></span> <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="ii.v.xli-Page_194"></span>II.  *The tempter is foiled in attacks
upon those who have learnt these tactics*.

<span id="ii.v.xli-p7"></span>And so those teachers, who have instructed
all the Church’s sons by their examples and their traditions, began the
rudiments of the Christian warfare with holy fasts, that, having to
fight against spiritual wickednesses, they might take the armour of
abstinence, wherewith to slay the incentives to vice.  For invisible
foes and incorporeal enemies will have no strength against us, if we be
not entangled in any lusts of the flesh.  The desire to hurt us is
indeed ever active in the tempter, but he will be disarmed and
powerless, if he find no vantage ground within us from which to attack
us.  But who, encompassed with this frail flesh, and placed in this body
of death, even one who has made much decided progress, can be so sure of
his safety now, as to believe himself free from the peril of all
allurements?  Although Divine Grace gives daily victory to His
saints <span id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162.md) , yet He does not
remove the occasion for fighting, because this very fact is part of our
Protector’s Mercy, Who has always designed that something should remain
for our ever-changing nature to win, lest it should boast itself on the
ending of the battle.

<span id="ii.v.xli-p9"></span>III.  *And so this fast comes very
opportunely after the feast of Whitsuntide.*

<span id="ii.v.xli-p10"></span>Therefore, after the days of holy
gladness, which we have devoted to the honour of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xli-p10.1"></span>Lord</span> rising from the
dead and then ascending into heaven, and after receiving the gift of the
Holy Ghost, a fast is ordained as a wholesome and needful practice, so
that, if perchance through neglect or disorder even amid the joys of the
festival any undue licence has broken out, it may be corrected by the
remedy of strict abstinence, which must be the more scrupulously carried
out in order that what was on this day Divinely bestowed on the Church
may abide in us.  For being made the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and
watered with a greater supply than ever of the Divine Stream, we ought
not to be conquered by any lusts nor held in possession by any vices in
order that the habitation of Divine power may be stained with no
pollution.

<span id="ii.v.xli-p11"></span>IV.  *And by proper use of it we shall
win <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xli-p11.1"></span>God’s</span>
favour.*

<span id="ii.v.xli-p12"></span>And this assuredly it is possible for all
to obtain, <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xli-p12.1"></span>God</span>
helping and guiding us, if by the purification of fasting and by
merciful liberality, we take pains to be set free from the filth of
sins, and to be rich in the fruits of love.  For whatever is spent in
feeding the poor, in healing the sick, in ransoming prisoners, or in any
other deeds of piety, is not lessened but increased, nor will that ever
be lost in the sight of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xli-p12.2"></span>God</span> which the loving-kindness of the
faithful has expended, seeing that whatever a man gives in relief, he
lays up for his own reward.  For “blessed are the merciful, since <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xli-p12.3"></span>God</span> shall have mercy
on them <span id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163.md) ;” nor wilt
shortcomings be remembered, where the presence of true religion has been
attested.  On Wednesday and Friday, therefore, let us fast, and on
Saturday let us keep vigil in the presence of the most blessed Apostle,
Peter, by whose prayers we surely trust to be set free both from
spiritual foes and bodily enemies; through our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xli-p13.2"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, who with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns for ever and ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[193:1162](2120219.htm#fr_1161.md) <span
id="ii.v.xli-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p5"></span> Cf. note 9 on Lett. CLVI. chap. 5.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[194:1163](2120219.htm#fr_1162.md) <span
id="ii.v.xli-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p8"></span> Cf. Serm. LXXXVIII. chap. 3, *licet
quotidiano Dei munere a diversis contaminationibus emundemur, inhærent
tamen incautis animis maculæ crassiores quas oporteat diligentiori cura
ablui*.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[194:1164](2120219.htm#fr_1163.md) <span
id="ii.v.xli-p12.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p13"></span> S. [Matt. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007.md)<span id="ii.v.xli-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXXII](2120220.md)
