[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120213)  [Next](2120215) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>(On the Lord’s Resurrection, II.)</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p3"></span>I.  *The Cross is not only the mystery
of salvation, but an example to follow*.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p4"></span>The whole of the Easter mystery,
dearly-beloved, has been brought before us in the Gospel narrative, and
the ears of the mind have been so reached through the ear of flesh that
none of you can fail to have a picture of the events:  for the text of
the Divinely-inspired story has clearly shown the treachery of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ’s
betrayal, the judgment by which He was condemned, the barbarity of His
crucifixion, and glory of His resurrection.  But a sermon is still
required of us, that the priests’ exhortation may be added to the solemn
reading of Holy Writ, as I am sure you are with pious expectation
demanding of us as your accustomed due.  Because therefore there is no
place for ignorance in faithful ears, the seed of the Word which
consists of the preaching of the Gospel, ought to grow in the soil of
your heart, so that, when choking thorns and thistles have been removed,
the plants of holy thoughts and the buds of right desires may spring up
freely into fruit.  For the cross of Christ, which was set up for the
salvation of mortals, is both a mystery and an example <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107) :  a sacrament where by the Divine
power takes effect, an example whereby man’s devotion is excited:  for
to those who are rescued from the prisoner’s yoke Redemption further
procures the power of following the way of the cross by imitation.  For
if the world’s wisdom so prides itself in its error that every one
follows the opinions and habits and whole manner of life of him whom he
has chosen as his leader, how shall we share in the name of Christ save
by being inseparably united to Him, Who is, as He Himself asserted, “the
Way, the Truth, and the Life <span id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108)
?” the Way that is of holy living, the Truth of Divine doctrine, and the
Life of eternal happiness.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p7"></span>II.  *Christ took our nature upon Him
for our salvation.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p8"></span>For when the whole body of mankind had
fallen in our first parents, the merciful <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>God</span> purposed so to succour, through
His only-begotten Jesus Christ, His creatures made after His image, that
the restoration of our nature should not be effected apart from it, and
that our new estate should be an advance upon our original position. 
Happy, if we had not fallen from that which <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p8.2"></span>God</span> made us; but happier, if we
remain that which He has re-made us.  It was much to have received form
from Christ; it is more to have a substance in Christ <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109) .  For we were taken up into its
own proper self by that Nature (which condescended to those limitations
which loving-kindness dictated and which yet incurred no sort of
change.  We were taken up by that Nature <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110) ), which destroyed not what was His
in what was ours, nor what was ours in what was His; which made the
person of the Godhead and of the Manhood so one in Itself that by
co-ordination of weakness and power, the flesh could not be rendered
inviolable through the Godhead, nor the Godhead passible through the
flesh.  We were taken up by that Nature, which did not break off the
Branch from the common stock of our race, and yet excluded all taint of
the sin which has passed upon all men.  That is to say, weakness and
mortality, which were not sin, but the penalty of sin, were undergone by
the Redeemer of the World in the way of punishment, that they might be
reckoned as the price of redemption.  What therefore in all of us is the
heritage of condemnation, is in Christ “the mystery of godliness <span
id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111) .”  For being free from debt, He
gave Himself up to that most cruel creditor, and suffered the hands of
Jews to be the devil’s agents in torturing His spotless flesh.  Which
flesh He willed to be subject to death, even up to His (speedy) <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112) resurrection, to this end, that
believers in Him might find neither persecution <span id="page_185">p.
185</span> <span id="ii.v.xxxvi-Page_185"></span>intolerable, nor death
terrible, by the remembrance that there was no more doubt about their
sharing His glory than there was about His sharing their nature.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p13"></span>III.  *The presence of the risen and
ascended <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p13.1"></span>Lord</span>
is still with us.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p14"></span>And so, dearly-beloved, if we
unhesitatingly believe with the heart what we profess with the mouth, in
Christ we are crucified, we are dead, we are buried; on the very third
day, too, we are raised.  Hence the Apostle says, “If ye have risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ is, sitting on
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p14.1"></span>God’s</span> right
hand:  set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth. 
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p14.2"></span>God</span>.  For when
Christ, your life, shall have appeared, then shall ye also appear with
Him in glory <span id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113) .”  But that the
hearts of the faithful may know that they have that whereby to spurn the
lusts of the world and be lifted to the wisdom that is above, the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p15.2"></span>Lord</span> promises us
His presence, saying, “Lo!  I am with you all the days, even till the
end of the age <span id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114) .”  For not in
vain had the Holy Ghost said by Isaiah:  “Behold! a virgin shall
conceive and shall bear a Son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel,
which is, being interpreted, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p16.2"></span>God</span> with us <span
id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115) .”  Jesus, therefore, fulfils the
proper meaning of His name, and in ascending into the heavens does not
forsake His adopted brethren, though “He sitteth at the right hand of
the Father,” yet dwells in the whole body, and Himself from above
strengthens them for patient waiting while He summons them upwards to
His glory.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p18"></span>IV.  *We must have the same mind as was
in Christ Jesus.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p19"></span>We must not, therefore, indulge in
folly amid vain pursuits, nor give way to fear in the midst of
adversities.  On the one side, no doubt, we are flattered by deceits,
and on the other weighed down by troubles; but because “the earth is
full of the mercy of the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p19.1"></span>Lord <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116) </span>,” Christ’s victory is
assuredly ours, that what He says may be fulfilled, “Fear not, for I
have overcome the world <span id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117) .” 
Whether, then, we fight against the ambition of the world, or against
the lusts of the flesh, or against the darts of heresy, let us arm
ourselves always with the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p21.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Cross.  For our Paschal feast
will never end, if we abstain from the leaven of the old wickedness (in
the sincerity of truth <span id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118) ). 
For amid all the changes of this life which is full of various
afflictions, we ought to remember the Apostle’s exhortation; whereby he
instructs us, saying, “Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ
Jesus:  Who being in the form of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22.2"></span>God</span> counted it not robbery to be
equal with <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22.3"></span>God</span>, but emptied Himself, taking the
form of a bond-servant, being made in the likeness of men and found in
fashion as a man.  Wherefore <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22.4"></span>God</span> also exalted Him, and gave Him a
name which is above every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee
should bow of things in heaven, of things on earth, and of things below,
and that every tongue should confess that the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22.5"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ is in the glory of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22.6"></span>God</span> the
Father <span id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119) .”  If, he says, you
understand “the mystery of great godliness,” and remember what the
Only-begotten Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p23.2"></span>God</span> did for the salvation of
mankind, “have that mind in you which was also in Christ Jesus,” Whose
humility is not to be scorned by any of the rich, not to be thought
shame of by any of the high-born.  For no human happiness whatever can
reach so great a height as to reckon it a source of shame to himself
that <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p23.3"></span>God</span>,
abiding in the form of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p23.4"></span>God</span>, thought it not unworthy of
Himself to take the form of a slave.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p24"></span>V.  *Only he who holds the truth on the
Incarnation can keep Easter properly.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25"></span>Imitate what He wrought:  love what He
loved, and finding in you the Grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25.1"></span>God</span>, love in Him your nature in
return, since as He was not dispossessed of riches in poverty, lessened
not glory in humility, lost not eternity in death, so do ye, too,
treading in His footsteps, despise earthly things that ye may gain
heavenly:  for the taking up of the cross means the slaying of lusts,
the killing of vices, the turning away from vanity, and the renunciation
of all error.  For, though the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25.2"></span>Lord’s</span> Passover can be kept by no
immodest, self-indulgent, proud, or miserly person, yet none are held so
far aloof from this festival as heretics, and especially those who have
wrong views on the Incarnation of the Word, either disparaging what
belongs to the Godhead or treating what is of the flesh as unreal.  For
the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25.3"></span>God</span> is true <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25.4"></span>God</span>, having from the Father all that
the Father is, with no beginning in time, subject to no sort of change,
undivided from the One <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25.5"></span>God</span>, not different from the
Almighty, the eternal Only-begotten of the eternal Father; so that the
faithful intellect believing in the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost in the same essence of the one Godhead, neither divides the Unity
by suggesting degrees of dignity, nor confounds the Trinity by merging
the Persons in one.  But it is not enough to know the Son of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25.6"></span>God</span> in the Father’s
nature <span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-Page_186"></span>only, unless we acknowledge Him in what
is ours without withdrawal of what is His own.  For that self-emptying,
which He underwent for man’s restoration, was the dispensation of
compassion, not the loss of power <span
id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120) .  For, though by the eternal
purpose of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p26.1"></span>God</span> there was “no other name under
heaven given to men whereby they must be saved <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121) ,” the Invisible made His substance
visible, the Intemporal temporal, the Impassible passible:  not that
power might sink into weakness, but that weakness might pass into
indestructible power.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p28"></span>VI.  *A mystical application of the
term “Passover” is given.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p29"></span>For which reason the very feast which
by us is named *Pascha*, among the Hebrews is called *Phase*, that is
Pass-over <span id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122) , as the evangelist
attests, saying, “Before the feast of Pascha, Jesus knowing that His
hour was come that He should pass out of this world unto the
Father <span id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123) .”  But what was the
nature in which He thus passed out unless it was ours, since the Father
was in the Son and the Son in the Father inseparably?  But because the
Word and the Flesh is one Person, the Assumed is not separated from the
Assuming nature, and the honour of being promoted is spoken of as
accruing to Him that promotes, as the Apostle says in a passage we have
already quoted, “Wherefore also <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p31.3"></span>God</span> exalted Him and gave Him a name
which is above every name.”  Where the exaltation of His assumed Manhood
is no doubt spoken of, so that He in Whose sufferings the Godhead
remains indivisible is likewise coeternal in the glory of the Godhead. 
And to share in this unspeakable gift the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p31.4"></span>Lord</span> Himself was preparing a blessed
“passing over” for His faithful ones, when on the very threshhold of His
Passion he interceded not only for His Apostles and disciples but also
for the whole Church, saying, “But not for these only I pray, but for
those also who shall believe on Me through their word, that they all may
be one, as Thou also, Father, art in Me, and I in Thee, that they also
may be one in us <span id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124) .”

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p33"></span>VII.  *Only true believers can keep the
Easter Festival.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p34"></span>In this union they can have no share
who deny that in the Son of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p34.1"></span>God</span>, Himself true <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p34.2"></span>God</span>, man’s nature
abides, assailing the health-giving mystery and shutting themselves out
from the Easter festival.  For, as they dissent from the Gospel and
gainsay the creed, they cannot keep it with us, because although they
dare to take to themselves the Christian name, yet they are repelled by
every creature who has Christ for his Head:  for you rightly exult and
devoutly rejoice in this sacred season as those who, admitting no
falsehood into the Truth, have no doubt about Christ’s Birth according
to the flesh, His Passion and Death, and the Resurrection of His body: 
inasmuch as without any separation of the Godhead you acknowledge a
Christ, Who was truly born of a Virgin’s womb, truly hung on the wood of
the cross, truly laid in an earthly tomb, truly raised in glory, truly
set on the right hand of the Father’s majesty; “whence also,” as the
Apostle says, “we look for a Saviour our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p34.3"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ.  Who shall
refashion the body of our humility to become conformed to the body of
His glory <span id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125) .”  Who liveth and
reigneth, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[184:1108](2120214.htm#fr_1107) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p5"></span> Cf. Serm. LXIII. 4, above:  *Salvator
noster—et sacramentum condidit et exemplum:  ut unum apprehenderent
renascendo, alterum sequerentur imitando*.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[184:1109](2120214.htm#fr_1108) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p6"></span> S. [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[184:1110](2120214.htm#fr_1109) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p9"></span> i.e. that both of the two natures in
Christ should be ours, as he goes on to show.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[184:1111](2120214.htm#fr_1110) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p10"></span> The words in brackets are of doubtful
genuineness, and seem in themselves a mediæval imitation of Leo’s style.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[184:1112](2120214.htm#fr_1111) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p11"></span> *Sacramentum pietatis*, the regular
Latin version of [1 Tim. iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[184:1113](2120214.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p12"></span> *Celerrimam*.  The epithet spoils the
argument, and is probably an interpolation.  Cf. however Serm. LXXI.
chap. 2, above.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[185:1114](2120214.htm#fr_1113) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p15"></span> [Col. iii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[185:1115](2120214.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p16"></span> S. [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[185:1116](2120214.htm#fr_1115) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p17"></span> [Isa.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), [Matt.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[185:1117](2120214.htm#fr_1116) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p20"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[185:1118](2120214.htm#fr_1117) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p21"></span> S. [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[185:1119](2120214.htm#fr_1118) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22.1"></span>: 
the words in brackets are of doubtful authority.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[185:1120](2120214.htm#fr_1119) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p22.7"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p23"></span> [Phil. ii.
5-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[186:1121](2120214.htm#fr_1120) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p25.7"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p26"></span> Much the same language is used in
Lett. XXVIII. (Tome) 3 and Serm. XXIII. 2.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[186:1122](2120214.htm#fr_1121) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p27"></span> [Acts iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[186:1123](2120214.htm#fr_1122) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p30"></span> *Phase id transitus dicitur*, cf. the
Vulgate, [Exod. xii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p30.1"></span>, *est enim Phase* (*id est transitus*)
*Domini*.  The form of the word is due to defective transliteration, the
correct Hebrew form being *Pesach*, which “is derived from a root which
means to step over or to overleap, and thus points back to the
historical origin of the festival ([Exod.
xii.](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#000)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p30.2"></span>).”—*Edersheim’s Temple*, p. 179.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[186:1124](2120214.htm#fr_1123) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p31"></span> S. [John xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p31.1"></span>;
the word for “pass” here in the Gk. is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p31.2"></span>μεταβῇ</span>, in the Lat. *transeat*.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[186:1125](2120214.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p31.5"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p32"></span> S. [John
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[186:1126](2120214.htm#fr_1125) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p34.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvi-p35"></span> [Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvi-p35.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXIII](2120215)
