[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120553)  [Next](2120555.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXIV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p2"></span>To Eulogius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, Bishop of
Alexandria, and Anastasius, Bishop of Antioch <span
id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716.md) .

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p5"></span>The charity wherewith I am greatly
bound to you allows me by no means to keep silence, that your Holiness
may know all that is going on among us, and, deceived by no false
rumours, may keep more perfectly the way of your justice and rectitude,
as you have perfectly begun to do.  Now the representatives
(*responsales*) of our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus came to me,
bringing me his synodical epistle.  And indeed between us and him there
is, as your Blessedness knows, serious difference on account of the
appellation of a profane name; but I thought that his representatives
sent in the cause of the faith ought to be received, lest the sin of
elation which has arisen in the Constantinopolitan Church almost against
all priests, might cause a shaking of the faith and a breach in
ecclesiastical unity.  I also caused the same representatives, inasmuch
as they very humbly requested it, to celebrate with me the solemnities
of mass, because, as I have taken care to intimate to the most serene
lord the Emperor, it was right that the representatives of our brother
and fellow priest Cyriacus should communicate with me, since by <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p5.1"></span>God’s</span> help I
have not fallen into the error of elation.  But my deacon ought not to
celebrate the solemnities of mass with our aforesaid-brother Cyriacus,
since, through a profane title, he has either committed or accedes to
the sin of pride; lest if he (my deacon) proceeds <span
id="fr_1717"></span>[1718](#fn_1717.md) with one who is in such a position
of elation, we might seem (which <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p6.1"></span>God</span> forbid) to confirm the vanity
of that foolish name.  But I have taken care to admonish our said
brother to correct himself of such elation, since, if he does not
correct it, he will in no way have peace with us.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p7"></span>Furthermore, our said brother in his
synodical letters has by the grace of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p7.1"></span>God</span> expressed himself in all
respects as a Catholic.  But he has condemned a certain Eudoxius, whom
we find neither condemned in synods, nor repudiated by his predecessors
in their synodical letters <span id="fr_1718"></span>[1719](#fn_1718.md) . 
It is true that the canons of the council of Constantinople condemn the
Eudoxians; but they say nothing as to who their author Eudoxius was. 
But the Roman Church does not possess so far these same canons, or the
acts of that council, nor has it accepted them, though it has accepted
this same synod with regard to what was defined by it against
Macedonius.  It does certainly repudiate the other heresies therein
spoken of, which had already been condemned by other Fathers:  but so
far it knows nothing about the Eudoxians.  Some things are indeed told
in Sozomen’s history about a certain Eudoxius, who is said to have
usurped the episcopate of the Church of Constantinople.  But this
history itself the Apostolic See refuses to accept, since it contains
many false statements, <span id="page_227b">p. 227b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-Page_227b"></span>and praises Theodore of Mopsuestia
too much, and says that he was a great doctor of the Church even to the
day of his death.  It remains then that, if any one receives that
history, he contradicts the synod held in the times of Justinian of
pious memory concerning the three chapters.  But one who cannot
contradict this synod must needs reject that history.  Moreover in the
Latin language we have so far found nothing about this Eudoxius, either
in Philaster or in the blessed Augustine, who wrote much about
heresies.  Let therefore your Charity inform me in your letters if any
one of the approved Fathers among the Greeks has made mention of him.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p9"></span>Furthermore three years ago, with
reference to the case of the monks of Isauria, who were accused as being
heretics <span id="fr_1719"></span>[1720](#fn_1719.md) , my brother and
fellow-bishop the lord John once sent me letters for my satisfaction, in
which he attempted to shew that they had contradicted the definitions of
the synod of Ephesus; and he forwarded to me certain chapters,
purporting to be those of the same synod, which they were said to
oppose <span id="fr_1720"></span>[1721](#fn_1720.md) .  Now among other
things it was in these chapters asserted concerning the soul of Adam,
that by sin it did not die, in that the devil does not enter into the
heart of man; and that whoso said it was so was anathema.  When this was
read to me I was much grieved.  For if the soul of Adam, who was the
first to sin, did not die by sin, how was it said to him concerning the
forbidden tree, *In the day that ye eat thereof ye shall surely die*
([Gen. ii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p11.1"></span>)?  And certainly Adam and Eve ate of
the forbidden tree, and yet in their flesh they lived afterwards more
than nine hundred years.  It is therefore evident that in his flesh he
did not die.  If then he did not die in his soul, the impious conclusion
follows that <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p11.2"></span>God</span> pronounced a false sentence
concerning him, when He said that in the day that he ate he should die. 
But far be this error, far be it from the true faith.  For what we say
is, that the first man died in soul in the day that he sinned, and that
through him the whole human race is condemned in this penalty of death
and corruption.  But through the second man we trust that we can be
freed, both now from the death of the soul, and hereafter from all
corruption of the flesh in the eternal resurrection:—as moreover we said
to the aforesaid representatives; ‘We say that the soul of Adam died by
sin, not from the substance of living, but from the quality of living. 
For, inasmuch as substance is one thing, and quality another, his soul
did not so die as not to be, but so died as not to be blessed.  Yet this
same Adam returned afterwards to life through penitence.’

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p12"></span>But that the devil enters into the
heart of man cannot be denied, if the Gospel is believed.  For it is
there written, *And after the sop Satan entered into him* ([John xiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p12.1"></span>).  And again it is therein also said,
*When the devil had now put himself into the heart of Judas, that Judas
should betray Him* ([John 13.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p12.2"></span>).  He that denies this falls into
Pelagian heresy.  Seeing then that, having examined the Ephesine synod,
we found nothing of the kind to be contained therein, we caused to be
brought to us also a very old Codex of the same synod from the Church of
Ravenna, and we found it to agree with the report of the synod which we
have so as to differ in no respect, and to contain nothing else in its
decree of anathema and rejection, except that they reject the twelve
chapters of Cyril of blessed memory.  But this whole argument we set
forth much more fully and particularly to his representatives when they
were with us, and most fully satisfied them.  Wherefore lest either
these or any like things should creep in yonder, so as to cause offence
to holy Church, it is necessary for us to indicate these things to your
Holiness.  And, although we know our brother and fellow-bishop Cyriacus
to be orthodox, yet on account of others we ought to be cautious, that
the seeds of error may be trampled down before they spring up to public
view.

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p13"></span>I received the letters of your
Holiness on the arrival here of our common son the deacon Sabinianus;
but, as their bearer is already prepared for departure and cannot be
detained, I will reply when the deacon, my *responsalis*, comes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[226b:1717](2120554.htm#fr_1716.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p4"></span> As to the first subject of this
epistle, with references to others on the same subject, see *Prolegom*.,
p. xxii.

<span id="fn_1717"></span>[226b:1718](2120554.htm#fr_1717.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p6"></span> *Procedit*, the usual term for
proceeding to the Holy Table for celebration.  See III. 57, note 5.

<span id="fn_1718"></span>[226b:1719](2120554.htm#fr_1718.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p8"></span> Cf. VII. 4.

<span id="fn_1719"></span>[227b:1720](2120554.htm#fr_1719.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p10"></span> See III. 53, note 9.

<span id="fn_1720"></span>[227b:1721](2120554.htm#fr_1720.md) <span
id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vii.xxii-p11"></span> Cf. VI. 14, where the same
doctrinal questions are similarly discussed in the same connexion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Dominicus, Bishop.](2120555.md)
