[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120473)  [Next](2120475) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.v.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.v.xx-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLI.</span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p2"></span>To Constantina Augusta.

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p3"></span>Gregory to Constantina, &c.

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p4"></span>Knowing how my most serene Lady thinks
about the heavenly country and the life of her soul, I consider that I
should be greatly in fault were I to keep silence on matters that ought
to be represented to her for the fear of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xx-p4.1"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p5"></span>Having ascertained that there are many
of the natives in the island of Sardinia who still, after the evil
custom of their race, practise sacrifices to idols, and that the priests
of the same island are sluggish in preaching our Redeemer, I sent
thither one of the bishops of Italy, who with the co-operation of the
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.v.xx-p5.1"></span>Lord</span> has
brought many of the natives to the faith.  But he has reported to me a
sacrilegious proceeding, namely, that those in the island who sacrifice
to idols pay a bribe to the judge for license to do this.  And, when
some of them had been baptized and had ceased sacrificing to idols, the
same payment had been exacted by this same judge of the island, even
after their baptism, which they had been previously accustomed to make
for leave to sacrifice to idols.  And, when the aforesaid bishop found
fault with him, he replied that he had promised so large a
*suffragium* <span id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607) that he could
not make it up except by aid from cases of this kind.  But the island of
Corsica is oppressed by such an excessive number of exactors and such a
burden of exactions, that those who are in it are hardly able to make up
what is exacted except by selling their children.  Hence it ensues that
the proprietors of this island, deserting the pious republic, are forced
to take refuge with that most wicked nation of the Lombards.  For what
can they suffer from barbarians harder or more cruel than being so
straitened and squeezed as to be compelled to sell their children? 
Moreover, in the island of Sicily one Stephen, *chartularius* of the
maritime parts, is said to practise such illegalities and such
oppressions, invading places that belong to various persons, and without
any legal process putting up titles <span
id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) on properties and houses, that, if
I wished to tell every one of his doings that have come to my ears, I
could not accomplish the task in a large volume.

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p8"></span>Let my most serene Lady look to all
these things wisely, and assuage the groans of the oppressed.  For I
suspect that these things have not come to your most pious ears.  For if
they could have reached them, they would by no means have continued
until now.  But they should be represented now at a suitable time to our
most pious lord, that he may remove such and so great a burden of sin
from his own soul, from the empire, and from his sons.  I know he will
say that whatever is collected from the aforesaid islands is transmitted
to us for the expenses of Italy.  But in reply to this I suggest that,
even though less expenditure were bestowed on Italy, he should still rid
his empire of the tears of the oppressed.  For perhaps, too, such great
expenditure in this land profits less than it might do because the money
for it is collected with some admixture of sin.  Let therefore our most
serene Lords give orders that nothing be collected with sin.  And I know
that, though less is given for the advantage of the republic, the
republic is thereby much aided.  And though perhaps it may be less aided
by a less expenditure, yet it is better that we should not live
temporally, than that you should find any hindrance in the way of
eternal life.  For consider what must be the <span id="page_178b">p.
178b</span> <span id="iii.v.v.xx-Page_178b"></span>feelings, what the
state of heart of parents, when they part with their children lest they
should be tormented.  But how one ought to feel for the children of
others is well known to those who have children of their own.  Let it
then suffice for me to have briefly represented these things, lest, if
your Piety were not to know what is being done in these parts, I should
suffer for the guilt of my silence before the strict judge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[177b:1608](2120474.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="iii.v.v.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p6"></span> i.e. the payment to the imperial
government required from judges or other functionaries in consideration
of their appointment.  “<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.v.xx-p6.1"></span>Suffragium</span>.  Pecuniæ quæ suffragii
titulo ab Imperatoribus accipiebantur cum honores deferebant, quæ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.v.v.xx-p6.2"></span>δεσποτικὰ</span>;
vocantur in formula jurisjurandi.—Novellæ Justiniani 8, cujus titulus
est, *ut judices sine suffragio fiant*.”  Du Cange.

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[177b:1609](2120474.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="iii.v.v.xx-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v.xx-p7"></span> *Titulos*, i.e. notices put upon
properties, asserting claim, or announcing sale, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Sebastian, Bishop.](2120475)
