[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120299)  [Next](2120301) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Part IV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p2"></span><span class="c16"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>How the Preacher, When He Has Accomplished All
Aright, Should Return to Himself, Lest Either His Life or His Preaching
Lift Him Up.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p3"></span>But since often, when preaching is
abundantly poured forth in fitting ways, the mind of the speaker is
elevated in itself by a hidden delight in self-display, great care is
needed that he may gnaw himself with the laceration of fear, lest he who
recalls the diseases of others to health by remedies should himself
swell through neglect of his own health; lest in helping others he
desert himself, lest in lifting up others he fall.  For to some the
greatness of their virtue has often been the occasion of their
perdition; causing them, while inordinately secure in confidence of
strength, to die unexpectedly through negligence.  For virtue strives
with vices; the mind flatters itself with a certain delight in it; and
it comes to pass that the soul of a well-doer casts aside the fear of
its circumspection, and rests secure in self-confidence; and to it, now
torpid, the cunning seducer enumerates all things that it has done well,
and exalts it in swelling thoughts as though superexcellent beyond all
beside.  Whence it is brought about, that before the eyes of the just
judge the memory of virtue is a pitfall of the soul; because, in calling
to mind what it has done well, while it lifts itself up in its own eyes,
it falls before the author of humility.  For hence it is said to the
soul that is proud, *For that thou art more beautiful, go down, and
sleep with the uncircumcised* ([Ezek. xxxii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv.v-p3.1"></span>): 
as if it were plainly said, Because thou liftest thyself up for the
comeliness of thy virtues, thou art driven by thy very beauty to fall. 
Hence under the figure of Jerusalem the soul that is proud in virtue is
reproved, when it is <span id="page_72b">p. 72b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.v-Page_72b"></span>said, *Thou wert perfect in my comeliness
which I had put upon thee, saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p3.2"></span>Lord</span>, and having confidence in thy
beauty thou hast committed fornication in thy renown* ([Ezek.
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv.v-p3.3"></span>). 
For the mind is lifted up by confidence in its beauty, when, glad for
the merits of its virtues, it glories within itself in security.  But
through this same confidence it is led to fornication; because, when the
soul is deceived by its own thoughts, malignant spirits, which take
possession of it, defile it through the seduction of innumerable vices. 
But it is to be noted that it is said, *Thou hast committed fornication
in thy renown:*  for when the soul leaves off regard for the supernal
ruler, it forthwith seeks its own praise, and begins to arrogate to
itself all the good which it has received for shewing forth the praise
of the giver; it desires to spread abroad the glory of its own
reputation, and busies itself to become known as one to be admired of
all.  In its renown, therefore, it commits fornication, in that,
forsaking the wedlock of a lawful bed, it prostitutes itself to the
defiling spirit in its lust of praise.  Hence David says, *He delivered
their virtue into captivity, and their beauty into the enemy’s hands*
([Psa. 68.61](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#061)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p3.4"></span> <span id="fr_1293"></span>[1294](#fn_1293)
).  For virtue is delivered into captivity and beauty into the enemy’s
hands, when the old enemy gets dominion over the deceived soul because
of elation in well doing.  And yet this elation in virtue tempts
somewhat, though it does not fully overcome, the mind even of the elect.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p5"></span>But it, when lifted up, is forsaken, and,
being forsaken, it is recalled to fear.  For hence David says again, *I
said in mine abundance, I shall not be moved for ever* ([Psa.
30.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p5.1"></span> <span id="fr_1294"></span>[1295](#fn_1294)
).  But he added a little later what he underwent for having been puffed
up with confidence in his virtue, *Thou didst turn thy face from me, and
I was troubled* ([Psa. 30.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#007)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p6.1"></span>).  As if he would say plainly, I believed
myself strong in the midst of virtues, but, being forsaken, I become
aware how great was my infirmity.  Hence he says again, *I have sworn
and am stedfastly purposed to keep the judgments of thy righteousness*
([Psa. 119.106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p6.2"></span> <span id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295)
).  But, because it was beyond his powers to continue the keeping which
he sware, straightway, being troubled, he found his weakness.  Whence
also he all at once betook himself to the aid of prayer, saying, *I am
humbled all together; quicken me, O <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p7.1"></span>Lord</span>, according to Thy word* ([Psa.
119.107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107)<span
id="iii.iv.v-p7.2"></span>).  But sometimes Divine government, before
advancing a soul by gifts, recalls to it the memory of its infirmity,
lest it be puffed up for the virtues it has received.  Whence the
Prophet Ezekiel, before being led to the contemplation of heavenly
things, is first called a son of man; as though the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.v-p7.3"></span>Lord</span> plainly
admonished him, saying, Lest thou shouldest lift up thy heart in elation
for these things which thou seest, perpend cautiously what thou art;
that, when thou penetratest the highest things, thou mayest remember
that thou art a man, to the end that, when rapt beyond thyself, thou
mayest be recalled in anxiety to thyself by the curb of thine
infirmity.  Whence it is needful that, when abundance of virtues
flatters us, the eye of the soul should return to its own weaknesses,
and salubriously depress itself; that it should look, not at the right
things that it has done, but those that it has left undone; so that,
while the heart is bruised by recollection of infirmity, it may be the
more strongly confirmed in virtue before the author of humility.  For it
is generally for this purpose that Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p7.4"></span>God</span>, though perfecting in great part
the minds of rulers, still in some small part leaves them imperfect; in
order that, when they shine with wonderful virtues, they may pine with
disgust at their own imperfection, and by no means lift themselves up
for great things, while still labouring in their struggle against the
least; but that, since they are not strong enough to overcome in what is
last and lowest, they may not dare to glory in their chief performances.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p8"></span>See now, good man, how, compelled by the
necessity laid upon me by thy reproof, being intent on shewing what a
Pastor ought to be, I have been as an ill-favoured painter pourtraying a
handsome man; and how I direct others to the shore of perfection, while
myself still tossed among the waves of transgressions.  But in the
shipwreck of this present life sustain me, I beseech thee, by the plank
of thy prayer, that, since my own weight sinks me down, the hand of thy
merit may raise me up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[72b:1294](2120300.htm#fr_1293) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p4"></span> In *English Bible*, lxviii. 61.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[72b:1295](2120300.htm#fr_1294) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p6"></span> Ibid. xxx. 6.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[72b:1296](2120300.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="iii.iv.v-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p7"></span> Ibid. cxix. 106.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Register of the Epistles of St. Gregory the Great.](2120301)
