[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120563)  [Next](2120565) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle III.</span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.iii-p2"></span>To Donus, Bishop of Messana (in
Sicily).

<span id="iii.v.viii.iii-p3"></span>Gregory to Donus, &c.

<span id="iii.v.viii.iii-p4"></span>The most eloquent man, our son
Faustinus, has come to us and complained that his late father Peltrasius
left some things which were not his own to your Church for his burial. 
And indeed he knows himself, and we have <span id="page_233b">p.
233b</span> <span id="iii.v.viii.iii-Page_233b"></span>heard, what the
secular law is in such a case; namely, that the heir is bound to pay if
his father has bequeathed what was not his own.  But, as we know that
your Fraternity lives by the law of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.viii.iii-p4.1"></span>God</span> and not of the world, it
seems to me very unjust that an amber cup, and a boy who is said to be
of a certain church situate on his property in the diocese of Consentia,
should be detained by thy Fraternity.  For, when the most reverend
Palumbus, now bishop, but then archdeacon, had testified that things
were as I have said, you certainly ought to have taken his word, and
restored what was not your own.  Further, you ought in my opinion to
have considered the golden brooch, which would be his whole substance
were there anything for the sustenance of those he had left behind him,
and accepted it at that time for his burial.  Nevertheless, you know our
ordinance, how that we have entirely forbidden the old custom in our
Church, nor give our assent to any one being allowed to acquire
burial-places for a human body for a price.  For, if the men of Sichem,
who were as we suppose Gentiles, offered without charge to Abraham
sepulture for the dead Sara to be buried in a place of her own, and were
hardly prevailed upon by his great importunity to receive a price for
her place of burial, ought we, who are called bishops, to make any
charge for burying the bodies of the faithful?  This, then, we commit to
the judgment of your Fraternity <span
id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731) .

<span id="iii.v.viii.iii-p6"></span>The aforesaid most eloquent man
complains also of this; that Sisinnius, the guardian (*defensor*) of thy
Church, unreasonably detains slaves in his possession:  concerning whom
also he asserts that it had been decided by the judgment of bishop
Maximianus of holy memory that the detainer of them should give them up,
but that he has so far wilfully put off their restitution.  We therefore
exhort thy Fraternity that, if the case has manifestly been adjudged,
what was ordained be carried out.  Otherwise, some one being deputed to
act in the case, cause him to resort to the parts of our brother and
fellow-bishop Secundinus for judgment, that, when it shall have been
declared by his sentence to whom the slaves in question belong, neither
the one party may appear to suffer prejudice nor the other bear a
grudge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[233b:1732](2120564.htm#fr_1731) <span
id="iii.v.viii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.viii.iii-p5"></span> For similar disapproval of burial
fees, cf. IX. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle V](2120565)
