[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120099)  [Next](2120101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xc"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xc-p1.1"></span>Letter XCV.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xc-p2.1"></span>To Pulcheria Augusta by the Hand of
Theoctistus the Magistrian <span id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md)
.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p4"></span>Leo, the bishop to Pulcheria Augusta.

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p5"></span>I.  *He informs the Empress that he has
loyally recognized the Council ordered by her, and sent representatives
with letters to it.*

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p6"></span>Your clemency’s religious care which you
unceasingly bestow on the catholic Faith, I recognize in everything, and
give <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.xc-p6.1"></span>God</span> thanks
at seeing you take such interest in the universal Church, that I can
confidently suggest what I think agreeable to justice and kindness,
<span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span id="ii.iv.xc-Page_71"></span>and
so what thus far your pious zeal through the mercy of Christ has
irreproachably accomplished, may the more speedily be brought to an
issue which we shall be thankful for, O most noble Augusta.  Your
clemency’s command, therefore, that a Synod should be held at
Nicæa <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430.md) , and your gently
expressed refusal of my request that it should be held in Italy, so that
all the bishops in our parts might be summoned and assemble, if the
state of affairs had permitted them, I have received in a spirit so far
removed from scorn as to nominate two of my fellow-bishops and
fellow-presbyters respectively to represent me, sending also to the
venerable synod an appropriate missive from which the brotherhood
therein assembled might learn the standard necessary to be maintained in
their decision, lest any rashness should do detriment either to the
rules of the Faith, or to the provisions of the canons, or to the
remedies required by the spirit of loving kindness.

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p8"></span>II.  *In the settlement of this matter
that moderation must be observed which was entirely absent at Ephesus.*

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p9"></span>For, as I have very often stated in
letters from the beginning of this matter, I have desired that such
moderation should be observed in the midst of discordant views and
carnal jealousies that, whilst nothing should be allowed to be wrested
from or added to the purity of the Faith, yet the remedy of pardon
should be granted to those who return to unity and peace.  Because the
works of the devil are then more effectually destroyed when men’s hearts
are recalled to the love of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xc-p9.1"></span>God</span> and their neighbours.  But how
contrary to my warnings and entreaties were their actions then, it is a
long story to explain, nor is the need to put down in the pages of a
letter all that was allowed to be perpetrated in that meeting, not of
judges but of robbers, at Ephesus; where the chief men of the synod
spared neither those brethren who opposed them nor those who assented to
them, seeing that for the breaking down of the catholic Faith and the
strengthening of execrable heresy, they stripped some of their rightful
rank and tainted others with complicity in guilt; and surely their
cruelty was worse to those whom by persuasion they divorced from
innocence, than to those whom by persecution they made blessed
confessors.

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p10"></span>III.  *Those who recant their error must
be treated with forbearance*.

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p11"></span>And yet because such men have harmed
themselves most by their wrong-doing, and because the greater the
wounds, the more careful must be the application of the remedy, I have
never in any letter maintained that pardon must be withheld even from
them if they came to their right mind.  And although we unchangeably
abhor their heresy, which is the greatest enemy of Christian religion,
yet the men themselves, if they without any doubt amend their ways and
clear themselves by full assurances of repentance, we do not judge to be
outcasts from the unspeakable mercy of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xc-p11.1"></span>God</span>:  but rather we lament with those
that lament, “we weep with those that weep <span
id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431.md) ,” and obey the requirements of
justice in deposing without neglecting the remedies of loving-kindness: 
and this, as your piety knows, is not a mere word-promise, but is also
borne out by our actions, inasmuch as nearly all who had been either
misled or forced into assenting to the presiding bishops, by rescinding
what they had decreed and by condemning what they had written, have
obtained complete acquittal from guilt and the boon of Apostolic peace.

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p13"></span>IV.  *Even the authors of the mischief
may find room for forgiveness by repentance.*

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p14"></span>If, therefore, your clemency deigns to
reflect upon my motives, it will be satisfied that I have acted
throughout with the design of bringing about the abolition of the heresy
without the loss of one soul; and that in the case of the authors of
these cruel disturbances I have modified my practice somewhat in order
that their slow minds might be aroused by some feelings of compunction
to ask for lenient treatment.  For although since their decision, which
is no less blasphemous than unjust, they cannot be held in such honour
by the catholic brotherhood as they once were, yet they still retain
their sees and their rank as bishops, with the prospect either of
receiving the peace of the whole Church, after true and necessary signs
of repentance or, if (which <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xc-p14.1"></span>God</span> forbid) they persist in their
heresy, of reaping the reward of their misbelief.  Dated 20th of July,
in the consulship of the illustrious Adelfius (451).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_429"></span>[70:430](2120100.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xc-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p3"></span> The *Magistriani* were what would now be
called King’s Messengers:  another name for them was *agentes in rebus*.
and they were under the direction of the Imperial *Magister Officiorum*.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[71:431](2120100.htm#fr_430.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xc-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p7"></span> See n. 4 on Letter XCIII. i.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[71:432](2120100.htm#fr_431.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xc-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xc-p12"></span> [Rom. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.iv.xc-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Ravennius, Bishop of Arles.](2120101.md)
