[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120027)  [Next](2120029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Letter XVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>To Januarius, Bishop of Aquileia <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p4"></span>Leo, bishop of the city of Rome, to
Januarius, bishop of Aquileia.

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p5"></span>Those who renounce heresy and schism
and return to the Church must make their recantation very clear:  those
who are clerics may retain their rank but not be promoted.

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p6"></span>On reading your letter, brother, we
recognized the vigour of your faith, which we already were aware of, and
congratulate you on the watchful care you bestow as pastor, on the
keeping of Christ’s flock:  lest the wolves, that enter in under guise
of sheep, should tear the simple ones to pieces in their bestial fierce
<span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-Page_31"></span>ness, and not only themselves run riot
without restraint, but also spoil those which are sound.  And lest the
vipery deceit should effect this, we have thought it meet to warn you,
beloved, reminding you that it is at the peril of his soul, for any one
of them who has fallen away from us into a sect of heretics and
schismatics <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) , and stained
himself to whatever extent with the pollution of heretical communion, to
be received into catholic communion on coming to his senses without
making legitimate and express satisfaction.  For it is most wholesome
and full of all the benefits of spiritual healing that presbyters or
deacons, or sub-deacons or clerics of any rank, who wish to appear
reformed, and entreat to return once more to the catholic Faith which
they had long ago lost, should first confess without ambiguity that
their errors and the authors of the errors themselves are condemned by
them, that their base opinions may be utterly destroyed, and no hope
survive of their recurrence, and that no member may be harmed by contact
with them, every point having been met with its proper recantation. 
With regard to them we also order the observance of this regulation of
the canons <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) , that they consider
it a great indulgence, if they be allowed to remain undisturbed in their
present rank without any hope of further advancement:  but only on
consideration of their not being defiled with second baptism <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) .  No slight penalty does he incur
from the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>Lord</span>, who judges any such person fit
to be advanced to Holy Orders.  If advancement is granted to those who
are without blame, only after full examination, how much more ought it
to be refused to those who are under suspicion.  Accordingly, beloved
brother, in whose devotion we rejoice, bestow your care on our
directions, and take order for the circumspect and speedy carrying out
of these laudable suggestions and wholesome injunctions, which affect
the welfare of the whole Church.  But do not doubt, beloved, that, if
what we decree for the observance of the canons, and the integrity of
the Faith be neglected (which we do not anticipate), we shall be
strongly moved:  because the faults of the lower orders are to be
referred to none more than to slothful and careless governors, who often
foster much disease by refusing to apply the needful remedy.  Dated 30
Dec., in the consulship of the illustrious Calepius and Ardaburis (447).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[30:203](2120028.htm#fr_202) <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p3"></span> The Ballerinii’s conjecture is at
least very plausible, that this Januarius was the successor of that
Bishop of Aquileia to whom Letter I. was written 5 years previously upon
the same subject of the Pelagian error.  The text of this letter is
almost word for word identical with Letter II., written to Septimus,
Bishop of Altinum, on the same occasion as Lett. I.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[31:204](2120028.htm#fr_203) <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p7"></span> *Schismaticorum*, considering how
easily heresy leads to schism and schism to heresy, there is no need
with Quesnel to consider that Novatians or Donatists are being here
attacked.  The Ballerinii say with justice:—*generalis regula hic
indicatur omnibus tum hæreticis tum schismaticis ad ecclesiam
redeuntibus communis*.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[31:205](2120028.htm#fr_204) <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p8"></span> What canon is here alluded to is
uncertain:  the Ballerinii think perhaps the 8th Nicene canon, extending
its application from the Cathari or Novatians to all heresies and
schism.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[31:206](2120028.htm#fr_205) <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p9"></span> *Si tamen iterata tinctione non
fuerint maculati.*  Cf. Can. Afric., 27, *neque permittendum ut
rebaptizati ad clericatus gradum promoveantur*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Dorus, Bishop of Beneventum.](2120029)
