[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120504)  [Next](2120506) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p2"></span>*To the Clergy and People of
Jadera* <span id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p4"></span>Gregory to the presbyters, deacons,
and clergy, nobles and people, dwelling at Jadera, and who have
communicated with the prevaricator Maximus.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p5"></span>It has come to my knowledge that some
of you, deceived by ignorance or under compulsion, have communicated
with those who, their fault as you know requiring it, have been deprived
of communion by the Apostolic See, but that others, with wholesome
discretion, have under the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xix-p5.1"></span>Lord’s</span> protection abstained; and as
much as I rejoice in those that have been constant so much do I groan
for those who have gone astray, since they have partaken of the
mysteries of holy communion, which have been granted to us by Divine
loving-kindness for absolution, rather to the detriment of their souls. 
And because (as I pray Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xix-p5.2"></span>God</span> to make known to you) I
earnestly and from the bottom of my heart sympathize will your Charity,
I adjure and entreat you with fatherly affection, that every one of you
abstain from unlawful communion, and altogether shun those whom the
Apostolic See does not receive into the fellowship of its communion,
lest any one should stand guilty in the sight of the eternal Judge from
that whereby he might have been saved.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p6"></span>Moreover I have discovered that
certain men of perverse mind in your parts have tried to insinuate that
I am moved against Maximus by some grudge, and that I desire to carry
out not what is canonical, but what anger dictates.  But far, far be
this from the priestly mind, that it should be moved in any cause by
private animosity.  But as for me, it is as taking thought for the
people dwelling in those parts and for my own soul, and as fearing the
judgment of Almighty <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xix-p6.1"></span>God</span>, that I wish to have the cause
of this Maximus enquired into, and, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xix-p6.2"></span>God</span> shewing me the way, to decide
canonically.  Now, inasmuch as I have written to him frequently that he
was not to celebrate the sacred solemnities of mass until I had been
able to obtain knowledge of his case, he would in any case be deprived
of communion; and now his sin of pride is openly shewn from this,—that,
having (as I have said) been often admonished to come to us, under
various excuses he refuses, he shuns, he fears coming.  What then is he
afraid of, if his conscience does not accuse him with regard to the
things that have been said?  Since then you know these things, now that
you can make no excuse on the plea of ignorance, I beseech, I exhort, I
warn you, that you altogether refrain from fellowship with forbidden
communion, and that not one of you presume, against his own soul, to
communicate with any priest who communicates with the above written
Maximus.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p7"></span>Since however I hear, as I have said
before, that some of you fell in ignorance, and that some were even
driven by force to communicate, I implore the Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p7.1"></span>Lord</span>, that He
would keep with His perpetual protection, and answer with His wished for
bounty, those who have given no assent to this iniquity; and as to those
whom either party spirit, or ignorance, or any other cause soever, has
drawn into a fault, that He would absolve them from all guilt of their
sins, and from all implication in the liability of others, and both give
them all the grace of His protection in the present life, and grant to
me to rejoice for them in the eternal country.  Wherefore, that this
intercession may avail for you with <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xix-p7.2"></span>God</span> our Saviour, do ye shew
obedience to our exhortations for the weal of your souls, and receive
the holy communion from those whom ye know to have abstained, and to
abstain still, from communion with the aforesaid Maximus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[197b:1651](2120505.htm#fr_1650) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xix-p3"></span> See III. 47, note 2.  Jadera was one
of the sees in the province of Dalmatia of which Salona was the
Metropolis.  The bishop of Jadera, Sabinianus, had communicated with
Maximus, and probably assisted in ordaining him, but afterwards
repented.  See below, VII. 17; VIII. l0, 24.  It may have been because
Gregory had heard that there was already a party in Jadera prepared to
renounce Maximus that he wrote this letter to strengthen it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXIX](2120506)
