[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120505)  [Next](2120507.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p1"></span> <span id="page_198b">p. 198b</span>
<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-Page_198b"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p2"></span>To Marinianus, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p3"></span>Gregory to Marinianus, Bishop of
Ravenna <span id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651.md) .

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p5"></span>We wonder why the discernment of thy
Fraternity should have been so changed in a short time that it does not
consider what it asks for.  On this account we grieve, since thou
affordest manifest proof that the words of evil counsellors have availed
with thee more than the study of divine lore has profited thee.  And,
when thou oughtest to be protecting monasteries, and with all thy power
congregating the religious therein so as to make gain from the gathering
together of souls, thou art on the contrary desiring to exercise thyself
in oppressing them, as thy letters testify; and, what is worse, art
trying to make us partakers in thy fault; to wit, in wishing, with our
consent, to oppress the monastery which thy predecessor founded under
the name of looking after its property and business affairs.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p6"></span>For thou oughtest to call to mind that,
in thy presence, and in the presence also of sundry of thy presbyters,
deacons, and clerics, we granted, as they requested, a precept contrary
to the testament of thy predecessor.  Yet, though the disposition he had
made with regard to the monastery itself was still therein confirmed,
thou now dissemblest this, and demandest of us that we should order the
contrary.  And indeed we know that this device is not thine own; but,
when thou refusest not to listen to those who say incongruous things,
thou injurest not only thine own reputation, but also souls.  Since,
then, I love thee much, I urgently admonish thee—consider this
attentively—that thou care not more for money than for souls.  The
former should be regarded collaterally; but the latter should be
regarded with the whole bent of the mind, and vehemently striven after. 
On this spend vigilantly thy labour and solicitude, since our Redeemer
seeks from the priest’s office not gold, but souls.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p7"></span>Further, it has reached our ears that
monasteries which are constituted under thy Fraternity are oppressed by
importunities and various annoyances from the clergy.  That this may no
longer be so, restrain it by strict prohibition, to the end that the
monks who live therein may be able to exult freely in the praises of our
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p7.1"></span>God</span>.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p8"></span>With regard to the clerics Romanus and
Dominicus, who presumed with rash daring to depart from this city
without our blessing, though they were to have been stricken with
heavier punishment, nevertheless such relaxation ought to be made in a
spirit of kindness that they be urged to come back to their duty.  The
month of April, Indict. 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[198b:1652](2120506.htm#fr_1651.md) <span
id="iii.v.vi.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xx-p4"></span> Cf. above, VI. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Secundus.](2120507.md)
