[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120519)  [Next](2120521) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LIII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p2"></span>To Virgilius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p3"></span>Gregory to Virgilius, Bishop of
Arelate (*Arles*), Metropolitan.

<span id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p4"></span>Although we are confident that your
Fraternity is intent on good works, and that you come forward of your
own accord in causes well-pleasing to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>God</span>, we nevertheless deem it
advantageous to address you with fraternal charity, that, being provoked
also by our letters, you may increase the solace which it becomes you
voluntarily to bestow.  And accordingly we inform your Holiness that we
have sent Augustine, the servant of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>God</span>, the bearer of these
presents, with other servants of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>God</span>, for the winning of souls in
the parts whither he is going, as he will be able himself to inform you
face to face.  In these circumstances you must needs aid him with prayer
and assistance, and, where need may require, afford him the support of
your succour, and refresh him, as is fit, with fatherly and priestly
consolation, to the end that, when he shall have obtained the succour of
your Holiness, if he should succeed in winning any gain for <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-p4.4"></span>God</span>, as we hope
he may, you too may be able to gain a reward along with him, having
devoutly administered to his good works the abundance of your support. 
Moreover, as to Candidus the presbyter, our common son, and the little
patrimony of our Church, let your Fraternity, as being of one mind with
us, study to hold both as commended to you; that so, with the help of
your Holiness, something may thence accrue for the sustenance of the
poor.  Inasmuch, then, as your predecessor held this patrimony for many
years, and <span id="page_204b">p. 204b</span> <span
id="iii.v.vi.xxxiv-Page_204b"></span>kept in his own hands the collected
payments, let your Fraternity consider whose the moneys are, and to whom
they should be paid, and restore them to us, handing them to the
above-written presbyter Candidus, our son.  For it is very execrable
that what has been preserved by the kings of the nations should be said
to be taken away by bishops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Desiderius and Syagrius, Bishops.](2120521)
