[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120429)  [Next](2120431.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p1.1"></span>Epistle IX.</span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p2"></span>To Januarius, Bishop.

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p3"></span>Gregory to Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
(Cagliari).

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p4"></span>Pastoral zeal ought indeed in itself to
have sufficiently instigated thee, even without our aid, to protect
profitably and providently the flock of which thou hast taken charge,
and to preserve it with diligent circumspection from the cunning devices
of enemies.  But, since we have found that thy Charity needs also the
written word of our authority for the augmentation of thy firmness, it
is necessary for us, by the exhortation of brotherly love, to strengthen
thy faltering disposition towards the earnestness of religious activity.

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p5"></span>Now it has come to our knowledge that
thou art remiss in thy guardianship of the monasteries of the
handmaidens of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>God</span> situated in Sardinia; and,
though it had been prudently arranged by thy predecessors that certain
approved men of the clergy should have the charge of attending to their
needs, this has now been so entirely neglected that women specially
dedicated to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p5.2"></span>God</span> are compelled to go in person
among public functionaries about tributes and other liabilities, and are
under the necessity of running to and fro through villages and farms for
making up their taxes, and of mixing themselves unsuitably in business
which belongs to men.  This evil let thy Fraternity remove by an easy
correction; that is, by carefully deputing one man of approved life and
manners, and of such age and position as to give rise to no evil
suspicion of him, who may, with the fear of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p5.3"></span>God</span>, so assist the inmates of these
monasteries that they may no longer be allowed to wander, against rule,
for any cause whatever, private or public, beyond their venerable
precincts; but that whatever has to be done in their behalf may be
transacted reasonably by him whom you shall depute.  But let the nuns
themselves, rendering praises to <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p5.4"></span>God</span> and confining themselves to
their monasteries, no longer suggest any evil suspicion to the minds of
the faithful.  But if any one of them, either through former license, or
through an evil custom of impunity, has <span id="page_148b">p.
148b</span> <span id="iii.v.iv.ix-Page_148b"></span>been seduced, or
should in future be led, into the gulph of adulterous lapse, we will
that, after enduring the severity of adequate punishment, she be
consigned for penance to some other stricter monastery of virgins, that
she may there give herself to prayers and fastings, and profit herself
by penitence, and afford an example of the more rigorous kind of
discipline, such as may inspire fear in others.  Further, let any one
who may be detected in any iniquity with women of this class be deprived
of communion, if he be a layman; but, if he be a cleric, let him also be
removed from his office, and thrust into a monastery for his ever to be
deplored excesses.

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p6"></span>We also desire thee to hold councils of
bishops twice in the year, as is said to have been the custom of thy
province, as well as being ordered by the authority of the sacred
canons; that, if any among them be of moral character inconsistent with
his profession, he may be convicted by the friendly rebuke of his
brethren, and also that measures may be taken with paternal
circumspection for the security of the flock committed to him, and for
the well-being of souls.  It has come to our knowledge also that male
and female slaves of Jews, who have fled for refuge to the Church on
account of their faith, are either restored to their unbelieving
masters, or paid for according to their value in lieu of being
restored.  We exhort therefore that thou by no means allow so bad a
custom to continue; but that whosoever being a slave to Jews, shall have
fled for refuge to venerable places, thou suffer him not in any degree
to sustain prejudice.  But, whether he had been a Christian before, or
been baptized now, let him be supported in his claim for freedom,
without any loss to the poor, by the patronage of ecclesiastical
compassion.

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p7"></span>Let not bishops presume to sign
baptized infants a second time on the forehead with chrism; but let the
presbyters anoint those who are to be baptized on the breast, that the
bishops may afterwards anoint them on the forehead <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530.md) .

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p9"></span>With regard also to founding
monasteries, which divers persons have ordered to be built, if thou
perceivest that any persons to whom the charge has been assigned put it
off on unjust pretexts, we desire thee to insist sagaciously according
to what the laws enjoin, lest (as <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p9.1"></span>God</span> forbid should be the case) the
pious retentions of the departed should be frustrated through thy
neglect.  Further, as to the monastery which Peter is said to have
formerly ordered to be constructed in his house, we have seen fit that
thy Fraternity should make accurate enquiry into the amount of the
revenues there.  And in case of there being a suitable provision, when
all diminutions of the property and what is said to have been dispersed
have been recovered, let the monastery with all diligence and without
any delay be founded.  But, if the means are insufficient or
detrimental <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531.md) , we desire thee,
after closely investigating everything as has been commanded, to send a
report to us, that we may know how to deliberate with the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>Lord’s</span> help with
regard to its construction.  Let, then, thy Fraternity give wise
attention to all the points above referred to, so as neither to be found
to have transgressed the tenour of our admonitions nor to stand liable
to divine judgment for too little zeal in thy pastoral office.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[148b:1531](2120430.htm#fr_1530.md) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p8"></span> For the meaning of this order, and its
subsequent modification, see note to IV. 26.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[148b:1532](2120430.htm#fr_1531.md) <span
id="iii.v.iv.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv.ix-p10"></span> The word *damnosa*, meaning perhaps
injuriously excessive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To All the Bishops of Dalmatia.](2120431.md)
