[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120019)  [Next](2120021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.x"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Letter X.</span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p2.1"></span>To the Bishops of the Province of Vienne.  In
the matter of Hilary, Bishop of Arles <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) .</span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p4"></span>To the beloved brothers, the whole body of
bishops of the province of Vienne, Leo, bishop of Rome.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p5"></span>I.  *The solidarity of the Church built
upon the rock of S. Peter must be everywhere maintained.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p6"></span>Our <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p6.1"></span>Lord</span> Jesus Christ, Saviour of mankind,
instituted the observance of the Divine religion which He wished by the
grace of <span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p6.2"></span>God</span> to
shed its brightness upon all nations and all peoples in such a way that
the Truth, which before was confined to the announcements of the Law and
the Prophets, might through the Apostles’ trumpet blast go out for the
salvation of all men <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) , as it is
written:  “Their sound has gone out into every land, and their words
into the ends of the world <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) .”  But
this mysterious function <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p9.1"></span>Lord</span> wished to be
indeed the concern of all the apostles, but in such a way that He has
placed the principal charge on the blessed Peter, chief of all the
Apostles <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) :  and from him as from
the Head wishes His gifts to flow to all the body:  so that any one who
dares to secede from Peter’s solid rock may understand that he has no
part or lot in the divine mystery.  For He wished him who had been
received into partnership in His undivided unity to be named what He
Himself was, when He said:  “Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build My Church <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) :”  that the
building of the eternal temple by the wondrous gift of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p11.2"></span>God’s</span> grace might rest
on Peter’s solid rock:  strengthening His Church so surely that neither
could human rashness assail it nor the gates of hell prevail against
it.  But this most holy firmness of the rock, reared, as we have said,
by the building hand of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p11.3"></span>God</span>, a man must wish to destroy in
over-weaning <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="ii.iv.x-Page_9"></span>wickedness when he tries to break down its
power, by favouring his own desires, and not following what he received
from men of old:  for he believes himself subject to no law, and held in
check by no rules of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p11.4"></span>God’s</span> ordinances and breaks away, in
his eagerness for novelty, from your use and ours, by adopting illegal
practices, and letting what he ought to keep fall into abeyance.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p12"></span>II.  *Hilary is disturbing the peace of
the Church by his insubordination.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p13"></span>But with the approval, as we believe, of
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p13.1"></span>God</span>, and
retaining towards you the fulness of our love which the Apostolic See
always, as you remember, expends upon you, holy brethren we are striving
to correct these things by mature counsel, and to share with you the
task of setting your churches in order, not by innovations but by
restoration of the old; that we may persevere in the accustomed state
which our fathers handed down to us, and please our <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p13.2"></span>God</span> through the
ministry of a good work by removing the scandals of disturbances.  And
so we would have you recollect, brethren, as we do, that the Apostolic
See, such is the reverence in which it is held, has times out of number
been referred to and consulted by the priests of your province as well
as others, and in the various matters of appeal, as the old usage
demanded, it has reversed or confirmed decisions:  and in this way “the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) ” has been kept, and by the interchange
of letters, our honourable proceedings have promoted a lasting
affection:  for “seeking not our own but the things of Christ <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) ,” we have been careful not to do despite
to the dignity which <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p15.2"></span>God</span> has given both to the churches and
their priests.  But this path which with our fathers has been always so
well kept to and wisely maintained, Hilary has quitted, and is likely to
disturb the position and agreement of the priests by his novel
arrogance:  desiring to subject you to his power in such a way as not to
suffer himself to be subject to the blessed Apostle Peter, claiming for
himself the ordinations of all the churches throughout the provinces of
Gaul, and transferring to himself the dignity which is due to
metropolitan priests; he diminishes even the reverence that is paid to
the blessed Peter himself with his proud words:  for not only was the
power of loosing and binding given to Peter before the others, but also
to Peter more especially was entrusted the care of feeding the
sheep <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) .  Yet any one who holds that
the headship must be denied to Peter, cannot really diminish his
dignity:  but is puffed up with the breath of his pride, and plunges
himself into the lowest depth.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p17"></span>III.  *Celidonius has been restored to his
bishopric, the charges against him having been found false.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p18"></span>Accordingly the written record of our
proceedings shows what action we have taken in the matter of
Celidonius <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) , the bishop, and what
Hilary said in the presence and hearing of the aforesaid bishop.  For
when Hilary had no reasonable answer to give in the council of the holy
priests, “the secrets of his heart <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)
” gave vent to utterances such as no layman could make and no priest
listen to.  We were grieved, I acknowledge, brothers, and endeavoured to
appease the tumult of his mind by patient treatment.  For we did not
wish to exasperate those wounds which he was inflicting on his soul by
his insolent retorts, and strove rather to pacify him whom we had taken
up as a brother, although it was he who was entangling himself by his
replies, than to cause him pain by our remarks.  Celidonius, the bishop,
was therefore acquitted, for he had proved himself wrongfully deposed
from the priesthood, by the clear replies of his witnesses made in his
own presence:  so that Hilary, who remained with us, had no opposition
to offer.  The judgment, therefore, was rescinded, which was brought
forward and read to the effect that, as the husband of a widow <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) , he could not hold the priesthood.  Now
this rule we, maintaining the legal constitutions <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) , have wished scrupulously adhered to,
not only in respect of priests but also of clergy of the lower ranks: 
that those who have contracted such a marriage, or those who are proved
not to be the husbands of only one wife contrary to the apostle’s
discipline, should not be suffered to enter the sacred service <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) .  But though we decree that those, whom
their own acts condemn, must either not be admitted at all, or, if they
have, must be removed, so those who are falsely so accused we are bound
to clear after examination held, and not allow to lose their office. 
For the sentence pronounced would have remained against him, if the
truth of the charge had been proved.  And so Celidonius, our
fellow-bishop, was restored to his church and to that dignity which he
ought not to have <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="ii.iv.x-Page_10"></span>lost, as the course of our proceedings, and
the sentence which was pronounced by us after holding the inquiry
testifies.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p24"></span>IV.  *Hilary’s treatment of Projectus does
not redound to his credit.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p25"></span>When this business was so concluded, the
complaint of our brother and fellow-bishop, Projectus <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) , next came before us:  who addressed us
in a tearful and piteous letter, about the ordaining of a bishop over
his head.  A letter was also brought to us from his own fellow-citizens,
corroborated by a great many individual signatures, and full of the most
unpleasant complaints against Hilary:  to the effect that Projectus,
their bishop, was not allowed to be ill, but his priesthood had been
transferred to another without their knowledge, and the heir brought
into possession by Hilary, the intruder as if to fill up a vacancy,
though the possessor was still alive <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) .  We should like to hear what you,
brothers, think on the point:  although we ought not to entertain any
doubt about your feelings, when you picture to yourselves a brother
lying on a sick-bed and tortured, not so much by his bodily weakness as
by pains of another kind.  What hope in life is left a man who is
visited with despair about his priesthood whilst another is set up in
his place?  Hilary gives a clear proof of his gentle heart when he
believed that the tardiness of a brother’s death is but a hindrance to
his own ambitious designs.  For, as far as in him lay, he quenched the
light for him; he robbed him of life by setting up another in his room,
and thus causing him such pain as to hinder his recovery.  And supposing
that his brother’s passage from this world was brief, but after the
common course of men, what does Hilary seek for himself in another’s
province, and why does he claim that which none of his predecessors
before Patroclus possessed? whereas that very position which seemed to
have been temporarily granted to Patroclus by the Apostolic See was
afterwards withdrawn by a wiser decision <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) .  At least the wishes of the citizens
should have been waited for, and the testimony of the people <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) :  the opinion of those held in honour
should have been asked, and the choice of the clergy—things which those
who know the rules of the fathers are wont to observe in the ordination
of priests:  that the rule of the Apostle’s authority might in all
things be kept, which enjoins that one who is to be the priest of a
church should be fortified, not only by the attestation of the faithful
but also by the testimony of “those who are without <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) ,” and that no occasion for offence be
left, when, in peace and in God-pleasing harmony with the full approval
of all, one who will be a teacher of peace is ordained.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p31"></span>V.  *Hilary’s action was very
reprehensible throughout, and we have restored Projectus.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p32"></span>But Hilary came upon them unawares and
departed no less suddenly, accomplishing many journeys with great speed,
as we have ascertained, and traversing distant provinces with such haste
that he seems to have coveted a reputation for the swiftness of a
courier rather than for the sobriety of a priest <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) .  For these are the words of the
citizens in the letter that has been addressed to us:—“He departed
before we knew he had come.”  This is not to return but to flee, not to
exercise a shepherd’s wholesome care, but to employ the violence of a
thief and a robber, as saith the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p33.1"></span>Lord</span>:  “he that entereth not by the
door into the sheep-fold <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) , but
climbeth up some other way, is a thief and a robber.”  Hilary,
therefore, was anxious not so much to consecrate a bishop as to kill him
who was sick, and to mislead the man whom he set over his head by
wrongful ordination.  We, however, have done what, as <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p34.1"></span>God</span> is our Judge, we
believe you will approve:  after holding counsel with all the brethren
we have decreed that the wrongfully ordained man should be deposed and
the Bishop Projectus abide in his priesthood:  with the further
provision that when any of our brethren in whatsoever province shall
decease, he who has been agreed upon to be metropolitan of that province
shall claim for himself the ordination of his successor.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p35"></span>These two matters, as we see, have been
settled, though there are many other points in them which seem to have
violated the principles of the Church, and ought to be visited with just
censure and judgment.  But we cannot linger on them any further, for we
are called off to other matters on which we must carefully confer with
you, holy brethren.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p36"></span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="ii.iv.x-Page_11"></span>VI.  *Hilary’s practice of using armed
violence must be suppressed.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p37"></span>A band of soldiers, as we have learnt,
follows the priest through the provinces and helps him who relies upon
their armed support in turbulently invading churches, which have lost
their own priests.  Before this court <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) are dragged for ordination men who are
quite unknown to the cities over which they are to be set.  For as one
who is well known and approved is sought out in peace, so must one who
is unknown, when brought forward, be established by violence.  I beg and
entreat and beseech you in <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p38.1"></span>God’s</span> name prevent such things,
brethren, and remove all occasion for discord from your provinces.  At
all events we acquit ourselves before <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p38.2"></span>God</span> in beseeching you not to allow this
to proceed further.  In peace and quietness should they be asked for who
are to be priests.  The consent of the clergy, the testimony of those
held in honour, the approval of the orders and the laity should be
required <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) .  He who is to govern
all, should be chosen by all <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) .  As
we said before, each metropolitan should keep in his own hands the
ordinations that occur in his own province, acting in concert with those
who precede the rest in seniority of priesthood, a privilege restored to
him through us.  No man should claim for himself another’s rights.  Each
should keep within his own limits and boundaries, and should understand
that he cannot pass on to another a privilege that belongs to himself. 
But if any one neglecting the Apostle’s prohibitions and paying too much
heed to personal favour, wishes to give up his precedence, thinking he
can pass his rights on to another, not he to whom he has yielded, but he
who ranks before the rest of the priests within the province in
episcopal seniority, should claim to himself the power of ordaining. 
The ordination should be performed not at random but on the proper day: 
and it should be known that any one who has not been ordained on the
evening of Saturday, which precedes the dawn of the first day of the
week <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) , or actually on the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p41.1"></span>Lord’s</span> day cannot be
sure of his status.  For our forefathers judged the day of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p41.2"></span>Lord’s</span>
resurrection <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) as alone worthy of the
honour of being the occasion on which those who are to be made priests
are given to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p42.1"></span>God</span>.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p43"></span>VII.  *Hilary is deposed not only from his
usurped jurisdiction, but also from what of right belongs to him, and is
restricted to his own single bishopric.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p44"></span>Let each province be content with its own
councils, and let not Hilary dare to summon synodal meetings besides,
and by his interference disturb the judgments of the <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p44.1"></span>Lord’s</span> priests.  And
let him know that he is not only deposed from another’s rights, but also
deprived of his power over the province of Vienne which he had
wrongfully assumed.  For it is but fair, brethren, that the ordinances
of antiquity should be restored, seeing that he who claimed for himself
the ordinations of a province for which he was not responsible, has been
shown in a similar way in the present case also to have acted so that,
as he has on more than one occasion brought on himself sentence of
condemnation by his rash and insolent words, he may now be kept by our
command in accordance with the clemency of the Apostolic See <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) to the priesthood of his own city alone. 
He is not to be present then at any ordination:  he is not to ordain
because, conscious of his deserts, when he was required to answer for
his action, he trusted to make good his escape by disgraceful flight,
and has put himself out of Apostolic communion, of which he did not
deserve to be a partaker <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) :  and we
believe this was by <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p46.1"></span>God’s</span> providence, who brought him to
our court, though we did not expect him, and caused him to retire by
stealth in the midst of holding the inquiry, that he should not be a
partner in our communion <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) .

<span id="ii.iv.x-p48"></span>VIII.  *Excommunication should be
inflicted only on those who are guilty of some great crime, and even
then not hastily.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p49"></span>No Christian should lightly be denied
communion <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) , nor should that be done
at the will of an angry priest which the judge’s mind ought to a certain
extent unwillingly and regretfully to carry out for the punishment of a
great crime.  For we have ascertained that some have been cut off from
the grace of communion for trivial deeds and words, and that the soul
for which Christ’s blood was shed has been exposed to the devil’s
attacks and wounded, disarmed, so to say, and stript of all <span
id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="ii.iv.x-Page_12"></span>defence by
the infliction of so savage a punishment as to fall an easy prey to
him.  Of course if ever a case has arisen of such a kind as in due
proportion to the nature of the crime committed to deprive a man of
communion, he only who is involved in the accusation must be subjected
to punishment:  and he who is not shown to be a partner in its
commission ought not to share in the penalty.  But what wonder that one
who is wont to exult over the condemnation of priests, should show
himself in the same light towards laymen.

<span id="ii.iv.x-p51"></span>IX.  *Leontius is appointed in Hilary’s
room.*

<span id="ii.iv.x-p52"></span>Wherefore, because our desire seems very
different to this (for we are anxious that the settled state of all the
Churches and the harmony of the priests should be maintained,) exhorting
you to unity in the bond of love, we both entreat, and consistently with
our affection admonish you, in the interests of your peace and dignity,
to keep what has been decreed by us at the inspiration of <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p52.1"></span>God</span> and the most
blessed Apostle Peter, after sifting and testing all the matters at
issue, being assured that what we are known to have decided in this way
is not so much to our own advantage as to yours.  For we are not keeping
in our own hands the ordinations of your provinces, as perhaps Hilary,
with his usual untruthfulness, may suggest in order to mislead your
minds, holy brethren:  but in our anxiety we are claiming for you that
no further innovations should be allowed, and that for the future no
opportunity should be given for the usurper to infringe your
privileges.  For we acknowledge that it can only redound to our credit,
if the diligence of the Apostolic See be kept unimpaired among you, and
if in our maintenance of Apostolic discipline we do not allow what
belongs to your position to fall to the ground through unscrupulous
aggressions.  And since seniority is always to be respected, we wish
Leontius <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) , our brother and
fellow-bishop, a priest well approved among you, to be promoted to this
dignity, if it please you that without his consent no further council be
summoned by you, holy brethren, and that he may be honoured by you all
as his age and good fame demands, the metropolitans being secured in
their own dignity and rights.  For it is but fair, and no injury seems
to accrue to any of the brethren, if those who come first in seniority
of the priesthood should, as their age deserves, have deference paid to
them by the rest of the priests in their own provinces.  <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.iv.x-p53.1"></span>God</span> keep you safe,
beloved brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[8:64](2120020.htm#fr_63) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p3"></span> Cf. Introduction p. vi.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[8:65](2120020.htm#fr_64) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p7"></span> *Per Apostolicam tubam in salutem
universitatis* (Gk. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.x-p7.1"></span>τῆς οἰκουμένης</span>) *exiret*, cf. Letter IX.
Chap. ii. *apostoli a Domino prædicandi omnibus gentibus evangelii tubam
sumunt.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[8:66](2120020.htm#fr_65) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p8"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[8:67](2120020.htm#fr_66) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p9"></span> *Huius muneris sacramentum*, his mind is
running forward to his favourite *sacramentum*, that of Peter as the
rock-man of the Church.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[8:68](2120020.htm#fr_67) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p10"></span> Cf. Letter XXVIII. chap. v. *a principali
petra* (*B. Petrus*), *soliditatem et virtutis traxit et nominis,*
etc.:  also Cyprian *de unit. eccl.* chapt. iv.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[8:69](2120020.htm#fr_68) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p11"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv.x-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[9:70](2120020.htm#fr_69) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p14"></span> [Eph. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.x-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[9:71](2120020.htm#fr_70) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p15"></span> [Phil. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span id="ii.iv.x-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[9:72](2120020.htm#fr_71) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p16"></span> *Cui cum præ* (Quesnel conj. *pro*)
*cæteris solvendi et ligandi tradita sit potestas, pascendarum tamen
ovium cura specialius mandata est*.  Cf. S. [John xxi.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.x-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[9:73](2120020.htm#fr_72) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p19"></span> Celidonius was probably either bishop of
Vienne or of Vesontis (Besançon):  see Perthel, p. 25.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[9:74](2120020.htm#fr_73) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p20"></span> Quesnel well refers this phrase to [1
Cor. xiv. 25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)<span
id="ii.iv.x-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[9:75](2120020.htm#fr_74) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p21"></span> Cf. Letter IV. chap. iii.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[9:76](2120020.htm#fr_75) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p22"></span> *Servantes legalia constituta*, these are
taken to be not so much the canons of the Church as the provisions of
the Mosaic Law, e.g. [Lev. 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#014),
[Ezek. 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#022)<span
id="ii.iv.x-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[9:77](2120020.htm#fr_76) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p23"></span> *Militiam* (lit. military service).

<span id="fn_77"></span>[10:78](2120020.htm#fr_77) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p26"></span> *Projectus* was perhaps a bishop of the
province of Gallia Narbonensis I.:  Perthel, p. 27.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[10:79](2120020.htm#fr_78) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p27"></span> *Quod Projecto episcopo suo ægrotare
liberum non fuisset, eiusque sacerdotium in alium præter suam notitiam
esse translatum, et tamquam in vacuam possessionem ab Hilario pervasore
hæredem viventis inductum*.  The construction is changed from
*quod.…fuisset*, to the ordinary accus. and infin.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[10:80](2120020.htm#fr_79) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p28"></span> Patroclus had been Bishop of Arles
*circ*. 416, and the then Bishop of Rome, Zosimus, had granted him
metropolitan rights over the provinces of S.E. Gaul, which did not gain
the acceptance of the other chief bishops in the district, and Boniface
I. (Ep. 12<span id="ii.iv.x-p28.1"></span>), in 422, seems to have
withdrawn the rights granted by Zosimus (Schaff, I, p. 297).

<span id="fn_80"></span>[10:81](2120020.htm#fr_80) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p29"></span> *Civium:  populorum*.  The former are
apparently called lower down *fidelium*, and the latter, *qui foris
sunt.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[10:82](2120020.htm#fr_81) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p30"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007)<span id="ii.iv.x-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[10:83](2120020.htm#fr_82) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p33"></span> *Gloriam de scurrili velocitate potius
quam de sacerdotali moderatione captasse*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[10:84](2120020.htm#fr_83) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p34"></span> *In* cortem *ovium*:  the low Latin word
(*cors*) is in the Vulgate changed to *ovile*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[11:85](2120020.htm#fr_84) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p38"></span> *Ante hoc officium*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[11:86](2120020.htm#fr_85) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p38.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p39"></span> Cf. Cypr. Ep. lv.<span
id="ii.iv.x-p39.1"></span> cap. vii., *factus est Cornelius episcopus de
Dei et Christi eius iudicio, de clericorum pæne omnium testimonio, de
plebis, quæ tunc adfuit, suffragio et sacerdotum antiquorum et bonorum
virorum collegio*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[11:87](2120020.htm#fr_86) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p40"></span> Quesnel appositely quotes Pliny (Paneg.
Traiani) *imperaturus omnibus eligi debet ex omnibus*.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[11:88](2120020.htm#fr_87) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p41"></span> *Quod lucescit in prima sabbati*; the
phrase is repeated from Letter IX., chap. ii., to which refer to the
whole passage.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[11:89](2120020.htm#fr_88) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p41.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p42"></span> Viz., Sunday.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[11:90](2120020.htm#fr_89) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p45"></span> *Pro apostolicæ sedis pietate*, or “as
loyalty to the Apostolic See demands.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[11:91](2120020.htm#fr_90) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p46"></span> This does not mean that Hilary is
excommunicated, but that he is to have no share in episcopal privileges
as a successor of the apostles.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[11:92](2120020.htm#fr_91) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p47"></span> These words of course refer to Hilary’s
journey on foot to Rome, and his subsequent escape from something very
much like prison:  see Introduction, p. vi.:  for his degradation, cf.
Letter XII., chap. ix., where a similar punishment is enacted.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[11:93](2120020.htm#fr_92) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p50"></span> Here, no doubt, excommunication pure and
simple is meant.  Cf. note 4, *supr*.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[12:94](2120020.htm#fr_93) <span
id="ii.iv.x-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.x-p53"></span> Leontius seems to have had little but his
age to recommend him for this promotion:  the name of his bishopric is
unknown, and the weakness of the appointment may, I think, be gathered
from Leo’s insisting so strongly on the principle of seniority both here
and in chap vi. above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Ordinance of Valentinianus III.](2120021)
