[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120219)  [Next](2120221) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xlii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c16"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p1.1"></span>Sermon LXXXII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p2.1"></span>On the Feast <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) of the Apostles Peter and Paul
(June 29).</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p4"></span>I.  *Rome owes its high position to these
Apostles.*

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p5"></span>The whole world, dearly-beloved, does
indeed take part in all holy anniversaries, and loyalty to the one Faith
demands that whatever is recorded as done for all men’s salvation should
be everywhere celebrated with common rejoicings.  But, besides that
reverence which to-day’s festival has gained from all the world, it is
to be honoured with special and peculiar exultation in our city, that
there may be a predominance of gladness on the day of their martyrdom in
the place where the chief of the Apostles met their glorious end <span
id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) .  For these are the men, through
whom the light of Christ’s gospel shone on thee, O Rome, and through
whom thou, who wast the teacher of error, wast made the disciple of
Truth.  These are thy holy Fathers and true shepherds, who gave thee
claims to be numbered among <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="ii.v.xlii-Page_195"></span>the heavenly kingdoms, and built thee
under much better and happier auspices than they, by whose zeal the
first foundations of thy walls were laid:  and of whom the one that gave
thee thy name defiled thee with his brother’s blood <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166) .  These are they who promoted thee
to such glory, that being made a holy nation, a chosen people, a
priestly and royal state <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167) ,
and the head of the world through the blessed Peter’s holy See thou
didst attain a wider sway by the worship of <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p12.2"></span>God</span> than by earthly government.  For
although thou wert increased by many victories, and didst extend thy
rule on land and sea, yet what thy toils in war subdued is less than
what the peace of Christ has conquered.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p13"></span>II.  *The extension of the Roman empire
was part of the Divine scheme*.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p14"></span>For the good, just, and Almighty <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlii-p14.1"></span>God</span>, Who has never
withheld His mercy from mankind, and has ever instructed all men alike
in the knowledge of Himself by the most abundant benefits, has by a more
secret counsel and a deeper love shown pity upon the wanderers’
voluntary blindness and proclivities to evil, by sending His co-equal
and co-eternal Word.  Which becoming flesh so united the Divine Nature
with the human that He by lowering His Nature to the uttermost has
raised our nature to the highest.  But that the result of this
unspeakable Grace might be spread abroad throughout the world, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlii-p14.2"></span>God’s</span> Providence
made ready the Roman empire, whose growth has reached such limits that
the whole multitude of nations are brought into close connexion.  For
the Divinely-planned work particularly required that many kingdoms
should be leagued together under one empire, so that the preaching of
the world might quickly reach to all people, when they were held beneath
the rule of one state.  And yet that state, in ignorance of the Author
of its aggrandisement though it rule almost all nations, was enthralled
by the errors of them all, and seemed to itself to have fostered
religion greatly, because it rejected no falsehood.  And hence its
emancipation through Christ was the more wondrous that it had been so
fast bound by Satan.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p15"></span>III.  *On the dispersing of the Twelve,
St. Peter was sent to Rome.*

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p16"></span>For when the twelve Apostles, after
receiving through the Holy Ghost the power of speaking with all tongues,
had distributed the world into parts among themselves, and undertaken to
instruct it in the Gospel, the most blessed Peter, chief of the
Apostolic band, was appointed to the citadel of the Roman empire, that
the light of Truth which was being displayed for the salvation of all
the nations, might spread itself more effectively throughout the body of
the world from the head itself.  What nation had not representatives
then living in this city; or what peoples did not know what Rome had
learnt?  Here it was that the tenets of philosophy must be crushed, here
that the follies of earthly wisdom must be dispelled, here that the cult
of demons must be refuted, here that the blasphemy of all idolatries
must be rooted out, here where the most persistent superstition had
gathered together all the various errors which had anywhere been
devised.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p17"></span>IV*.  St. Peter’s love conquered his
fears in coming to Rome.*

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p18"></span>To this city then, most blessed Apostle
Peter, thou dost not fear to come, and when the Apostle Paul, the
partner of thy glory, was still busied with regulating other churches,
didst enter this forest of roaring beasts, this deep, stormy ocean with
greater boldness than when thou didst walk upon the sea.  And thou who
hadst been frightened by the high priest’s maid in the house of
Caiaphas, hadst no fear of Rome the mistress of the world.  Was there
any less power in Claudius, any less cruelty in Nero than in the
judgment of Pilate or the Jews’ savage rage?  So then it was the force
of love that conquered the reasons for fear:  and thou didst not think
those to be feared whom thou hadst undertaken to love.  But this feeling
of fearless affection thou hadst even then surely conceived when the
profession of thy love for the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p18.1"></span>Lord</span> was confirmed by the mystery of
the thrice-repeated question.  And nothing else was demanded of this thy
earnest purpose than that thou shouldst bestow the food wherewith thou
hadst thyself been enriched, on feeding His sheep whom thou didst love.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p19"></span>V.  *S. Peter was providentially
prepared for his great mission.*

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p20"></span>Thy confidence also was increased by
many miraculous signs, by many gifts of grace, by many proofs of power. 
Thou hadst already taught the people, who from the number of the
circumcised had believed:  thou hadst already founded the Church at
Antioch, where first the dignity of the Christian name arose:  thou
hadst already instructed Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia, in the laws of the Gospel-message:  and, without doubt as to
the success of the work, with full knowledge of the short span of thy
life didst carry <span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="ii.v.xlii-Page_196"></span>the trophy of Christ’s cross into the
citadel of Rome, whither by the Divine fore-ordaining there accompanied
thee the honour of great power and the glory of much suffering.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p21"></span>VI.  *Many noble martyrs have sprung
from the blood of SS. Peter and Paul*.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p22"></span>Thither came also thy blessed
brother-Apostle Paul, “the vessel of election <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) ,” and the special teacher of the
Gentiles, and was associated with thee at a time when all innocence, all
modesty, all freedom was in jeopardy under Nero’s rule.  Whose fury,
inflamed by excess of all vices, hurled him headlong into such a fiery
furnace of madness that he was the first to assail the Christian name
with a general persecution, as if <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p23.2"></span>God’s</span> Grace could be quenched by the
death of saints, whose greatest gain it was to win eternal happiness by
contempt of this fleeting life.  “Precious,” therefore, “in the eyes of
the <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlii-p23.3"></span>Lord</span> is
the death of His saints <span id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) :” 
nor can any degree of cruelty destroy the religion which is founded on
the mystery of Christ’s cross.  Persecution does not diminish but
increase the church, and the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p24.2"></span>Lord’s</span> field is clothed with an ever
richer crop, while the grains, which fall singly, spring up and are
multiplied a hundred-fold <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) . 
Hence how large a progeny have sprung from these two Heaven-sown seeds
is shown by the thousands of blessed martyrs, who, rivalling the
Apostles’ triumphs, have traversed the city far and wide in purple-clad
and ruddy-gleaming throngs, and crowned it, as it were with a single
diadem of countless gems.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p26"></span>VII.  *No distinction must be drawn
between the merits of the two.*

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p27"></span>And over this band, dearly-beloved, whom
<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlii-p27.1"></span>God</span> has set
forth for our example in patience and for our confirmation in the Faith,
there must be rejoicing everywhere in the commemoration of all the
saints, but of these two Fathers’ excellence we must rightly make our
boast in louder joy, for <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p27.2"></span>God’s</span> Grace has raised them to so
high a place among the members of the Church, that He has set them like
the twin light of the eyes in the body, whose Head is Christ.  About
their merits and virtues, which pass all power of speech, we must not
make distinctions, because they were equal in their election <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) , alike in their toils, undivided
in their death.  But as we have proved for ourselves, and our
forefathers maintained, we believe, and are sure that, amid all the
toils of this life, we must always be assisted in obtaining <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlii-p28.3"></span>God’s</span> Mercy by the
prayers of special interceders, that we may be raised by the Apostles’
merits in proportion as we are weighed down by our own sins.  Through
our <span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.xlii-p28.4"></span>Lord</span> Jesus
Christ, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[194:1165](2120220.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p3"></span> *Natali*, lit. birthday; but the early
Church gave this beautiful name to, and kept the memory of Saints on,
the day of their death (cf. below, *in die martyrii eorum*) in all cases
except that of S. John the Baptist (from the importance of his natural
birthday in connexion with the <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p3.1"></span>Lord’s</span> Nativity).  The Conversion of
S. Paul is a later exception.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[194:1166](2120220.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p6"></span> It is of course well known that this is
very debatable ground, and as such, it is wiser to leave it untouched in
a work which is only intended as a means of rendering English-speaking
people acquainted with Leo’s views and statements.  It will be noticed
however, that the historically verified connexion of S. Paul with Rome
is as nothing in his eyes in comparison with the very apocryphal
connexion of S. Peter:  cf. below, *per sacram beati Petri sedem*, on
which the Ballerinii very appropriately quote Prosper *de Ingratis:—*

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p7"></span>Sedes Roma Petri, quæ pastoralis honore

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p8"></span>facta caput mundo, quidquid non possidet
armis

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p9"></span>*religione tenet*.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p10"></span>The Roman Calendar still retains the
double commemoration on June 29.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[195:1167](2120220.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p11"></span> i.e. Romulus (the traditional founder
of Rome) murdered his brother, Remus.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[195:1168](2120220.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p12"></span> Cf. [1 Pet. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.xlii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[196:1169](2120220.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p23"></span> [Acts ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xlii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[196:1170](2120220.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p24"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xlii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[196:1171](2120220.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p25"></span> This is a commonplace with the
Fathers:  S. Augustine is esp. fond of it; Hurter quotes from him *de
catech. rud*. chap. xxiv. and four times on the Psalms.  Cf. Serm.
XXXVI. chap. iii. n. 1.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[196:1172](2120220.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="ii.v.xlii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p28"></span> *Electio pares* (*fecit*) omitted by
the oldest Vatican <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p28.1"></span>ms.</span> but undoubtedly genuine, the
allusion being obviously to S. Paul’s claim to equal apostleship with
the Twelve more than once advanced (e.g. [2 Cor. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.xlii-p28.2"></span>,
&c.).  This then is an interesting passage when read side by side with
Leo’s Petrine claims, but does not really contradict them, though the
language here used, esp. the figure of the two eyes, is strong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon LXXXIV](2120221)
