[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2120249)  [Next](2120251.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>That the ruler should be discreet in
keeping silence, profitable in speech.

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>The ruler should be discreet in
keeping silence, profitable in speech; lest he either utter what ought
to be suppressed or suppress what he ought to utter.  For, as incautious
speaking leads into error, so indiscreet silence leaves in error those
who might have been instructed.  For often improvident rulers, fearing
to lose human favour, shrink timidly from speaking freely the things
that are right; and, according to the voice of the Truth ([Joh. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.1"></span>), serve unto the custody of the flock by
no means with the zeal of shepherds, but in the way of hirelings; since
they fly when the wolf cometh if they hide themselves under silence. 
For hence it is that the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.2"></span>Lord</span> through the prophet upbraids
them, saying, *Dumb dogs, that cannot bark* ([Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000.md), [Isa.
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.3"></span>).  Hence again He complains, saying, *Ye
have not gone up against the enemy, neither opposed a wall for the house
of Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.4"></span>Lord</span>* ([Ezek.
xiii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.5"></span>).  Now to go up against the enemy is to
go with free voice against the powers of this world for defence of the
flock; and to stand in the battle in the day of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.6"></span>Lord</span> is out of
love of justice to resist bad men when they contend against us.  For,
for a shepherd to have feared to say what is right, what else is it but
to have turned his back in keeping silence?  But surely, if he puts
himself in front for the flock, he opposes a wall against the enemy for
the house of Israel.  Hence again to the sinful people it is said, *Thy
prophets have seen false and foolish things for thee:  neither did they
discover thine iniquity, to provoke thee to repentance* ([Lam. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.7"></span>).  For in sacred language teachers are
sometimes called prophets, in that, by pointing out how fleeting are
present things, they make manifest the things that are to come.  And
such the divine discourse convinces of seeing false things, because,
while fearing to reprove faults, they vainly flatter evil doers by
promising security:  neither do they at all discover the iniquity of
sinners, since they refrain their voice from chiding.  For the language
of reproof is the key of discovery, because by chiding it discloses the
fault of which even he who has committed it is often himself unaware. 
Hence Paul says, *That he may be able by sound doctrine even to convince
the gainsayers* ([Tit. i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.8"></span>).  Hence through Malachi it is said,
*The priest’s lips keep knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his
mouth* ([Malac. ii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.9"></span>).  Hence through Isaiah the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.10"></span>Lord</span> admonishes,
saying, *Cry* <span id="page_12b">p. 12b</span> <span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-Page_12b"></span>*aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet* ([Isa. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000.md), [Isa.
58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.11"></span>).  For it is true that whosoever enters
on the priesthood undertakes the office of a herald, so as to walk,
himself crying aloud, before the coming of the judge who follows
terribly.  Wherefore, if the priest knows not how to preach, what voice
of a loud cry shall the mute herald utter?  For hence it is that the
Holy Spirit sat upon the first pastors under the appearance of tongues
([Acts ii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.12"></span>); because whomsoever He has filled, He
himself at once makes eloquent.  Hence it is enjoined on Moses that when
the priest goes into the tabernacle he shall be encompassed with bells
([Exod. xxviii. 33](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#033.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.13"></span>); that is, that he shall have about him
the sounds of preaching, lest he provoke by his silence the judgment of
Him Who beholds him from above.  For it is written, *That his sound may
be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.14"></span>Lord</span> and when he
cometh out, that he die not* ([Exod. xxviii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#035.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.15"></span>).  For the priest, when he goeth in or
cometh out, dies if a sound is not heard from him, because he provokes
the wrath of the hidden judge, if he goes without the sound of
preaching.  Aptly also are the bells described as inserted in his
vestments.  For what else ought we to take the vestments of the priest
to be but righteous works; as the prophet attests when he says, *Let Thy
priests be clothed with righteousness* ([Ps. cxxxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.16"></span>)?  The bells, therefore, are inherent
in his vestments to signify that the very works of the priest should
also proclaim the way of life together with the sound of his tongue. 
But, when the ruler prepares himself for speaking, let him bear in mind
with what studious caution he ought to speak, lest, if he be hurried
inordinately into speaking, the hearts of hearers be smitten with the
wound of error and, while he perchance desires to seem wise he unwisely
sever the bond of unity.  For on this account the Truth says, *Have salt
in yourselves, and have peace one with another* ([Mark ix.
49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.17"></span>).  Now by salt is denoted the word of
wisdom.  Let him, therefore, who strives to speak wisely fear greatly,
lest by his eloquence the unity of his hearers be disturbed.  Hence Paul
says, *Not to be more wise than behoveth to be wise, but to be wise unto
sobriety* ([Rom. xii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.18"></span>).  Hence in the priest’s vestment,
according to Divine precept, to bells are added pomegranates ([Exod.
xxviii. 34](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#034.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.19"></span>).  For what is signified by
pomegranates but the unity of the faith?  For, as within a pomegranate
many seeds are protected by one outer rind, so the unity of the faith
comprehends the innumerable peoples of holy Church, whom a diversity of
merits retains within her.  Lest then a ruler should be unadvisedly
hurried into speaking, the Truth in person proclaims to His disciples
this which we have already cited, *Have salt in yourselves, and have
peace one with another* ([Mark ix.
49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.20"></span>).  It is as though He should say in a
figure through the dress of the priest:  Join ye pomegranates to bells,
that in all ye say ye may with cautious watchfulness keep the unity of
the faith.  Rulers ought also to guard with anxious thought not only
against saying in any way what is wrong, but against uttering even what
is right overmuch and inordinately; since the good effect of things
spoken is often lost, when enfeebled to the hearts of hearers by the
incautious importunity of loquacity; and this same loquacity, which
knows not how to serve for the profit of the hearers, also defiles the
speaker.  Hence it is well said through Moses, *The man that hath a flux
of seed shall be unclean* ([Levit. xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.21"></span>).  For the quality of the speech that
is heard is the seed of the thought which follows, since, while speech
is conceived through the ear, thought is engendered in the mind.  Whence
also by the wise of this world the excellent preacher was called a sower
of words (*seminiverbius*) ([Acts xvii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.22"></span>).  Wherefore, he that suffers from a
flux of seed is pronounced unclean, because, being addicted to much
speaking, he defiles himself by that which, had it been orderly issued,
might have produced the offspring of right thought in the hearts of
hearers; and, while he incautiously spends himself in loquacity, he
sheds his seed not so as to serve for generation, but unto uncleanness. 
Hence Paul also, in admonishing his disciple to be instant in preaching,
when he says, *I charge thee before <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.23"></span>God</span> and Christ Jesus, Who shall
judge the quick and the dead by His appearing and His kingdom, preach
the word, be instant opportunely, importunely* <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269.md) ([2 Tim. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p4.1"></span>), being about to say *importunely*,
premises *opportunely*, because in truth importunity mars itself to the
mind of the hearer by its own very cheapness, if it knows not how to
observe opportunity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[12b:1270](2120250.htm#fr_1269.md) <span
id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p3.24"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.iii.iv-p4"></span> *Opportune, importune*, the second
word being apparently understood in the sense of *importunately*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the ruler should be a near neighbour to every one in
compassion, and exalted above all in contemplation.](2120251.md)
