[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toe14)  [Next](toe16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Theory of the Earth*, by James Hutton, \[1788 and 1795\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. IV.

*The Supposition of Primitive Mountains refuted.*

In the theory now given, the earth has been represented as a composition
of different materials, which had existed in another form, and as the
effect of natural operations; therefore, however various may be found
the structure of our earth, and however dissimilar some parts of its
composition may be in comparison with others, no part should be
considered as original, in relation to the globe, or as primitive, in
relation to second causes, *i.e.* physical operations by which those
parts should have been formed. But it is pretended by naturalists, that
there are certain primitive mountains in the earth, bodies which have
had another origin than that of the general strata of the globe and
subsequent masses; an origin, therefore, which cannot be considered as
having been produced from natural operations, or as effected in the
course of known causes. Now, if it can be made to appear, that there is
no solid ground for this distinction; and if it can be shown, that there
is truly no mineral body in this earth which may not have been produced
by operations natural to the globe, we should thus procure a certain
confirmation of the doctrine. This also will be the more interesting, in
being deduced from a part of natural appearances, which seemed to be
inconsistent with the theory.

Certain masses or mountains of granite, are the only bodies of this
earth which have apparently a certain pretension to this species of
originality. These, therefore, must be now the subject of our
examination.

Granite, considered by itself, does not appear to have any claim to
originality in its nature. It is composed of bodies which are capable of
being analysed; and these are then found to be compositions of different
substances, which are also sometimes variously proportioned. The
feldspar and the mica, for example, as well as the schorl, are found
variously coloured in different granites, and coloured in various
proportions. Besides the variety in the composition, or chemical mixture
of the different bodies which compose granite, this rock admits of a
great diversity, from the variety of its mechanical mixture, or from the
different species of bodies which are its constituent parts. M. de
Saussure, who has examined this subject perhaps more than any other
person, and who has had the very best opportunities for this purpose,
says, that this composition may be found in all the different
combinations which may be produced by every possible composition of 7 or
8 different kinds of stone, (page 108, Voyage dans les Alpes, etc.).
Neither does this fill up the measure of its variety; for, another
source of change is found in the grain of this rock stone; I have a
specimen of this variety from the size almost of sand to that of some
inches.

Were granite, therefore, to be supposed as in the original state of its
creation, nature would be considered as having operated in an indefinite
diversity of ways, without that order and wisdom which we find in all
her works; for here would be change without a principle, and variety
without a purpose. There is no reason, however, to suppose granite
original, more than any other composite rock, although we may be
ignorant of the particular process in which it is formed, and although,
comparatively in relation to certain other rocks, granite, or certain
masses of this composition, may be found of a more ancient date.

If granite be truly stratified, and those strata connected with the
other strata of the earth, it can have no claim to originality; and the
idea of primitive mountains, of late so much employed by natural
philosophers, must vanish, in a more extensive view of the operations of
the globe; but it is certain that granite, or a species of the same kind
of stone, is thus found stratified. It is the *granit feuilletée* of M.
de Saussure, and, if I mistake not, what is called *gneis* by the
Germans. We have it also in our north alpine country of Scotland; of
this I have specimens, but have not seen it in its place.

Granite being thus found stratified, the masses of this stone cannot be
allowed to have any right of priority over the schistus, its companion
in the alpine countries, although M. de Saussure, whose authority I
would revere, has given it for the following reason; that it is found
the most centrical in the chains of high mountains, or in alpine
countries. Now, supposing this fact to be general, as he has found it in
the Alps, no argument for the priority of those masses can be founded
either upon the height or the situation of those granite mountains; for
the height of the mountain depends upon the solidity and strength of the
stone. Now though it is not to be here maintained that granite is the
most durable of those alpine rocks, yet as a mountain, either granite in
general, or in particular, certain species of it, may be esteemed such,
consequently, this massy stone, remaining highest in the mountainous
region, will naturally be considered as the centre, and according to
this rule, as having the pre-eminence in point of seniority.

The rock which stands in competition with granite for the title of
primitive in the order of mountains, is that micaceous stratified stone
which is formed chiefly of quartz, but which admits of great variety
like the granite. The difference between those two bodies does not
consist in the materials of which they are composed, for, in their
varieties, they may be in this respect the same, but in a certain
regularity of composition, in this alpine stone, which evidently arises
from stratification or subsidence in water.

If we shall thus consider all the varieties of this alpine stone as
being of one kind, and call it granite, then we shall distinguish in
this body two different species, from whence perhaps some interesting
conclusion may be formed with regard to the operations of the globe.
These two species are, *first*, granite regular in its composition, or
stratified in its construction; and, *secondly*, granite in mass, or
irregular in its construction. Let us now endeavour to make use of these
generalizations and distinctions.

In examining the great diversity of our whinstone, trap, or basaltes, it
is found at last to granulate into granite; at the same time those two
different species of rock-stone may be distinguished. A perfect granite
has not in its composition necessarily any argillaceous earth, farther
than may be in the natural constitution of its distinct parts; whereas,
a perfect basalt may have abundance of this substance, without any
quartz or any siliceous body. A perfect granite, is, therefore, an
extremely hard stone, having quartz and feldspar for its basis; but a
perfect whin or basaltes may be extremely soft, so as to cut easily with
a knife. In like manner granite is a composition which graduates into
porphyry; but porphyry is only whinstone of a harder species. Therefore,
though perfectly distinct, those three things graduate into each other,
and may be considered as the same.

Granite and whinstone, or basaltes, though distinct compositions, thus
graduating into each other; and whinstone, as well as porphyry, being
without doubt a species of lava, we may consider the granite which is
found in mass without stratification, in like manner as we do the masses
of whinstone, basaltes, or Swedish trap, as having flowed in the bowels
of the earth, and thus been produced by the chance of place, without any
proper form of its own, or in an irregular shape and construction. In
this manner would be explained the irregular shape or structure of those
granite masses; and thus great light would be thrown upon the waved
structure of the stratified alpine stone, which, though it has not been
made to flow, has been brought to a great degree of softness, so as to
have the original straight lines of its stratification changed to those
undulated or waving lines which are in some cases extremely much
incurvated.

It remains only to confirm this reasoning, upon our principles, by
bringing actual observation to its support; and this we shall do from
two of the best authorities. The Chevalier de Dolomieu, in describing
the volcanic productions of Etna, mentions a lava which had flowed from
that mountain, and which may be considered as a granite. But M. de
Saussure has put this matter out of doubt by describing most accurately
what he had seen both in the Alps and at the city of Lyons. These are
veins of granite which have flowed from the contiguous mass into the
stratified stone, and leave no doubt with regard to this proposition,
that the granite had flowed in form of subterranean lava, although M. de
Saussure has drawn a very different conclusion from this appearance. I
have also a specimen from this country of a vein of granite in a granite
stone, the vein being of a smaller grain than that of the rock which it
traverses.<sup>20</sup>

Footnote 20: (return) This is what I had wrote upon, the subject of
granite, before I had acquired such ample testimony from my own
observations upon that species of rock. I have given some notice, in the
3d vol. of the Transactions of the Edinburgh R.S. concerning the general
result of those observations, which will be given particularly in the
course of this work.

It will thus appear, that the doctrine which of late has prevailed, of
primitive mountains, or something which should be considered as original
in the construction of this earth, must be given up as a false view of
nature, which has formed the granite upon the same principle with that
of any other consolidated stratum; so far as the collection of different
materials, and the subsequent fusion of the compound mass, are necessary
operations in the preparation of all the solid masses of the earth.
Whatever operations of the globe, therefore, may be concluded from the
composition of granite masses, as well as of the alpine strata, these
must be considered as giving us information with regard to the natural
history of this earth; and they will be considered as important, in
proportion as they disclose to us truths, which from other strata might
not be so evident, or at all made known.

Let us now examine the arguments, which, may be employed in favour of
that supposition of primitive mountains.

The observations, on which naturalists have founded that opinion of
originality in some of the component parts of our earth, are these;
*first*, They observe certain great masses of granite in which
stratification is not to be perceived; this then they say is an original
mass, and it is not to be derived from any natural operation of the
globe; *secondly*, They observe considerable tracts of the earth
composed of matter in the order of stratification as to its general
composition, but not as to its particular position, the vertical
position here prevailing, instead of the horizontal which is proper to
strata formed in water; this, therefore, they also term primitive, and
suppose it to be from another origin than that of the subsidence of
materials moved in the waters of the globe; *lastly*, They observe both
strata and masses of calcareous matter in which they cannot distinguish
any marine body as is usual in other strata of the same substance; and
these calcareous masses being generally connected with their primitive
mountains, they have also included these collections of calcareous
matter, in which marine bodies are not observed, among the primitive
parts which they suppose to be the original construction of this globe.

It may be proper to see the description of a calcareous alpine mountain.
M. de Saussure gives us the following observations concerning a mountain
of this kind in the middle of the Alps, where the water divides in
running different ways towards the sea. It is in describing the passage
of the Bon-Homme, (Tom. 2. V. dans les Alpes).

"§ 759. Sur la droite ou au couchant de ces rochers, on voit une
montagne calcaire étonnante dans ce genre par la hardiesse avec laquelle
elle élève contre le ciel ses cimes aigues et tranchantes, taillées à
angles vifs dans le costume des hautes cimes de granit. Elle est
pourtant bien sûrement calcaire, je l'ai observée de près, et on
rencontre sur cette route les blocs qui s'en détachent.

"Cette pierre porte les caractères des calcaires les plus anciennes; sa
couleur est grise, son grain assez fin, on n'y apperçoit aucun vestige
de corps organisés; ses couches sont peu épaisses, ondées et coupées
fréquemment par des fentes parallèles entr'elles et perpendiculaires à
leurs plans. On trouve aussi parmi ces fragmens des brèches calcaires
grises."

Here is a mountain which will rank with the most primitive of the earth;
But why? only because it is extremely consolidated without any mark of
organised body. Had there been in this mountain but one single shell, we
should not then have scrupled to conclude that the origin of this lofty
mountain had been the same with every marble or limestone in the earth.
But though, from the structure of this stone, there is no mark of its
having been formed immediately of the calcareous parts of animals, there
is every mark of those calcareous strata having been formed like other
marbles by deposit in the waters of the globe.

These two things are also homologated by the equal or perfect
consolidation of their substance; for, as it is to be proved that all
stratified marbles have been consolidated by the fusion of their
substance, we must attribute the same consolidating cause to those
alpine masses; the frequent veins that divide those calcareous strata
which M. de Saussure has here described, also prove the nature of the
consolidating cause, (see Chap. 1. page 111.).

This mountain, considered by itself, may perhaps afford no data by which
a naturalist might read the circumstances of its origin. But, Is a
theory of the earth to be formed upon such a negative observation? and,
Is there any particular in this mountain, that may not be shown in
others of which the origin is not in any degree doubtful?

It is not to be disputed, that there are parts of the solid body of our
earth which may be considered as primary or prior, compared with others
that are posterior, in relation to the time of their formation, and much
less changed with regard to the state in which they had been originally
formed:—But it is here denied, that there are any parts of the earth
which do not appear to have had the same origin with all the rest, so
far as this consists in the collection of materials deposited at the
bottom of the waters <span id="fr_27"></span>[21](#fn_27); for there is
no solid mass of land that may not be traced to this origin, either from
its composition, or from its local connection with other masses, the
nature of which in this respect are known. We have already given
examples of this from sufficient authority. The evidence, therefore, of
those primary masses being original in relation to the natural
operations of the globe, is reduced to this assertion, that there are no
vestiges of organised bodies to be found in those primary masses. Let us
now examine how far this testimony for the originality of those masses
is to be admitted in fact and sound reasoning.

The matter in question at present is this, that there are certain tracts
of countries in which no vestige of organised bodies are found; now, let
us suppose the fact to be true or well grounded, Can we conclude from
this that there had been originally no organised bodies in the
composition of those masses?—Such a conclusion could only be formed in
making a supposition, that every organised body deposited in a mass of
matter, whether homogeneous or heterogeneous, should be preserved
without change, while the collected mass, in which it had been
deposited, changes as much as possible by the operation both of fire and
water. But this supposition is erroneous, and cannot be admitted; and
the study of marbles will demonstrate this truth, that the calcareous
relics of organised bodies are changed, in the consolidating operations
of the globe, in every degree, from the smallest alteration to the
greatest, when they become indistinguishable any farther to our sight.

Therefore, from the supposition of no appearance of marine bodies in the
pretended primitive masses, there is no sufficient evidence or reason to
conclude, that those masses have not had a marine origin; because, the
traces of organised bodies may be obliterated by the many subsequent
operations of the mineral region; and which operations, the present
state of those masses certify beyond dispute.

We are now to examine the fact, how far the ground on which that false
reasoning had been founded is strictly true.

In the first place, then, it must be considered, that the alleged fact
is nothing but a negative assertion, importing that no mark of organised
bodies had been observed, in certain stones and strata which some
naturalists have examined with that view. But, though many naturalists
have looked for them without success, it does not follow that such marks
may not be found; it indeed proves that such a task is difficult, and
the success of it, to a particular, most precarious; accident, however,
may bring about what the greatest industry has not been able to attain.
Secondly, there is good reason to believe that this asserted negation is
not absolutely true; for I have in my possession what I consider as
proof of the contrary; I found it in Wales, and I think it is in what
may be considered as primitive mountains;—it is the mark of shells in a
stone of that kind.

Thus, I had formed my opinion with regard to this alleged fact, long
before I had seen any description either of the Alps or Pyrennean
mountains; and now I have no reason to change that opinion. It may
indeed be alleged, that the strata of marble or limestone, containing
marine bodies found in those mountains, are secondary strata, and not
the primitive. To this I can give no reply, as the descriptions given of
those strata do not enable me to decide this point.

At the village of Mat, under the Mont Blatten for example, there is a
quarry of schistus or black slate, in which are often found the print
and the bones of fishes. (Discours sur l'Histoire Naturelle de la
Suisse, page 225.). If this may be considered as an alpine or primitive
schistus, it would be decisive of the question: But it would require to
have it well ascertained that this schistus is truly one of those which
are esteemed primitive, or that it is properly connected with them.

But though I cannot find in those interesting descriptions which we now
have got, any one which is demonstrative of this truth, that calcareous
marine objects are found in the primitive strata, this is not the case
with regard to another object equally important in deciding this
question, Whether the primitive strata are found containing the marks of
organised bodies?

M. de Dellancourt, in his *Observations Minéralogiques*, Journal de
Physique Juillet 1786, in describing the mountains of Dauphiné, gives us
the following fact with regard to those alpine vertical strata.

"La pierre constituante de la montagne d'Oris est en général le *Kneifs*
ou la roche feuilletée mica et quartz à couches plus ou moins ferrées
quelquefois le schorl en roche pénétré de stéatite. Les couches varient
infiniment quant à leur direction et à leur inclinaisons. Cette montagne
est cultivée et riche dans certain cantons, surtout autour du village
d'Oris, mais elle est très-escarpée dans beaucoup d'autres. Entre le
village d'Oris et celui du Tresnay est une espèce de combe assez creuse
formée par la chute des eaux des cimes supérieures des rochers. Cette
combe offre beaucoup de schiste dont les couches font ou très-inclinées
ou perpendiculaires. Entre ces couches il s'en est trouvé de plus noires
que les autres et capable de brûler, mais difficilement. Les habitans
ont extrait beaucoup de cette matière terreuse, et lui ont donné le nom
de charbon de terre. Ils viennent même à bout de la faire brûler, et de
s'en servir l'hiver en la mêlant avec du bois. Ce schiste noir
particulier m'a paru exister principalement dans les endroits ou les
eaux se sont infiltrées entre les couches perpendiculaires, et y ont
entraîné diverse matières, et sur-tout des débris de végétaux que j'ai
encore retrouvés à demi-noirs, pulvérulens et comme dans un état
charbonneux."

This formation of coal, by the infiltration of water and carrying in of
vegetable bodies, certainly cannot be admitted of; consequently, from
this description, there would seem to be strata of coal alternated with
the alpine schisti. But the formation of mineral coal requires vegetable
matter to have been deposited along with those earthy substances, at the
bottom of the sea. The production of vegetable bodies, again, requires
the constitution of sea and land, and the system of a living world,
sustaining plants at least, if not animals.

In this natural history of the alpine schisti, therefore, we have a most
interesting fact, an example which is extremely rare. Seldom are
calcareous organised bodies found among those alpine strata, but still
more rarely, I believe, are the marks of vegetable bodies having
contributed in the formation of those masses. But however rare this
example, it is equally decisive of the question, Whether the alpine
schisti have had a similar origin as the other strata of the globe, in
which are found abundance of animal and vegetable bodies, or their
relics? and we are authorised to say, that since those perfect alpine
strata of Dauphiné have had that origin, all the alpine schisti of the
globe have been originally formed in a similar manner. But to put this
matter out of doubt:

In this summer 1788, coming from the Isle of Man, Mr Clerk and I
travelled through the alpine schistus country of Cumberland and
Westmoreland. We found a limestone quarry upon the banks of Windermere,
near the Low-wood Inn. I examined this limestone closely, but despaired
of finding any vestige of organised body. The strata of limestone seem
to graduate into the slate or schistus strata, between which the
calcareous are placed. Fortunately, however, I at last found a fragment
in which I thought to perceive the works of organised bodies in a sparry
state; I told Mr Clerk so, and our landlord Mr Wright, who had
accompanied us. I have brought home this specimen, which I have now
ground and polished; and now it is most evidently full of fragments of
entrochi. Mr Wright then told me he had seen evident impressions of
marine objects, as I understood from the description, in the slate of
those mountains; and he was to send me specimens so soon as he could
procure them.

Here is one specimen which at once overturns all the speculations formed
upon that negative proposition. The schistus mountains of Cumberland
were, in this respect, as perfect primitive mountains as any upon the
earth, before this observation; now they have no claim upon that score,
no more than any limestone formed of shells.

When I first announced my belief that such objects in natural history
might be found, I little thought to have seen it realised, to such a
degree as has now happened in the little circle of my knowledge. In the
summer 1791,

Professor Playfair was to pass through Cumberland. I begged that he
would inquire of Mr Wright, at the Low-wood Inn, for those objects which
he was to endeavour to procure for me, and to examine the limestone
quarry in which I had found the specimen with entrochi. He went through
another part of those primary mountains, and has found examples of this
kind in the schisti; concerning which he has written me the following
account.

"In a visit which I made to the Lakes of Cumberland in September 1791,
in company with the Hon. Francis Charteris, I met with a limestone full
of marine objects, though from its position it is certainly to be
reckoned among the primary strata. The place where we found this stone
was in the district of Lancashire, that is west of Windermere Lake, on
the road from Ambleside to the north end of Coniston Lake, and not far
from the point when you come in sight of the latter. Just about this
spot we happened to meet with one of those people who serve as guides to
travellers in those parts, and who told us, among other things, that
stones with shells in them were often found not far from where we were
then walking. We immediately began to look about for specimens of that
kind, and soon met with several; the most remarkable of which was in a
rock that rose a little above the surface, about 300 or 400 yards to the
right of the road. It was a part of a limestone stratum, nearly
vertical, and was full of bivalves with the impressions as strong as in
a common secondary limestone. The strata on both sides had the same
inclination, and were decidedly primary, consisting of the ordinary
micaceous schistus. This however I need not remark to you, who know so
well from your own observations that the whole of the country I am now
speaking of has every character of a primary one. I, only mention it,
that it may not be supposed that the rock in question was some fragment
of a secondary stratum that remained, after the rest was washed away,
superincumbent on the primary.

"After I had seen this rock, I recollected that you had told me of
something of the same kind that you saw in a quarry at Low-wood Inn; and
it may be that both belonged to the same stratum or body of strata; for
the direction of the strata, as nearly as I could observe, was from S.W.
to N.E.; and this also is nearly the bearing of Low-wood from the place
where we now were. I send you a specimen, which you can compare with
those you brought from the lime quarry at Low-wood."

I have examined this specimen, and find it to be the common schistus of
that country, only containing many bivalve shells and fragments of
entrochi and madrapore bodies, and mixed with pyrites.

I have already observed that one single example of a shell, or of its
print, in a schistus, or in a stone stratified among those vertical or
erected masses, suffices to prove the origin of those bodies to have
been, what I had maintained them to be, water formed strata erected from
the bottom of the sea, like every other consolidated stratum of the
earth. But now, I think, I may affirm, that there is not, or rarely, any
considerable extent of country of that primary kind, in which some mark
of this origin will not be found, upon careful examination; and now I
will give my reason for this assertion. I have been examining the south
alpine country of Scotland, occasionally, for more than forty years
back, and I never could find any mark of an organised body in the
schistus of those mountains. It is true that I know of only one place
where limestone is found among the strata; this is upon Tweed-side near
the Crook. This quarry I had carefully examined long ago, but could find
no mark of any organised body in it. I suppose they now are working some
other of the vertical strata near those which I had examined; for, in
the summer 1792, I received a letter from Sir James Hall, which I shall
now transcribe. It is dated at Moffat, June 2. 1792.

"As I was riding yesterday between Noble-house and Crook, on the road to
this place, I fell in with a quarry of alpine limestone; it consists of
four or five strata, about three feet thick, one of them single, and the
rest contiguous; they all stand between the strata of slate and schist
that are at the place nearly vertical. In the neighbourhood, a slate
quarry is worked of a pure blue slate; several of the strata of slate
near the limestone are filled with fragments of limestone scattered
about like the fragments of schist in the sandstone in the neighbourhood
of the junction on our coast. <span id="fr_28"></span>[22](#fn_28)

"Among the masses of limestone lately broken off for use, and having the
fractures fresh, I found the forms of cockles quite distinct; and in
great abundance.—I send you three pieces of this kind," etc.

It may perhaps be alleged that those mountains of Cumberland and
Tweedale are not the primary mountains, but composed of the secondary
schistus, which is every where known to contain those objects belonging
to a former earth. Naturalists who have not the opportunity of
convincing themselves by their proper examination, must judge with
regard to that geological fact by the description of others. Now it is
most fortunate for natural history, that it has been in this range of
mountains that we have discovered those marks of a marine origin; for, I
shall afterwards have occasion to give the clearest light into this
subject, from observations made in other parts of those same mountains
of schist, by which it will be proved that they are the primary strata;
and thus no manner of doubt will then remain in the minds of
naturalists, who might otherwise suspect that we were deceiving
ourselves, by mistaking the secondary for the primitive schistus.

1 have only farther to observe, that those schisti mountains of Wales,
of Cumberland, and of the south alpine part of Scotland, where these
marine objects have been found, consist, of that species of stone which
in some places makes the most admirable slate for covering houses; and,
in other parts, it breaks into blocks that so much resemble wood in
appearance, that, without narrow inspection, it might pass for petrified
wood.

We are therefore to conclude that the marks of organised bodies in those
primary mountains are certainly found; at the same time the general
observation of naturalists has some foundation, so far as the marks of
organised bodies are both rarely to be met with in those masses, and not
easily distinguished as such when they are found.

But this scarcity of marine objects is not confined to those primary
mountains, as they are called; for among the most horizontal strata, or
those of the latest production, there are many in which, it is commonly
thought, no marine calcareous objects are to be found; and this is a
subject that deserves to be more particularly considered, as the theory
may thus receive some illustration.

Sandstone, coal, and their accompanying strata, are thought to be
destitute of calcareous marine productions, although many vestiges of
plants or vegetable productions are there perceived. But this general
opinion is neither accurate nor true; for though it be true that in the
coal and sandstone strata it is most common to find marks of vegetable
production, and rarely those calcareous bodies which are so frequent in
the limestone, yet it is not unusual for coal to be accompanied with
limestone formed of shells and corals, and also with ironstone
containing many of those marine objects as well as wood. Besides,
sandstone frequently contains objects which have been organised bodies,
but which do not belong to the vegetable kingdom, at least to no plant
which grows upon the land, but would seem to have been some species of
zoophite perhaps unknown.

I have also frequently seen the vestige of shells in sandstone, although
in these strata the calcareous bodies are in general not perceived. The
reason of this is evident. When there is a small proportion of the
calcareous matter in the mass of sand which is pervious to steam and to
the percolation of water, the calcareous bodies may be easily dissolved,
and either carried away or dispersed in the mass; or even without being
thus dispersed by means of solution, the calcareous matter may be
absorbed by the siliceous substance of the stratum by means of fusion,
or by heat and cementation. The fact is, that I have seen in sandstone
the empty mould of marine shells with some siliceous crystallization, so
far as I remember, which corresponded perfectly with that idea. The
place I saw this was in a fine white sandstone accompanying the coal,
upon the sea side at Brora in Sutherland.

Mineralogy is much indebted to Mr Pallas for the valuable observations
which he has given of countries so distant from the habitations of
learned men. The physiology of the globe has also been enriched with
some interesting observations from the labours of this learned
traveller. But besides giving us facts, Mr Pallas has also reasoned upon
the subject, and thus entered deep into the science of Cosmogeny; here
it is that I am afraid he has introduced some confusion into the natural
history of the earth, in not properly distinguishing the mineral
operations of the globe, and those again which belong entirely to the
surface of the earth; perhaps also in confounding the natural effects of
water upon the surface of the earth, with those convulsions of the sea
which may be properly considered as the accidental operations of the
globe. This subject being strictly connected with the opinions of that
philosopher with regard to primitive mountains, I am obliged to examine
in this place matters which otherwise might have come more properly to
be considered in another.

M. Pallas in his *Observations sur la formation des montagnes*, (page
48) makes the following observations.

"J'ai déjà dit que *la bande de montagnes primitives schisteuses*
hétérogènes, qui, par toute la terre, accompagne les chaines
granitiques, et comprend les roches quartzeuses et talceuses mixtes,
trapézoïdes, serpentines, le schiste corne, les roches spathiques et
cornées, les grais purs, le porphyre et le jaspre, tous rocs fêlés en
couches, ou presque perpendiculaires, ou du moins très-rapidement
inclinées, (les plus favorables à la filtration des eaux), semble
aussi-bien que le granit, antérieure à la création organisée. Une raison
très-forte pour appuyer cette supposition, c'est que la plupart de ces
roches, quoique lamelleuse en façon d'ardoise, n'a jamais produit aux
curieux la moindre trace de pétrifactions ou empreintes de corps
organisés. S'il s'en est trouvé, c'est apparemment dans des fentes de
ces roches où ces corps ont été apportés par un deluge, et encastrées
apres dans une matière infiltrée, de même qu'on a trouvé des restes
d'Eléphans dans le filon de la mine d'argent du Schlangenberg. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[23](#fn_29) Les caractères par lesquels plusieurs de
ces roches semblent avoir souffert des effets d'un feu-très-violent, les
puissantes veines et amas des minéraux les plus riches qui se trouvent
principalement dans la bande qui en est composée, leur position
immédiate sur le granit, et même le passage, par lequel on voit souvent
en grand, changer le granit en une des autres espèces; tout cela indique
une origine bien plus ancienne, et des causes bien différentes de celles
qui ont produit les montagnes secondaires."

Here M. Pallas gives his reason for supposing those mountains primitive
or anterior to the operations of this globe as a living world; *first*,
because they have not, in general, marks of animals or plants; and that
it is doubtful if they ever properly contain those marks of organised
bodies; *secondly*, because many of those rocks have the appearance of
having suffered the effects of the most violent fire. Now, What are
those effects? Is it in their having been brought into a fluid state of
fusion. In that case, no doubt, they may have been much changed from the
original state of their formation; but this is a very good reason why,
in this changed state, the marks of organised bodies, which may have
been in their original constitution, should be now effaced.

The *third* reason for supposing those mountains primitive, is taken
from the metallic veins, which are found so plentifully in these masses.
Now, had these masses been the only bodies in this earth in which those
mineral veins were found, there might be some species of reason for
drawing the conclusion, which is here formed by our philosopher. But
nothing is so common (at least in England) as mineral veins in the
strata of the latest formation, and in those which are principally
formed of marine productions; consequently so far from serving the
purpose for which this argument was employed, the mineral veins in the
primitive mountains tend to destroy their originality, by assimilating
them in some respect with every other mass of strata or mountain upon
the globe.

*Lastly*, M. Pallas here employs an argument taken from an appearance
for which we are particularly indebted to him, and by which the
arguments which have been already employed in denying the originality of
granite is abundantly confirmed. It has been already alleged, that
granite, porphyry, and whinstone, or trap, graduate into each other; but
here M. Pallas informs us that he has found the granite not only changed
into porphyry, but also into the other alpine compositions. How an
argument for the originality of these mountains can be established upon
those facts, I am not a little at a loss to conceive.

The general mineralogical view of the Russian dominions, which we have,
in this treatise, may now be considered with regard to that distinction
made by naturalists, of primitive, secondary, and tertiary mountains, in
order to see how far the observations of this well informed naturalist
shall be found to confirm the theory of the earth which has been already
given, or not.

The Oural mountains form a very long chain, which makes the natural
division betwixt Europe and Asia, to the north of the Caspian. If in
this ridge, as a centre of elevation, and of mineral operations, we
shall find the greatest manifestation of the violent exertion of
subterraneous fire, or of consolidating and elevating operations; and if
we shall perceive a regular appearance of diminution in the violence or
magnitude of those operations, as the places gradually recede from this
centre of active force; we may find some explanation of those
appearances, without having recourse to conjectures which carry no
scientific meaning, and which are more calculated to confound our
acquired knowledge, than to form any valuable distinction of things. Let
us consult M. Pallas how far this is the case, or not.

After having told us that all those various alpine schisti, jaspers,
porphyries, serpentines, etc. in those mountains, are found mutually
convertible with granite, or graduating into each other, our author thus
continues, (p. 50).

"On entrevoit de certaines loix à l'égard de l'arrangement respectif de
cet ordre secondaire d'anciennes roches, par tous les systèmes de
montagnes qui appartiennent à l'Empire Russe. La chaîne Ouralique, par
exemple, a du côté de l'Orient sur tout sa longueur, une très-grande
abondance de schistes cornés, serpentins et talceux, riches en filons de
cuivre, qui forment le principal accompagnement du granite, et en
jaspres de diverses couleurs plus extérieurs et souvent comme entrelacés
avec les premiers, mais formant des suites de montagnes entières, et
occupant de très-grands espaces. De ce même côté, il y paraît beaucoup
de quartz en grandes roches toutes pures, tant dans la principale chaîne
que dans le noyau des montagnes de jaspre, et jusques dans la plaine.
Les marbres spateux et veinés, percent en beaucoup d'endroits. La
plupart de ces espèces ne paraissent point du tout à la lisière
occidentale de la chaîne, qui n'est presque que de roche mélangée de
schistes argileux, alumineux, phlogistique, etc. Les filons des mines
d'or mêlées, les riches mines de cuivre en veines et chambrées, les
mines de fer et d'aimant par amas et montagnes entières, sont l'apanage
de la bande schisteuse orientale; tandis que l'occidentale n'a pour elle
que des mines de fer de dépôts, et se montre généralement très-pauvre en
métaux. Le granit de la chaîne qui borde la Sibérie, est recouvert du
côté que nous connaissons de roches cornées de la nature des pierres à
fusil, quelquefois tendant à la nature d'un grais fin et de schistes
très-métallières de différente composition. Le jaspre n'y est qu'en
filons, ou plans obliques, ce qui est très-rare pour la chaîne
Ouralique, et s'observe dans la plus grande partie de la Sibérie, à
l'exception de cette partie de sa chaîne qui passe près de la mer
d'Okhotsk, ou le jaspre forme derechef des suites de montagnes, ainsi
que nous venons de le dire des monts Ourals; mais comme cette roche
tient ici le côté méridionale de la chaîne Sibérienne, et que nous ne
lui connaissons point ce côté sur le reste de sa longueur, il se
pourrait que le jaspre y fût aussi abondant. Il faudrait, au reste, bien
plus de fouilles et d observations pour établir quelque chose de certain
sur l'ordre respectif qu'observent ces roches."

I would now ask, if in all this account of the gradation of rock from
the Oural mountains to the sandy coast of the Baltic, there is to be
observed any clear and distinctive mark of primitive, secondary, and
tertiary, mountains, farther than as one stratum may be considered as
either prior or posterior to another stratum, according to the order of
superposition in which they are found. We have every where evident marks
of the formation of strata by materials deposited originally in water;
for the most part, there is sufficient proof that this water in which
those materials had been deposited was the sea; we are likewise assured
that the operations of this living world producing animals, must have,
for a course of time, altogether inconceivably been exerted, in
preparing materials for this mass; and, lastly, from the changed
constitution of those masses, we may infer certain mineral operations
that melt the substance and alter the position of those horizontal
bodies. Such is the information which we may collect from this mineral
description of the Russian Dominions.

If we compare some of the Oural mountains with the general strata of the
Russian plains, then, as to the contained minerals, we may find a
certain diversity in those two places; at the same time, no greater
perhaps than may be found betwixt two different bodies in those same
plains, for example, chalk and flint. But when we consider those bodies
of the earth, or solid strata of the globe, in relation to their proper
structure and formation, we surely can find in this description nothing
on which may be founded any solid opinion with regard to a different
original, however important conclusions may perhaps be formed with
regard to the operations of the globe, from the peculiar appearances
found in alpine.

From this detail of what is found in the Oural mountains, and in the
gradation of country from those mountains to the plains of Russia, we
have several facts that are worthy of observation. First extensive
mountains of jasper. I have a specimen of this stone; it is striped red
and green like some of our marly strata. It has evidently been formed of
such argillaceous and siliceous materials, not only indurated, so as to
lose its character, as an argillaceous stone, but to have been brought
into that degree of fusion which produces perfect solidity. Of the same
kind are those hornstein rocks of the nature of flint, sometimes tending
to the nature of a fine sandstone. Here is the same induration of
sandstone by means of fusion, that in the argillaceous strata has
produced jasper. But oblique veins of jasper are represented as
traversing these last strata; now this is a fact which is not
conceivable in any other way, than by the injection or transfusion of
the fluid jasper among those masses of indurated strata.

All this belongs to the east side of the mountains. On the west, again,
we find the same species of strata; only these are not changed to such a
degree as to lose their original character or construction, and thus to
be termed differently in mineralogy.

Our author then proceeds. (p. 53.)

"Nous pourrons parler plus décisivement sur les *montagnes secondaires
et tertiaires* de l'Empire, et c'est de celles-là, de la nature, de
l'arrangement et du contenu de leurs couches, des grandes inégalités et
de la forme du continent d'Europe et d'Asie, que l'on peut tirer avec
plus de confiance quelques lumières sur les changemens arrivés aux
terres habitables. Ces deux ordres de montagnes présentent la chronique
de notre globe la plus ancienne, la moins sujette aux falsifications, et
en même-tems plus lisible que le caractère des chaînes primitives; ce
font les archives de la nature, antérieures aux lettres et aux
traditions les plus reculées, qu'il étoit réservé à notre siècle
observateur de feuiller, de commenter, et de mettre au jour, mais que
plusieurs siècles après le nôtre n'épuiseront pas.

"Dans toute l'étendue de vastes dominations Russes, aussi bien que dans
l'Europe entière, les observateurs attentifs ont remarqué que
généralement la band schisteuse des grandes chaînes se trouve
immédiatement recouverte ou cottée par la *bande calcaire*. Celle-ci
forme deux ordres de montagnes, très-différentes par la hauteur, la
situation de leurs couches, et la composition de la pierre calcaire qui
les compose; différence qui est très-évidente dans cette bande calcaire
qui forme la lisière occidentale de toute la chaîne Ouralique, et dont
le plan s'étend par tout le plat pays de la Russie. L'on observerait la
même chose à l'orient de la chaîne, et dans toute l'étendue de la
Sibérie, si les couches calcaires horizontales n'y étaient recouvertes
par les dépôts postérieures, de façon qu'il ne paraît à la surface que
les parties les plus faillantes de la bande, et si ce pays n'étoit trop
nouvellement cultivé et trop peu exploité par des fouilles et autres
opérations, que des hommes industrieux ont pratiqué dans les pays
anciennement habités. Ce que je vais exposer sur les deux ordres de
montagnes calcaires, se rapportera donc principalement à celles qui sont
à l'occident de la chaîne Ouralique.

"Ce côté de la dite chaîne consiste sur cinquante à cent verstes de
largeur, de roche calcaire solide, d'un grain uni, qui tantôt ne
contient aucune trace de productions marines, tantôt n'en conserve que
des empreintes aussi légères qu'éparses. Cette roche s'élève en
montagnes d'une hauteur très-considérable, irrégulières, rapides, et
coupées de vallons escarpés. Ses couches, généralement épaisses, ne sont
point de niveau, mais très-inclinées à l'horizon, paralleles, pour la
plupart, à la direction de la chaîne, qui est aussi ordinairement celle
de la bande schisteuse;—au lieu que du côté de l'orient les couches
calcaires sont au sens de la chaîne en direction plus ou moins
approchante de l'angle droite. L'on trouve dans ces hautes montagnes
calcaires de fréquentes grottes et cavernes très-remarquables, tant par
leur grandeur que par les belles congélations et crystallizations
stalactiques dont elles s'ornent. Quelques-unes de ces grottes ne
peuvent être attribuées qu'à quelque bouleversement des couches;
d'autres semblent devoir leur origine à l'écoulement des sources
souterraines qui ont amolli, rongé et charrié une partie de la roche qui
en étoit susceptible.

"En s'éloignant de la chaîne, on voit les couches calcaires s'aplanir
assez rapidement, prendre une position horizontale, et devenir
abondantes en toute forte de coquillages, de madrépores, et d'autres
dépouilles marines. Telles on les voit par-tout dans les vallées les
plus basses qui se trouvent aux pieds des montagnes (comme aux environs
de la rivière d'Oufal; telles aussi, elles occupent tout l'étendue de la
grande Russie, tant en collines qu'en plat pays; solides tantôt et comme
semées de productions marines; tantôt toutes composées de coquilles et
madrépores brisées, et de ce gravier calcaire qui se trouve toujours sur
les parages ou la mer abonde en pareilles productions; tantôt, enfin,
dissoutes en craie et en marines, et souvent entremêlées de couches de
gravier et de cailloux roulés."

How valuable for science to have naturalists who can distinguish
properly what they see, and describe intelligibly that which they
distinguish. In this description of the strata, from the chain of
mountains here considered as primitive, to the plains of Russia, which
are supposed to be of a tertiary formation, our naturalist presents us
with another species of strata, which he has distinguished, on the one
hand, in relation to the mountains at present in question, and on the
other, with regard to the strata in the plains, concerning which there
is at present no question at all. Now, let us see how these three things
are so connected in their nature, as to form properly the contiguous
links of the same chain.

The primary and tertiary masses are bodies perfectly disconnected; and,
without a medium by which they might be approached, they would be
considered as things differing in all respects, consequently as having
their origins of as opposite a nature as are their appearances. But the
nature and formation of those bodies are not left in this obscurity;
for, the secondary masses, which are interposed, participate so
precisely of what is truly opposite and characteristic in the primary
and tertiary masses, that it requires nothing more than to see this
distinction of things in its true light, to be persuaded, that in those
three different things we may perceive a certain gradation, which here
takes place among the works of nature, and forms three steps
distinguishable by a naturalist, although in reality nothing but the
variable measure of similar operations.

We are now to assimilate the primary and tertiary masses, which are so
extremely different, by means of the secondary masses, which is the
mean. The primary and tertiary differ in the following respects: The one
of these contains the relicts of organised bodies which are not observed
in the other. But in the species containing these distinguishable
bodies, the natural structure and position of the mass is little
affected, or not so much as to be called into doubt. This, however, is
not the case with the other; the species in which organised bodies do
not appear, is in general so indurated or consolidated in its structure,
and changed in its position, that this common origin of those masses is
by good naturalists, who have also carefully examined them, actually
denied. Now, the secondary masses may be considered, not only as
intermediate with respect to its actual place, as M. Pallas has
represented it, but as uniting together the primary and tertiary, or as
participating of the distinguishing characters of the other two. It is
homologated with the primitive mountains, in the solidity of its
substance and in the position of its strata; with the tertiary species,
again, in its containing marks of organised bodies. How far this view of
things is consistent with the theory of the earth now given, is
submitted to the consideration of the unprejudiced.

Let us see what our learned author has said farther on this subject,
(page 65).

"Je dois parler d'un ordre de montagnes très-certainement postérieur aux
couches marines, puisque celles-ci, généralement lui servent de base. On
n'a point jusqu'ici observé une suite de ces *montagnes tertiaires*,
effet des catastrophes les plus modernes de notre globe, si marquée et
si puissante, que celle qui accompagne la chaine Ouralique ou côté
occidentale fur tout la longueur. Cette suite de montagnes, pour la
plupart composées de grais, de marnes rougeâtres, entremêlées de couches
diversement mixtes, forme une chaîne par-tout séparée par une vallée
plus ou moins large de la bande de roche calcaire, dont nous avons
parlé. Sillonnée et entrecoupée de fréquens vallons, elles s'élève
souvent à plus de cent toises perpendiculaires, se répand vers les
plaines de la Russie en traînées de collines, qui séparent les rivières,
en accompagnant généralement la rive boréale ou occidentale, et dégénère
enfin en déserts sableux qui occupent de grands espaces, et s'étendent
surtout par longues bandes parallèles aux principales traces qui suivent
les cours des rivieres. La principale force de ces montagnes tertiaires
est plus près de la chaîne primitive par-tout le gouvernement
d'Orenbourg et la Permie, ou elle consiste principalement en grais, et
contient un fond inépuisable de mines de cuivre sableuses, argileuses,
et autres qui se voient ordinairement dans les couches horizontales.
Plus loin, vers la plaine, sont des suites de collines toutes marneuses,
qui abondent autant en pierres gypseuses, que les autres en minerais
cuivreux. Je n'entre pas dans le détail de celles-ci, qui indiquent
sur-tout les sources salines; mais je dois dire des premières, qui
abondent le plus et dont les plus hautes élévations des plaines, même
celle de Moscou, sont formées, qu'elles contiennent très-peu de traces
de productions marines, et jamais des amas entiers de ces corps, tels
qu'une mer reposée pendant des siècles de suite a pu les accumuler dans
les bancs calcaires. Rien, au contraire, de plus abondant dans ces
montagnes de grais stratifié sur l'ancien plan calcaire, que des troncs
d'arbres entières et des fragmens de bois pétrifié, souvent minéralisé
par le cuivre ou le fer; des impressions de troncs de palmires, de tiges
de plantes, de roseau, et de quelques fruits étrangers; enfin des
ossemens d'animaux terrestres, si rares dans les couches calcaires. Les
bois pétrifiés se trouvent jusques dans les collines de sable de la
plaine; l'on en tire, entr'autres, des hauteurs sablonneuses aux
environs de Sysran sur la Volga, changés en queux très-fin, qui a
conservé jusqu'à la texture organique du bois, et remarquables sur-tout
par les traces très-évidentes de ces vers rongeurs qui attaquent les
vaisseaux, les pilotis et autres bois trempés dans la mer, et qui sont
proprement originaires de la mer des Indes."

This philosopher has now given us a view of what, according to the
present fashion of mineral philosophy, he has termed *montagnes
primitives, secondaires, et tertiaires*. The first consists in masses
and strata, much indurated and consolidated, and greatly displaced in
their position; but the character of which is chiefly taken from this,
that they contain not any visible mark of animal or vegetable bodies.

The second are formed in a great measure of marine productions, are
often no less consolidated than those of the first class, and frequently
no less changed in their natural shape and situation.

The third again have for character, according to this learned theorist,
the containing of those organised bodies which are proper to the earth,
instead of those which in the second class had belonged to the sea; in
other respects, surely there is no essential difference. It is not
pretended that these tertiary strata had any other origin, than that of
having been deposited in water; it is not so much as suspected, that
this water had been any other than that of the sea; the few marine
bodies which M. Pallas here acknowledges, goes at least to prove this
fact: and with regard to the mineral operations which had been employed
in consolidating those water formed strata, it is impossible not to be
convinced that every effect visible in the other two are here also to be
perceived.

From this view of mineral bodies, taken from the extensive observations
of the Russian dominions, and from the suppositions of geologists in
relation to those appearances, we should be led to conclude that the
globe of this earth had been originally nothing but an ocean, a world
containing neither plant nor animal to live, to grow and propagate its
species. In following a system founded on those appearances, we must
next suppose, that to the sterile unorganised world there had succeeded
an ocean stored with fish of every species. Here it would be proper to
inquire what sustained those aquatic animals; for, in such a system as
this, there is no provision made for continuing the life even of the
individuals, far less of feeding the species while, in an almost
infinite succession of individuals, they should form a continent of land
almost composed of their *exuviae*.

If fish can be fed upon water and stone; if siliceous bodies can, by the
digesting powers of animals, be converted into argillaceous and
calcareous earths; and if inflammable matter can be prepared without the
intervention of vegetable bodies, we might erect a system in which this
should be the natural order of things. But to form a system in direct
opposition to every order of nature that we know, merely because we may
suppose another order of things different from the laws of nature which
we observe, would be as inconsistent with the rules of reasoning in
science, by which the speculations of philosophy are directed, as it
would be contrary to common sense, by which the affairs of mankind are
conducted.

Still, however, to pursue our visionary system, after a continent had
been formed from the relicts of those animals, living, growing, and
propagating, during an indefinite series of ages, plants at last are
formed; and, what is no less wonderful, those animals which had formed
the earth then disappear; but, in compensation, we are to suppose, I
presume, that terrestrial animals began. Let us now reason from those
facts, without either constraining nature, which we know, or forming
visionary systems, with regard to things which are unknown. It would
appear, that at one period of time, or in one place, the matter of the
globe may be deposited, in strata, without containing any organised
bodies; at another time, or in another place, much animal matter may be
deposited in strata, without any vegetable substance there appearing;
but at another period, or at another time, strata may be formed with
much vegetable matter, while there is hardly to be observed any animal
body. What then are we to conclude upon the whole? That nature, forming
strata, is subject to vicissitudes; and that it is not always the same
regular operation with respect to the materials, although always forming
strata upon the same principles. Consequently, upon the same spot in the
sea, different materials may be accumulated at different periods of
time, and, conversely, the same or similar materials may be collected in
different places at the same time. Nothing more follows strictly from
the facts on which we now are reasoning; and this is a conclusion which
will be verified by every appearance, so far as I know.

Of this I am certain, that in a very little space of this country, in
many places, such a course of things is to be perceived. Nothing so
common as to find alternated, over and over again, beds of sand-stone
without animal bodies, beds of coal and schistus abounding with
vegetable bodies, beds of lime-stone formed of shells and corals, and
beds or particular strata of iron-stone containing sometimes vegetable
sometimes animal bodies, or both. Here, indeed, the strata are most
commonly inclined; it is seldom they are horizontal; consequently, as
across the whole country, all the strata come up to the day, and may be
seen in the beds of our rivers, we have an opportunity of observing that
great variety which is in nature, and which we are not able to explain.
This only is certain, from what we see, that there is nothing formed in
one epoch of nature, but what has been repeated in another, however
dissimilar may be the operations which had intervened between those
several epochs.

It must not be alleged, that the heights of the Oural mountains, or the
hardness of their rocks, make an essential distinction between them and
the argillaceous or arenaceous strata of the plains; solidity and
hardness, as well as changes in their height and natural position, has
been superinduced in operations posterior to the collection of those
masses,—operations which may be formed in various degrees, even in the
different parts of the same mass. If this is the case, there can be no
difficulty in conceiving a stratum, which appears to be argillaceous or
marly in the plains, to be found jasper in the Oural mountains. But
there is nothing in the Oural mountains, that may not be found some
where or other in the plains, although the soft and easily decomposing
argillaceous strata be not found upon the Oural mountains, or the Alps,
for this reason, that had those mountains been formed of such materials,
there had not been a mountain there at this day.

But surely the greatest possible error, with regard to the philosophy of
this earth, would be to confound the sediment of a river with the strata
of the globe; bodies deposited upon the surface of the earth, with those
sunk at the bottom of the sea; and things which only form the travelled
or transported soil, with those which constitute the substratum or the
solid earth. How far M. Pallas has committed this oversight, I leave
others to determine. After mentioning those strata in which wood is
found petrified, and metallic minerals formed, he thus proceeds, (page
69).

"Dans ces mêmes dépôts sableux et souvent limoneux, gisent les restes
des grands animaux de l'Inde: ces ossemens d'éléphans, de rhinocéros, de
buffles monstrueux, dont on déterre tous les jours un si grand nombre,
et qui font l'admiration des curieux. En Sibérie, où l'on à découvert le
long de presque toutes les rivières ces restes d'animaux étrangers, et
l'ivoire même bien conservé en si grande abondance, qu'il forme un
article de commerce, en Sibérie, dis je, c'est aussi la couche la plus
moderne de limon sablonneux qui leur sert de sépulture, et nulle part
ces monumens étrangers sont si frequens, qu'aux endroits où la grande
chaine, qui domine surtout la frontière méridionale de la Sibérie, offre
quelque dépression, quelque ouverture considérable.

"Ces grands ossemens, tantôt épars tantôt entassés par squelettes, et
même par hécatombes, considérée dans leurs sites naturels, m'ont
sur-tout convaincu de la réalité d'un déluge arrivé sur notre terre,
d'une catastrophe, dont j'avoue n'avoir pu concevoir la vraisemblance
avant d'avoir parcouru ces places, et vu, par moi-même, tout ce qui peut
y servir de preuve à cet évènement mémorable <span
id="fr_30"></span>[24](#fn_30). Une infinité de ces ossemens couchés
dans des lits mêlés de petites tellines calcinées, d'os de poissons, de
glossopètres, de bois chargés d'ocre, etc. prouve déjà qu'ils ont été
transportés par des inondations. Mais la carcasse d'un rhinocéros,
trouvé avec sa peau entière, des restes de tendons, de ligamens, et de
cartilages, dans les terres glacées des bords du Viloûi, dont j'ai
déposé les parties les mieux conservées au cabinet de l'Académie, forme
encore une preuve convaincante que ce devait être un mouvement
d'inondation des plus violens et des plus rapides, qui entraîna jadis
ces cadavres vers nos climats glacés, avant que la corruption eût le
tems, d'en détruire les parties molles. Il seroit à souhaiter qu'un
observateur parvint aux montagnes qui occupent l'espace entre les
fleuves Indighirka et Koylma où selon le rapport des chasseurs, de
semblables carcasses d'éléphans et d'autres animaux gigantesques encore
revêtues de leurs peaux, ont été remarquées à plusieurs reprises."

The question here turns upon this, Are the sea shells and glossopetrae,
which are thus found deposited along with those skeletons, in their
natural state, or are they petrified and mineralised. If the productions
of the sea shall here be found collected along with bodies belonging to
the surface of the earth, and which had never been within the limits of
the sea, this would surely announce to us some strange catastrophe, of
which it would be difficult, perhaps, to form a notion; if, on the
contrary, those marine productions belong to the solid strata of the
earth, in the resolution or decay of which they had been set at liberty,
and were transported in the floods, our author would have no reason from
those appearances to conclude, there had existed any other deluge than
those produced by the waters of the land <span
id="fr_31"></span>[25](#fn_31).

Having thus endeavoured to remove this prevailing prejudice, of there
being primitive parts in this earth, parts of which the composition and
constitution are not to be explained upon the principles of natural
philosophy, it will be proper to inquire, how far there may be in the
theory, which has now been given, principles by which may be explained
those appearances that have led natural philosophers to form
conclusions, of there being in this earth parts whose origin may not be
traced; and of there being parts whose origin may not be explained upon
the same principles which apply so well to all the rest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[v1:21](toe15.htm#fr_27) There are no collection
of those alpine masses in which may not be found in some of them sand,
mica, and gravel; but these materials prove the existence of an earth,
on which those fragments of greater masses had been formed, and more or
less worn by attrition.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[v1:22](toe15.htm#fr_28) This has a reference to
very curious observations which we made upon the east coast where these
mountains terminate, and which I am to describe in the course of this
work.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[v1:23](toe15.htm#fr_29) This is a very natural
way of reasoning when a philosopher finds a fact, related by some
naturalists, that does not correspond with his theory or systematic view
of things. Here our author follows the general opinion in concluding
that no organised body should be found in their primitive strata; when,
therefore, such an object is said to have been observed, it is supposed
that there may have been some mistake with regard to the case, and that
all the circumstances may not have been considered. This caution with
regard to the inaccurate representation of facts, in natural history, is
certainly extremely necessary; the relicts of an elephant found in a
mineral vein, is certainly a fact of that kind, which should not be
given as an example in geology without the most accurate scientifical
examination of the subject.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[v1:24](toe15.htm#fr_30) Voyez le Mémoire,
imprimé dans le XVII. volume des nouveaux Commentaires de l'Académie
Imperiale de Petersbourgh.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[v1:25](toe15.htm#fr_31) Since writing this, I
find my doubts in a great measure resolved, in reading M. Pallas's
Journal, translated from the German by M. Gauthier de la Peyronie. What
I had suspected is, I think, confirmed in the distinct account which M.
Pallas has given of those occasions in which the bones of land animals
and marine objects are found buried together. The marine objects are
mineralised; consequently, they have proceeded from the decomposition of
the solid strata; and, having been travelled in the running water of the
surface of the earth, they must have been deposited in those beds of
rivers, which now are dry, alongst with the bones, or the entire bodies
of terrestrial animals, the remains of which are now found there. This
argument, from the state of those marine bodies will not be allowed,
perhaps by the generality of mineralists, who attribute to the
operations of water every species of petrifaction or mineralisation;
but, until some species of proof be given with regard to the truth of
that theory, which vulgar error first suggested, I must reason from a
theory, in proof of which I have given clear examples, and, I think,
irrefragable arguments, which shall be more and more illustrated. Thus
may be removed the necessity of a general deluge, or any great
catastrophe, in order to bring together things so foreign to each other;
but at the same time we would ascertain this fact, That formerly the
Elephant and Rhinoceros had lived in Siberia. (See Voyage de Pallas,
Tom. II. p. 377 and 403.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Concerning that which may be termed the Primary Part
of the Present Earth](toe16)
