[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Confucianism](../../cfu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aow04) 
[Next](aow06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1934255122/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of War*, by Lionel Giles, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### <span class="smallcaps">The Commentators</span>.

Sun Tzŭ can boast an exceptionally long and distinguished roll of
commentators, which would do honour to any classic. \# Ou-yang Hsiu
remarks on this fact, though he wrote before the tale was complete, and
rather ingeniously explains it by saying that the artifices of war,
being inexhaustible,

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

must therefore be susceptible of treatment in a great variety of
ways. <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92)

1\. \# **Ts‘ao Ts‘ao** or \# **Ts‘ao Kung**, afterwards known as \#
**Wei Wu Ti** \[A.D. 155–220\]. There is hardly any room for doubt that
the earliest commentary on Sun Tzŭ actually came from the pen of this
extraordinary man, whose biography in the *San Kuo Chih* <span
id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93) reads like a romance. One of the greatest
military geniuses that the world has seen, and Napoleonic in the scale
of his operations, he was especially famed for the marvellous rapidity
of his marches, which has found expression in the line \# "Talk of
Ts‘ao Ts‘ao, and Ts‘ao Ts‘ao will appear." Ou-yang Hsiu says of him that
he was a great captain who "measured his strength against Tung Cho, Lü
Pu and the two Yüan, father and son, and vanquished them all; whereupon
he divided the Empire of Han with Wu and Shu, and made himself king. It
is recorded that whenever a council of war was held by Wei on the eve of
a far-reaching campaign, he had all his calculations ready; those
generals who made use of them did not lose one battle in ten; those who
ran counter to them in any particular saw their armies incontinently
beaten and put to flight." <span id="fr_94"></span>[3](#fn_94) Ts‘ao
Kung's notes on Sun Tzŭ, models of austere brevity, are so thoroughly
characteristic of the stern commander known to history that it is hard
indeed to conceive of them as the work of a mere *littérateur*.
Sometimes, indeed, owing to extreme compression,

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

they are scarcely intelligible and stand no less in need of a commentary
than the text itself. <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95) As we have
seen, Ts‘ao Kung is the reputed author of the \#, a book on war in
100,000 odd words, now lost, but mentioned in the \#. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96)

2\. \# **Mêng Shih**. The commentary which has come down to us under
this name is comparatively meagre, and nothing about the author is
known. Even his personal name has not been recorded. Chi T‘ien-pao's
edition places him after Chia Lin, and \# Ch‘ao Kung-wu also assigns him
to the T‘ang dynasty, <span id="fr_97"></span>[3](#fn_97) but this is
obviously a mistake, as his work is mentioned in the \#. In Sun
Hsing-yen's preface, he appears as Mêng Shih of the Liang dynasty
\[502–557\]. Others would identify him with \# Mêng K‘ang of the
3<sup>rd</sup> century. In the \#, <span id="fr_98"></span>[4](#fn_98)
he is named last of the \# "Five Commentators," the others being Wei Wu
Ti, Tu Mu, Ch‘ên Hao and Chia Lin.

3\. \# **Li Ch‘üan** of the 8<sup>th</sup> century was a well-known
writer on military tactics. His \# has been in constant use down to the
present day. The \# mentions \# (lives of famous generals from the Chou
to the T‘ang dynasty) as written by him. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[5](#fn_99) He is also generally supposed to be the
real author of the popular Taoist tract, the \#. According to Ch‘ao
Kung-wu and the *T‘ien-i-ko* catalogue, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[6](#fn_100) he followed the \# text of Sun Tzŭ,
which differs considerably from those

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

now extant. His notes are mostly short and to the point, and he
frequently illustrates his remarks by anecdotes from Chinese history.

4\. \# **Tu Yu** (died 812) did not publish a separate commentary on Sun
Tzŭ, his notes being taken from the *T‘ung Tien*, the encyclopaedic
treatise on the Constitution which was his life-work. They are largely
repetitions of Ts‘ao Kung and Mêng Shih, besides which it is believed
that he drew on the ancient commentaries of \# Wang Ling and others.
Owing to the peculiar arrangement of the *T‘ung Tien*, he has to explain
each passage on its merits, apart from the context, and sometimes his
own explanation does not agree with that of Ts‘ao Kung, whom he always
quotes first. Though not strictly to be reckoned as one of the "Ten
Commentators," he was added to their number by Chi T‘ien-pao, being
wrongly placed after his grandson Tu Mu.

5\. \# **Tu Mu** (803–85 2) is perhaps best known as a poet—a bright
star even in the glorious galaxy of the Tang period. We learn from Ch‘ao
Kung-wu that although he had no practical experience of war, he was
extremely fond of discussing the subject, and was moreover well read in
the military history of the *Ch‘un Ch‘iu* and *Chan Kuo* eras. <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) His notes, therefore, are well worth
attention. They are very copious, and replete with historical parallels.
The gist of Sun Tzŭ's work is thus summarised by him: "Practise
benevolence and justice, but on the other hand make full use of artifice
and measures of expediency." <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102) He
further declared that all the military

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

triumphs and disasters of the thousand years which had elapsed since Sun
Wu's death would, upon examination, be found to uphold and corroborate,
in every particular, the maxims contained in his book. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103) Tu Mu's somewhat spiteful charge against
Ts‘ao Kung has already been considered elsewhere.

6\. \# **Ch‘ên Hao** appears to have been a contemporary of Tu Mu. Ch‘ao
Kung-wu says that he was impelled to write a new commentary on Sun Tzŭ
because Ts‘ao Kung's on the one hand was too obscure and subtle, and
that of Tu Mu on the other too long-winded and diffuse. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[2](#fn_104) Ou-yang Hsiu, writing in the middle of
the 11<sup>th</sup> century, calls Ts‘ao Kung, Tu Mu and Ch‘ên Hao the
three chief commentators on Sun Tzŭ (\#), and observes that Ch‘ên Hao is
continually attacking Tu Mu's shortcomings. His commentary, though not
lacking in merit, must rank below those of his predecessors.

7\. \# **Chia Lin** is known to have lived under the T‘ang dynasty, for
his commentary on Sun Tzŭ is mentioned in the \# and was afterwards
republished by \# Chi Hsieh of the same dynasty together with those of
Mêng Shih and Tu Yu. <span id="fr_105"></span>[3](#fn_105) It is of
somewhat scanty texture, and in point of quality, too, perhaps the least
valuable of the eleven.

8\. \# **Mei Yao-ch‘ên** (1002–1060), commonly known by his "style" as
Mei \# Shêng-yü, was, like Tu Mu, a poet of distinction. His commentary
was published with a laudatory preface by the great Ou-yang Hsiu, from
which we may cull the following:—

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Later scholars have misread Sun Tzŭ, distorting his words and trying to
make them square with their own one-sided views. Thus, though

</div>

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

commentators have not been lacking, only a few have proved equal to the
task. My friend Shêng-yü has not fallen into this mistake. In attempting
to provide a critical commentary for Sun Tzŭ's work, he does not lose
sight of the fact that these sayings were intended for states engaged in
internecine warfare; that the author is not concerned with the military
conditions prevailing under the sovereigns of the three ancient
dynasties, <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) nor with the nine
punitive measures prescribed to the Minister of War. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107) Again, Sun Wu loved brevity of diction,
but his meaning is always deep. Whether the subject be marching an army,
or handling soldiers, or estimating the enemy, or controlling the forces
of victory, it is always systematically treated; the sayings are bound
together in strict logical sequence, though this has been obscured by
commentators who have probably failed to grasp their meaning. In his own
commentary, Mei Shêng-yü has brushed aside all the obstinate prejudices
of these critics, and has tried to bring out the true meaning of Sun Tzŭ
himself. In this way, the clouds of confusion have been dispersed and
the sayings made clear. I am convinced that the present work deserves to
be handed down side by side with the three great commentaries; and for a
great deal that they find in the sayings, coining generations will have
constant reason to thank my friend Shêng-yü. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108)

</div>

Making some allowance for the exuberance of friendship, I am inclined to
endorse this favourable judgment, and would certainly place him above
Ch'ên Hao in order of merit.

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

9\. \# **Wang Hsi**, also of the Sung dynasty, is decidedly original in
some of his interpretations, but much less judicious than Mei Yao-ch‘ên,
and on the whole not a very trustworthy guide. He is fond of comparing
his own commentary with that of Ts‘ao Kung, but the comparison is not
often flattering to him. We learn from Ch‘ao Kung-wu that Wang Hsi
revised the ancient text of Sun Tzŭ, filling up lacunae and correcting
mistakes. <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109)

10\. \# **Ho Yen-hsi** of the Sung dynasty. The personal name of this
commentator is given as above by \# Chêng Ch‘iao in the *T‘ung Chih*,
written about the middle of the twelfth century, but he appears simply
as \# Ho Shih in the *Yü Hai*, and Ma Tuan-lin quotes Ch‘ao Kung-wu as
saying that his personal name is unknown. There seems to be no reason to
doubt Chêng Ch‘iao's statement, otherwise I should have been inclined to
hazard a guess and identify him with one \# Ho Ch‘ü-fei, the author of a
short treatise on war entitled \#, who lived in the latter part of the
11<sup>th</sup> century. <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110) Ho Shih's
commentary, in the words of the *T‘ien-i-ko* catalogue, \# "contains
helpful additions" here and there, but is chiefly remarkable for the
copious extracts taken, in adapted form, from the dynastic histories and
other sources.

11\. \# **Chang Yü**. The list closes with a commentator of no great
originality perhaps, but gifted with admirable powers of lucid
exposition. His commentary is based on that of Ts‘ao Kung, whose terse
sentences he contrives to expand and develop in masterly fashion.
Without Chang Yü, it is safe to say that much of Ts‘ao Kung's commentary
would have remained cloaked in its pristine obscurity and therefore
valueless. His work is not mentioned in the Sung history, the *T‘ung
K‘ao*, or

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

the *Yü Hai*, but it finds a niche in the *T‘ung Chih*, which also names
him as the author of the \# "Lives of Famous Generals." <span
id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111)

It is rather remarkable that the last-named four should all have
flourished within so short a space of time. Ch‘ao Kung-wu accounts for
it by saying: "During the early years of the Sung dynasty the Empire
enjoyed a long spell of peace, and men ceased to practise the art of
war. But when \[Chao\] Yüan-hao's rebellion came \[1038–42\] and the
frontier generals were defeated time after time, the Court made
strenuous enquiry for men skilled in war, and military topics became the
vogue amongst all the high officials. Hence it is that the commentators
of Sun Tzŭ in our dynasty belong mainly to that period." <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112)

Besides these eleven commentators, there are several others whose work
has not come down to us. The *Sui Shu* mentions four, namely \# Wang
Ling (often quoted by Tu Yu as \#); \# Chang Tzŭ-shang; \# Chia Hsü of
\# Wei; <span id="fr_113"></span>[3](#fn_113) and \# Shên Yu of \# Wu.
The *T‘ang Shu* adds \# Sun Hao, and the *T‘ung Chih* \# Hsiao Chi,
while the *T‘u Shu* mentions a Ming commentator, \# Huang Jun-yü. It is
possible that some of these may have been merely collectors and editors
of other commentaries, like Chi T‘ien-pao and Chi Hsieh, mentioned
above. Certainly in the case of the latter, the entry \#, in the *T‘ung
K‘ao*, without the following note, would give one to understand that he
had written an independent commentary of his own.

There are two works, described in the

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Ssu K‘u Ch‘üan
Shu* <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114) and no doubt extremely rare,
which I should much like to have seen. One is entitled \#, in 5 *chüan*.
It gives selections from four new commentators, probably of the Ming
dynasty, as well as from the eleven known to us. The names of the four
are \# Hsieh Yüan; \# Chang Ao; \# Li Ts‘ai; and \# Huang Chih-chêng.
The other work is \# in 4 *chüan*, compiled by \# Chêng Tuan of the
present dynasty. It is a compendium of information on ancient warfare,
with special reference to Sun Tzŭ's 13 chapters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[xxxv:1](aow05.htm#fr_92) Preface to Mei
Yao-ch‘ên's edition: \#

<span id="fn_93"></span>[xxxv:2](aow05.htm#fr_93) See \#, ch. 1.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[xxxv:3](aow05.htm#fr_94) *Loc. cit.*: \#.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[xxxvi:1](aow05.htm#fr_95) Cf. \# Catalogue of
the library of the \# Fan family at Ningpo, \#, fol. 12 *v*°: \# "His
commentary is frequently obscure but furnishes a clue, but does not
fully develop the meaning."

<span id="fn_96"></span>[xxxvi:2](aow05.htm#fr_96) See \#, ch. 141 *ad
init*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[xxxvi:3](aow05.htm#fr_97) *Wên Hsien T‘ung
K‘ao*, ch. 221, f. 9 *v*°.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[xxxvi:4](aow05.htm#fr_98) Ch. 207, f. 5 *r*°.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[xxxvi:5](aow05.htm#fr_99) It is interesting to
note that M. Pelliot has recently discovered chapters 1, 4 and 5 of this
lost work in the "Grottos of the Thousand Buddhas." See B. E. F. E. O,
t. VIII, nos. 3–4, p. 525.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[xxxvi:6](aow05.htm#fr_100) *Loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[xxxvii:1](aow05.htm#fr_101) *Wên Hsien T‘ung
K‘ao*, ch. 221, f. 9: \#.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[xxxvii:2](aow05.htm#fr_102) Preface to his
commentary (*T‘u Shu*, \# ch. 442): \#.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[xxxviii:1](aow05.htm#fr_103) *Ibid.*: \#.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[xxxviii:2](aow05.htm#fr_104) *T‘ung K‘ao*,
*loc. cit.*: \#.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[xxxviii:3](aow05.htm#fr_105) *Ibid.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[xxxix:1](aow05.htm#fr_106) The Hsia, the Shang
and the Chou. Although the last-named was nominally existent in Sun
Tzŭ's day, it retained hardly a vestige of power, and the old military
organisation had practically gone by the hoard. I can suggest no other
explanation of the passage.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[xxxix:2](aow05.htm#fr_107) See *Chou Li*,
XXIX. 6–10.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[xxxix:3](aow05.htm#fr_108) See *T‘u Shu*, \#,
ch. 90, f. 2 *v*°: \#.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[xl:1](aow05.htm#fr_109) *T‘ung K‘ao*, ch. 221,
f. 11 *r*°: \#.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[xl:2](aow05.htm#fr_110) See \#, ch. 99, f. 16
*v*°.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[xli:1](aow05.htm#fr_111) This appears to be
still extant. See Wylie's "Notes," p. 91 (new edition).

<span id="fn_112"></span>[xli:2](aow05.htm#fr_112) *T‘ung K‘ao*, *loc.
cit.*: \#.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[xli:3](aow05.htm#fr_113) A notable person in
his day. His biography is given in the *San Kuo Chih*, ch. 10.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[xlii:1](aow05.htm#fr_114) Ch. 100, ff. 2, 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appreciations Of Sun Tzŭ](aow06)
