[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Confucianism](../../cfu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aow06) 
[Next](aow08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1934255122/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of War*, by Lionel Giles, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### <span class="smallcaps">Apologies for War</span>.

Accustomed as we are to think of China as the greatest peace-loving
nation on earth, we are in some danger of

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

forgetting that her experience of war in all its phases has also been
such as no modern State can parallel. Her long military annals stretch
back to a point at which they are lost in the mists of time. She had
built the Great Wall and was maintaining a huge standing army along her
frontier centuries before the first Roman legionary was seen on the
Danube. What with the perpetual collisions of the ancient feudal States,
the grim conflicts with Huns, Turks and other invaders after the
centralisation of government, the terrific upheavals which accompanied
the overthrow of so many dynasties, besides the countless rebellions and
minor disturbances that have flamed up and flickered out again one by
one, it is hardly too much to say that the clash of arms has never
ceased to resound in one portion or another of the Empire.

No less remarkable is the succession of illustrious captains to whom
China can point with pride. As in all countries, the greatest are found
emerging at the most fateful crises of her history. Thus, Po Ch‘i stands
out conspicuous in the period when Ch‘in was entering upon her final
struggle with the remaining independent states. The stormy years which
followed the break-up of the Ch‘in dynasty are illumined by the
transcendent genius of Han Hsin. When the House of Han in turn is
tottering to its fall, the great and baleful figure of Ts‘ao Ts‘ao
dominates the scene. And in the establishment of the T‘ang dynasty, one
of the mightiest tasks achieved by man, the superhuman energy of Li
Shih-min (afterwards the Emperor T‘ai Tsung) was seconded by the
brilliant strategy of Li Ching. None of these generals need fear
comparison with the greatest names in the military history of Europe.

In spite of all this, the great body of Chinese sentiment, from Lao Tzŭ
downwards, and especially as reflected in the standard literature of
Confucianism, has been consistently pacific, and intensely opposed to
militarism in any form. It is such an uncommon thing to find any of the
literati

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

defending warfare on principle, that I have thought it worth while to
collect and translate a few passages in which the unorthodox view is
upheld. The following, by Ssŭ-ma Ch‘ien, shows that for all his ardent
admiration of Confucius, he was yet no advocate of peace at any price:—

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Military weapons are the means used by the Sage to punish violence and
cruelty, to give peace to troublous times, to remove difficulties and
dangers, and to succour those who are in peril. Every animal with blood
in its veins and horns on its head will fight when it is attacked. How
much more so will man, who carries in his breast the faculties of love
and hatred, joy and anger! When he is pleased, a feeling of affection
springs up within him; when angry, his poisoned sting is brought into
play. That is the natural law which governs his being . . . . What then
shall be said of those scholars of our time, blind to all great issues,
and without any appreciation of relative values, who can only bark out
their stale formulas about "virtue" and "civilisation," condemning the
use of military weapons? They will surely bring our country to impotence
and dishonour and the loss of her rightful heritage; or, at the very
least, they will bring about invasion and rebellion, sacrifice of
territory and general enfeeblement. Yet they obstinately refuse to
modify the position they have taken up. The truth is that, just as in
the family the teacher must not spare the rod, and punishments cannot be
dispensed with in the State, so military chastisement can never be
allowed to fall into abeyance in the Empire. All one can say is that
this power will be exercised wisely by some, foolishly by others, and
that among those who bear arms some will be loyal and others
rebellious. <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127)

</div>

The next piece is taken from Tu Mu's preface to his commentary on Sun
Tzŭ:—

<div style="font-size: 90%">

War may be defined as punishment, which is one of the functions of
government. It was the profession of Chung Yu and Jan Ch‘iu, both

</div>

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

disciples of Confucius. Nowadays, the holding of trials and hearing of
litigation, the imprisonment of offenders and their execution by
flogging in the market-place, are all done by officials. But the
wielding of huge armies, the throwing down of fortified cities, the
haling of women and children into captivity, and the beheading of
traitors—this is also work which is done by officials. The objects of
the rack <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128) and of military weapons
are essentially the same. There is no intrinsic difference between the
punishment of flogging and cutting off heads in war. For the lesser
infractions of law, which are easily dealt with, only a small amount of
force need be employed: hence the institution of torture and flogging.
For more serious outbreaks of lawlessness, which are hard to suppress, a
greater amount of force is necessary: hence the use of military weapons
and wholesale decapitation. In both cases, however, the end in view is
to get rid of wicked people, and to give comfort and relief to the
good <span id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_129) …

Chi-sun asked Jan Yu, saying: "Have you, Sir, acquired your military
aptitude by study, or is it innate?" Jan Yu replied: "It has been
acquired by study." <span id="fr_130"></span>[3](#fn_130) "How can that
be so," said Chi-sun, "seeing that you are a disciple of Confucius?" "It
is a fact," replied Jan Yu; "I was taught by Confucius. It is fitting
that the great Sage should exercise both civil and military functions,
though to be sure my instruction in the art of fighting has not yet gone
very far."

Now, who the author was of this rigid distinction between the "civil"
and the "military," and the limitation of each to a separate sphere of
action, or in what year of which dynasty it was first introduced, is
more than I can say. But, at any rate, it has come about that the
members of the governing class are quite afraid of enlarging on military
topics, or do so only in a shamefaced manner. If any are bold enough to
discuss the subject, they are at once set down as eccentric individuals
of coarse and brutal propensities. This is an extraordinary instance of
the way in

</div>

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

which, through sheer lack of reasoning, men unhappily lose sight of
fundamental principles. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131)

When the Duke of Chou was minister under Ch‘êng Wang, he regulated
ceremonies and made music, and venerated the arts of scholarship and
learning; yet when the barbarians of the River Huai revolted, <span
id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132) he sallied forth and chastised them.
When Confucius held office under the Duke of Lu, and a meeting was
convened at Chia-ku, <span id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_133) he said: "If
pacific negotiations are in progress, warlike preparations should have
been made beforehand." He rebuked and shamed the Marquis of Ch‘i, who
cowered under him and dared not proceed to violence. How can it be said
that these two great Sages had no knowledge of military matters? <span
id="fr_134"></span>[4](#fn_134)

</div>

We have seen that the great Chu Hsi held Sun Tzŭ in high esteem. He also
appeals to the authority of the Classics:—

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Our Master Confucius, answering Duke Ling of Wei, said: "I have never
studied matters connected with armies and battalions." <span
id="fr_135"></span>[5](#fn_135) Replying to K‘ung Wên-tzŭ, he said: "I
have not been instructed about buff-coats and weapons." <span
id="fr_136"></span>[6](#fn_136) "But if we turn to the meeting at
Chia-ku, <span id="fr_137"></span>[7](#fn_137) we find that he used
armed force against the men of Lai, <span
id="fr_138"></span>[8](#fn_138) so that the marquis of Ch‘i was
overawed. Again, when the inhabitants of Pi revolted, he ordered his
officers to attack them, whereupon they were defeated and fled in
confusion. <span id="fr_139"></span>[9](#fn_139) He once tittered the
words: "If I fight, I

</div>

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

conquer." <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140) And Jan Yu also said:
"The Sage exercises both civil and military functions." <span
id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141) Can it be a fact that Confucius never
studied or received instruction in the art of war? We can only say that
he did not specially choose matters connected with armies and fighting
to be the subject of his teaching. <span id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_142)

</div>

Sun Hsing-yen, the editor of Sun Tzŭ, writes in similar strain:—

<div style="font-size: 90%">

Confucius said: "I am unversed in military matters." <span
id="fr_143"></span>[4](#fn_143) He also said: "If I fight, I
conquer." <span id="fr_144"></span>[4](#fn_143) Confucius ordered
ceremonies and regulated music. Now war constitutes one of the five
classes of State ceremonial, <span id="fr_145"></span>[5](#fn_144) and
must not be treated as an independent branch of study. Hence, the words
"I am unversed in" must be taken to mean that there are things which
even an inspired Teacher does not know. Those who have to lead an army
and devise stratagems, must learn the art of war. But if one can command
the services of a good general like Sun Tzŭ, who was employed by Wu
Tzŭ-hsü, there is no need to learn it oneself. Hence the remark added by
Confucius: "If I fight, I conquer." <span
id="fr_146"></span>[6](#fn_145)

The men of the present day, however, wilfully interpret these words of
Confucius in their narrowest sense, as though he meant that books on the
art of war were not worth reading. With blind persistency, they adduce
the example of Chao Kua, who pored over his father's books to no
purpose, <span id="fr_147"></span>[7](#fn_146) as a proof that all
military theory is useless. Again, seeing

</div>

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

<div style="font-size: 90%">

that books on war have to do with such things as opportunism in
designing plans, and the conversion of spies, they hold that the art is
immoral and unworthy of a sage. These people ignore the fact that the
studies of our scholars and the civil administration of our officials
also require steady application and practice before efficiency is
reached. The ancients were particularly chary of allowing mere novices
to botch their work. <span id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_147) Weapons are
baneful <span id="fr_149"></span>[2](#fn_148) and fighting perilous; and
unless a general is in constant practice, he ought not to hazard other
men's lives in battle. <span id="fr_150"></span>[3](#fn_149) Hence it is
essential that Sun Tzŭ's 13 chapters should be studied. <span
id="fr_151"></span>[4](#fn_150)

Hsiang Liang used to instruct his nephew Chi <span
id="fr_152"></span>[5](#fn_151) in the art of war. Chi got a rough idea
of the art in its general bearings, but would not pursue his studies to
their proper outcome, the consequence being that he was finally defeated
and overthrown. He did not realise that the tricks and artifices of war
are beyond verbal computation. Duke Hsiang of Sung <span
id="fr_153"></span>[6](#fn_152) and King Yen of Hsü <span
id="fr_154"></span>[7](#fn_153) were brought to destruction by their
misplaced humanity. The treacherous and underhand nature of war
necessitates the use of guile and stratagem suited to the occasion.
There is a case on record of Confucius himself having violated an
extorted oath, <span id="fr_155"></span>[8](#fn_154) and also of his
having left the Sung State in disguise. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[9](#fn_155) Can we then recklessly arraign Sun Tzŭ
for disregarding truth and honesty? <span
id="fr_157"></span>[10](#fn_156)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[xlv:1](aow07.htm#fr_127) *Shih Chi*, ch. 25,
fol. 1: \#.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[xlvi:1](aow07.htm#fr_128) The first Instance
of \# in the *P‘ei Wên Yün Fu* is from Ssŭ-ma Ch‘ien's letter to \# Jên
An (see \#, ch. 41, f. 9 *r*°), where M. Chavannes translates it "la
cangue et la chaîne." But in the present passage it seems rather to
indicate some single instrument of torture.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[xlvi:2](aow07.htm#fr_129) \#.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[xlvi:3](aow07.htm#fr_130) Cf. *Shih Chi*, cf.
47, f. 11 *v*°.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[xlvii:1](aow07.htm#fr_131) \#.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[xlvii:2](aow07.htm#fr_132) See *Shu Ching*,
preface § 55.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[xlvii:3](aow07.htm#fr_133) See *Tso Chuan*, \#
X. 2; *Shih Chi*, ch. 47, t. 4 *r*°.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[xlvii:4](aow07.htm#fr_134) \#.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[xlvii:5](aow07.htm#fr_135) *Lun Yü*, XV, 1.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[xlvii:6](aow07.htm#fr_136) *Tso Chuan*, \#,
XI.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[xlvii:7](aow07.htm#fr_137) See *supra*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[xlvii:8](aow07.htm#fr_138) *Tso Chuan*, \#, X.
2.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[xlvii:9](aow07.htm#fr_139) *Ibid.* XII. 5;
*Chia Yü*, ch. 1 *ad fin*.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[xlviii:1](aow07.htm#fr_140) I have failed to
trace this utterance. See note [2](aow06.htm#fn_122) on [p.
xliii](aow06.htm#page_xliii).

<span id="fn_141"></span>[xlviii:2](aow07.htm#fr_141) See *supra*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[xlviii:3](aow07.htm#fr_142) \#, *loc. cit.*:
\#.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[xlviii:4](aow07.htm#fr_144) See *supra*.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[xlviii:5](aow07.htm#fr_145) *Viz.*, \#. the
other four being \#, \#, \# and \# "worship, mourning, entertainment of
guests and festive rites." See *Shu Ching*, II, 1, iii. 8, and *Chou
Li*, IX, fol. 49.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[xlviii:6](aow07.htm#fr_146) Preface to Sun
Tzŭ: \#.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[xlviii:7](aow07.htm#fr_147) See [p.
166](aow21.htm#page_166).

<span id="fn_147"></span>[xlix:1](aow07.htm#fr_148) This is a rather
obscure allusion to *Tso Chuan*, \#, XXXI. 4, where Tzŭ-ch‘an says: \#
"If you have a piece of beautiful brocade, you will nor employ a mere
learner to make it up."

<span id="fn_148"></span>[xlix:2](aow07.htm#fr_149) Cf. *Tao Tê Ching*,
ch. 31: \#.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[xlix:3](aow07.htm#fr_150) Sun Hsing-yen might
have quoted Confucius again. See *Lun Yü*, XIII. 29, 30.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[xlix:4](aow07.htm#fr_151) \#.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[xlix:5](aow07.htm#fr_152) Better known as
Hsiang \# Yü \[B.C. 233–202\].

<span id="fn_152"></span>[xlix:6](aow07.htm#fr_153) The third among the
\# (or \#) enumerated on [p. 141](aow19.htm#page_141). For the incident
referred to, see *Tso Chuan*, \#, XXII. 4.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[xlix:7](aow07.htm#fr_154) See *supra*, [p.
xvi](aow03.htm#page_xvi), note [4](aow03.htm#fn_25).

<span id="fn_154"></span>[xlix:8](aow07.htm#fr_155) *Shih Chi*, ch. 47,
f. 7 *r*°.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[xlix:9](aow07.htm#fr_156) *Ibid*., ch. 38, f.
8 *v*°.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[xlix:10](aow07.htm#fr_157) \# <span
id="page_l">p. l</span> \#.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](aow08)
