[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah119)  [Next](oah121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V

1\. OSIRE said: In the name of Jehovih, peace be unto thee! To which
Daveas replied: Nay, in the name of Apollo, who I am! How darest thou
approach, save to crawl on thy belly? Four hundred years hath the honor
of my kingdom been revered by all visiting Gods; but thou comest as a
barbarian. Down, wretch! Erst I have thee bound and cast in prison!

2\. Osire said: Why should I not come before thee? Behold, the Great
Spirit created the whole universe for His Sons and Daughters. By what
right hast thou usurped a portion? And whence thy authority to bid me
kneel to thee? But if thou canst show me wherein thou hast one just
claim to enslave these people, rather let thy argument run thither, for
I am come in the name of the Father to liberate them, that they may be
prepared for the second and third resurrections.

3\. Daveas said: Think not that I have neglected to prepare for
rebellious Gods like thou. Behold my millions of subjects! What is thy
handful? Verily, I tell thee I have prisons large enough to hold thee
and thy hosts. Neither flatter thyself that I am ignorant. For two
hundred years I wrought in the so-called resurrections; I made myself a
slave to the multitude, giving all my labor and time. Then I beheld my
folly, and so built a third resurrection myself. This is, therefore, my
lawful kingdom. Moreover, I tell thee to thy face, thou wretch, there is
no higher heaven than mine. Neither comest thou from a heaven great as
mine. But having great self-conceit, thou art come for mischief. I have
heard of thee in other heavens! But now thou hast <span
id="page_157a">p. 157a</span> put thy head into the halter. Seize him,
marshals! Seize him and his hosts! Cast them in prison!

4\. Osire spake not, but raised his hand upward in the seventh sign, and
suddenly his hosts casts forth sheets of light brighter than the sun.
Daveas stood back affrighted, and his marshals fled. Presently, Osire,
with a thousand attendants, stepped forth in flames of light, and went
up into the capital and surrounded Daveas, the usurper, but touched him
not. And now the ship was illumined, and lo, the sentinels of Daveas'
Council broke and fled. Hereupon, Osire spake, saying:

5\. Hand of Thy hand, O Jehovih; voice of Thy voice, overturn Thou this
house and throne! And, behold, the light of the upper heavens rested in
Osire's palms, and he smote the house and the throne, and they tumbled
over as straw before a hurricane. Alone stood Daveas, the evil God, half
speechless and half blinded by the great Light of Jehovih. Down! down!
said Osire, to the walls and temples of the city. And his hosts
concentrated at any point Osire's hand directed; and lo, everything fell
and was scattered far.

6\. Meanwhile, the officers of Daveas fled in all directions, save such
as were overcome by the light, and these fell and were buried themselves
amidst the rubbish.

7\. Hold! Hold! cried Daveas. Give me air! I perish! I am a consuming
fire! And he tossed his hands aloft; then cringed his face within his
glittering robes. And now Osire called forth thunder and lightning, and
sent shafts through, and over, and about the whole plateau of Vibrahj,
and the din and roar confounded all the eight hundred millions of souls,
so they ran no farther, but stood and waited, watching what should next
befall.

8\. Osire halted not, but went forward to a more suitable place, to
build his throne. Jehovih! Almighty! he cried: Elements of Thy elements,
O Father! Found here a throne for Thy Son! And even so, for whilst his
words went forth, the elements rose to do his will, and there raised a
most excellent throne, strong and adamantine, on which Osire ascended.
Daveas had fallen flat down, weeping and wailing; but Osire, by a motion
of the hand, called Wang-te, a most enlightened archangel, with her
attendants, to bear him hence, the which was quickly done.

9\. Quickly, now, the place being cleared, the hosts of Osire fenced
around a sufficient space for a city of a thousand million souls, with
pillars <span id="page_158a">p. 158a</span> of light, as brilliant as an
arc in the etherean firmament. Hereat, Osire appointed Klesta, Dawn
Goddess, and he gave her a council of fifty thousand ethereans. Outside
of the walls of the pillars of agni were Daveas and his eight hundred
million subjects, in dire confusion.

10\. Wang-te, the archangel, said to Daveas: In thine own falsehood thou
art favored to free thyself awhile, to organize a new kingdom, but in
holiness, and return and command obedience from this smothering host.
Behold, thou has taught them to believe thou art Apollo; say to them
now: I am not Apollo! I have been false!

11\. Daveas madly replied: Never! Jehovih and His kingdoms accursed be
forever! Ye strange spirits, come from far-off kingdoms, to despoil and
overturn the most righteous place in heaven! Are Jehovih and His
servants destroyers! To which Wang-te replied: This is no time for
argument; behold here these countless millions! If I withdraw from thee,
and my attendants also withdraw, thou wilt be as one drowned amidst this
sea of ignorance and horrid smells. Assume at once, for pity's sake, to
purge thyself of thy life-long falsehoods and treacherous tyranny.
Announce thyself as Daveas, as thou art, and I can save thee!

12\. Daveas rudely thrust her aside, saying: Never! I acknowledge to
none! If there be a higher heaven, I will ascend thither as I am,
Apollo! Apollo! Wang-te said: Put me not off, in Jehovih's name!
Remember what thou art, and of the little thou hast seen, how powerless
thou art before Omnipotence! Thy fate is like that of all dictators, on
the verge of a chasm of horrors. Daveas waited not to hear her further,
but proclaimed aloud, Apollo! Apollo! and stood aside. And presently his
former officers rushed to him, and with that came the sea of millions of
spirits, unorganized, unwashed, unfed, frightened and mad, for love of
the name Apollo, the meaning of which they knew not; and they became as
a knot of serpents, entwined around the central figure, Daveas and his
officers. And in the terrible brawl not one voice could be distinguished
from another. And the outer extreme pressed inward, on every side, and
presently the eight hundred millions were <span id="page_159a">p.
159a</span> as a ball, a knot of darkness, with a dull and rumbling moan
within, and fearful clamor on the surface, from which horrid smells
issued in all directions.

13\. Wang-te and her attendants hastened back to the throne of Osire,
Son of Jehovih, to tell what had happened. Osire said: What shall I do,
O Father? Then the Light of Jehovih came, and Jehovih spake, saying:
Consider My Creation, My son. The young child I made to fall with few
bruises; but the full-grown man falleth heavily. Shall I make a separate
rule to favor kings and queens on the earth, and false Gods in heaven?
Nay, verily. Behold, I will make of Daveas an example in heaven, and on
earth, also. Because he hath spurned his own name, so will I make both
angels and mortals to curse and shun the name, Daveas.

14\. Osire said: Proceed ye with my kingdom, in the name of the father.
Let Daveas rest awhile as he is.

15\. At that, Osire departed, taking the remainder of his hosts with him
in his fire-ship; and he went to a heavenly place to the westward, where
was Seru, a false God, with ten millions of slaves; and Osire destroyed
Seru's kingdom also. Next, he went to a heavenly place in the north,
where Raka, a false God, had seventy millions of slaves; and Osire
destroyed his kingdom also, liberating his slaves, and putting a guard
over Raka.

16\. Thus went Osire throughout atmospherea, demolishing all the
heavenly kingdoms of the false Gods, of whom there were, in all, seven
hundred and eighty; but many of them had not a million of subjects.
Thirty days, in all, was Osire engaged in destroying the evil kingdoms
in the lower heavens, and then the work was finished.

17\. Osire said to his hosts: For thirty days we labored in destroying
that which was; now will we rebuild to Jehovih for another thirty days.
Take the ship, therefore, to Vibrahj, for thither will I found my
central kingdom. And after we shall have completed the work of starting
the second resurrection on a sure foundation, then will we go down to
the earth and overturn the kingdoms of the false Lords and men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](oah121)
