[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah146)  [Next](oah148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XII

1\. FRAGAPATTI caused the ship, the avalanza, to be moved to other black
mountains, deep buried in revolting crimes and misery; wherein no one
with God-like power had ventured in for hundreds of years. Again he
called down Jehovih's fire, and raised walls, impenetrable, high on
every side, affrighting and stirring up the self-condemned with frenzied
fear. And they ran, all polluted with foul thoughts, which had clothed
them about with foulness terrible, and oaths and curses and imprecations
against all righteousness.

2\. And Hoab, too, now a very sun, desperate to do overwhelming good
things, even more a thousand times than in his self-ease of other days
he refrained from dark company lest he be polluted, now rushed in
headlong to the very worst and foulest. Proclaiming Jehovih and active
work to stir them up; and by his quick and <span id="page_206a">p.
206a</span> unmistakable zeal proving his soul's connection with the
Almighty's Power.

3\. After Fragapatti and Hoab rushed in, hundreds of thousands of
ethereans did so also, laboring for the Father's kingdom; with flames of
fire cutting loose the demons' grips of torture on the helpless, and
hurling them separate. None could escape because of the walls around,
now seething with the choking smell of brimstone; and must needs fall
prostrate, before the crystallizing lights thrust at them, weeping and
wailing.

4\. All day long, and all night, Fragapatti and Hoab, now a powerful
worker, the which Fragapatti had previously seen would be the case, and
the etherean hosts, rested not; but waded into the hell of death.
Turning them to the right or to the left, the miserable, devouring
wretches, brothers and sisters of mortals and spirits, now engulfed in
their own depravity, and by their desperate desire for sin, holding
millions of the moderately good as officers of torture, in order to
gratify their horrid love of witnessing horrors. Into groups and series
they roughly selected them, as a starting point for the das that were to
come after, and more carefully divide them.

5\. Then Fragapatti called the das and put them to work with their rods
of water and rods of fire, making stations beyond the walls of fire,
where the naked, trembling, rescued sufferers and drujas were housed and
fed, restrained by guardians of ample strength and foresight. For of
such nature is the low man and low woman, that love of evil in time
delighteth to feed itself in evil more than in good, and will even turn
against benefactors, and spurn good offerings.

6\. Of whom Jehovih saith: As by fire the dross of metal is burned and
cast out, leaving that which is pure; so created I the righteous with
light from My countenance, to burn out the dross which the wicked nestle
into their bosoms. Wherein, man shall perceive that it is the dross that
healeth Me and My chosen. Go, then, deliver the wicked in hell, and make
them clean with water and with fire, and ye shall find a star in every
soul. And as many of these as ye deliver, so is your glory in My
etherean kingdoms.

7\. For each deliverer is as a sun around which these stars congregate,
and they magnify one another forever. And when these stars have grown,
they also go and do in like manner; for it is of such that My exalted
ones are in the highest heavens, whom ye call Gods and Lords, and justly
so, because of their supremacy.

<span id="page_207a">p. 207a</span>

8\. Thus went Fragapatti through the lowest regions of Aoasu; for forty
days and nights labored he and his hosts, and he broke up the regions of
hell, and cast out the souls of the tortured, thousands of millions of
them. Neither was there left any place standing in all the lower heavens
where evil held dominion.

9\. And there were established in those regions around about, two
hundred thousand colonies, comprising the evil ones who had been
rescued. But the very lowest, who knew not anything, who were: some,
infants who died at the time of birth; some, infants of drunkards, who
came to the lower heavens with the intoxicating liquors or smoke of
their mother's debauchery; some, very young abortions, slain by their
mothers and fathers; some, chaotic, killed in wars, who were mad and
crazed, howling and screaming and fighting, of whom there were nine
hundred millions: these Fragapatti had brought away from all the others,
putting guardians over them for the present.

10\. Then he called together the crew of the avalanza, and all the hosts
of Hoab, and Hoab himself; and when they were duly in order, Fragapatti
extemporized a throne and sat on it; and thus he spake, saying:

11\. Without Thee, O Jehovih, man is nothing. Nor can he stand upright,
nor hold up his head, nor his soul after he is up, save but by Thee.
When he cutteth himself off from Thee, he falleth like a limb of a tree
that is severed.

12\. He goeth about boasting: There is no All Person. But his words are
as a severing knife, and he knoweth it not. He setteth up his judgment,
saying: Thou wert good for fools, O Jehovih; but as for me, Thou art a
foolish encumbrance!

13\. Yea, he saith: Who hath seen Jehovih! And he laugheth because of
his cleverness. He saith: What stood Jehovih upon when He created the
worlds? How long slept He before He created? He saith: What a foolish
Creator! He created sin and death! He saith: Who knoweth the size of His
head; the length of His arm; the place He liveth; or who hath heard His
voice!

14\. He saith: Verily, there is no All Person; no All Highest; no Light.
This is the second downward stage, and in the third, he saith: A curse
upon Faith! A curse upon all things! A curse upon myself! And then
cometh hell and her horrors to swallow him up.

<span id="page_208a">p. 208a</span>

15\. But thou art near, O Jehovih! Thy hosts traverse the universe. In
Thy name they come, and Thy power and glory are with them. In their
majesty they encounter all evil; they cast out hell and its prisoners.

16\. Then Fragapatti turned to Hoab, saying: Speak, O Hoab. Nine hundred
millions of dead, that are still sleeping in death, lie at our feet.
These regions are unsuited for their treatment; whither shall we take
them? Or shall we, because they are so dead, leave them to shift for
themselves.

17\. Then rose Hoab, saluting, and tears were in his eyes. He said:
Mighty art Thou, O Jehovih! Lo, I was on the verge of an everlasting
fall! I was on a steep precipice, but saw not. With blinded eyes I
walked about. I lost Thy countenance. My family became strangers to
Thee, and we were following close after, to become strangers to one
another!

18\. Yea, I was ungrateful before Thee. I forgot that Thou createdst me.
I forgot that all the joys I had ever had were bestowed by Thee; and
that by Thee I had been made capable to appreciate mine own enjoyment.
And then I raised up my voice against Thee, and turned Thee out of the
world.

19\. Yea, I chose a corner and appropriated it for my own ease and
glory. I said: To keep other Gods and angels away from my lands, that is
all I desire. But Thou wert mindful of me, O Jehovih! Thy voice sounded
in the heavens above, and Thy Son came down in Thy glory. He beheld my
vanity and my weakness, but he rebuked me not. Yea, I told him I loved
not to go to those beneath me and raise them up. I said: Let them shift
for themselves!

20\. Now am I rebuked in mine own words! Now have I cast myself out of
hell. Behold, I said: Zeredho shall be a place for me and my people
forever! None shall come hither to make us afraid or to annoy us. And
Thy Son said to me: I can teach thee and thy people that ye shall never
more fear to be annoyed by the low or by the evil-minded; nor shall ye
fear for Gods or angels to come and inhabit Zeredho!

21\. Thus spake Thy Son, O Jehovih! And he hath given us the secret. We
no longer fear that others will encroach upon Zeredho. Behold, Zeredho
is Thy place, O Jehovih. These unfortunates, these drujas, are Thy
children. They shall go to Zeredho. I fear not pollution now, nor do my
hosts. We will wade into this filth, like scavengers into a filthy
street, and we will make these children like shining stars in Thy
firmament!

<span id="page_209a">p. 209a</span>

22\. Yea, O Jehovih, nothing more can make us afraid! We have nothing;
we have nothing to lose. We are Thy servants, now and forever!

23\. Then spake Fragapatti, saying: Behold the size of my avalanza, O
Hoab! If thou wilt but take the measure, thou shalt find it is just the
size and build to take thee and thy hosts and these drujas. Think not
that this matter so happened, for I sent beforehand, and had all these
unfortunates enumerated, and thy people enumerated also.

24\. When Hoab perceived this great wisdom in Fragapatti, and
comprehended the care that had been used to accomplish so much, he made
no reply at first, but, looking at him, burst into tears. Presently, he
said: By Thy Power and Wisdom, O Jehovih, will I, also, lift my fellows
up out of darkness and misery!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](oah148)
