[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah183)  [Next](oah185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. DURING the infant age of Zarathustra, God manifested no more through
him; but he sent Ejah, one of his Lords, to be with Zarathustra, day and
night. And Ejah taught the infant wisdom in all things, but showed
himself to none else.

2\. When Zarathustra was half grown, the Lord began to manifest through
him, giving signs and miracles and prophecy before the Listians who
lived in the Forest of Goats. This forest was of the width in every
direction, save the east, of forty days' journey for a man, and in all
that region there were no houses, the inhabitants living in tents made
of bark and skins.

3\. The Lord inspired Zarathustra to teach them to build houses, and
tame the goats, and to live in cities, and otherwise subdue the earth
through righteousness; the chief centre of their habitations being on
the river Apherteon and its tributaries. And it was from these
inhabitants that sprang in after years the migrants called Fonece'ans,
signifying, out of the mountains. Nevertheless, these people were
I'huans, but because of the <span id="page_184b">p. 184b</span>
cruelties of the Par'si'ean kings, they fled and lived in the forests.

4\. The Lord said to Zarathustra: Behold the people who fly from the
kings! I have made them kings over goats and over the beasts of the
fields.

5\. And from this time forth the Listians styled themselves shepherd
kings. And Zarathustra taught them of the Lord, that man should have
dominion over the beasts of the forests, but that no man should hold
dominion over his neighbor. Consequently, every man of the Listians
styled himself a king, and every woman styled herself a queen.

6\. Again the Lord said to Zarathustra: Go thou, my son, whither I will
lead thee, and thou shalt find a people sacred to the Great Spirit. So
Zarathustra wandered beyond the Forest of Goats, and came to
Hara'woetchij, to the south of the mountains of Oe'tahka, where were
three large cities and twelve small ones, inhabited by I'hins.

7\. And the Lord had been with the I'hins, and foretold them Zarathustra
was coming, so that it was proven on both sides. The Lord said to the
high priest: Thou shalt suffer Zarathustra to come within the walls of
the cities, for he is pure.

8\. So Zarathustra went in, and, in the time of worship before the altar
of God, the Lord appeared in a great light and commanded the high
priest, saying: Behold, I have brought my son to thee. Him shalt thou
anoint as a priest according to the I'hin laws; and thou shalt teach him
the rites and ceremonies of the ancients.

9\. Accordingly Zarathustra was made a priest and was otherwise accepted
as an I'hin, and bestowed under the rod with water and with fire. And he
also taught the sacred words and the art of writing and making tablets;
and of weaving cloth and making clothes from flax.

10\. Seven years Zarathustra remained with the I'hins, fasting and <span
id="page_185b">p. 185b</span> praying, and singing and dancing before
the Lord. And then the Lord commanded him to return through the Forest
of Goats, the which he did, teaching before the Listians whithersoever
he halted for a rest, and the Lord was with him, working miracles.

11\. At the end of another seven years the Lord said to Zarathustra:
Behold, the dawn of light is come! Thou shalt, therefore, bestow thy
mother with thy people, and I will lead thee to the city of thy birth.
Zarathustra said: Tell me, O Lord, of the city of my birth?

12\. The Lord said: It is a great city, but it shall fall before thy
hand; for I'hua'Mazda hath turned his favor away from its kings.

13\. In two days' journey Zarathustra came to Oas, and entered into the
city, but he brought no provender with him. Now, it was a law of Oas,
that all strangers coming into the city, should bring provender as a
testimony of fidelity to the laws and to the king. So, when he came to
the inner gate, the keeper asked him for provender; but Zarathustra
answered him, saying:

14\. Naked I came into the world, and Ormazd asked me not for provender.
Is thy king greater than the Creator?

15\. The keeper said: I know not thy words; shall a servant explain
laws? To which Zarathustra said: Thou art wise; neither shalt thou
suffer for disobedience in letting me pass. The Lord will give thee
food.

16\. When he had spoken thus, there fell at the feet of the keeper an
abundance of fruit, and the keeper feared and stood aside, suffering
Zarathustra to pass in. The keeper not only told the people of the
miracle, but ran and told the king, likewise. This was Asha, who had
reigned since the death of So-qi; and Asha no sooner heard of the
miracle than he imagined the person to be the same whom he had seen in
infancy.

17\. Asha, the king, sent officers at once to find Zarathustra, and
bring him before the court. But the Lord knowing these things, inspired
Zarathustra to go on his own account; and he went accordingly before the
king, even before the officers returned.

18\. The king said: Who art thou? and for what purpose hast thou come
before the king?

<span id="page_186b">p. 186b</span>

19\. Then spake I'hua'Mazda through Zarathustra, saying: I am
I'hua'Mazda, God of the I'huans. He through whom I speak, is
Zarathustra, whom thou sawest in his mother's arms. We twain are one. I
have come before thee, O king, because of two reasons: thou hast sent
for me; and I desire to use thee.

20\. The king said: Speak further, stranger, that I may approve of thy
words.

21\. In the time of So-qi, said I'hua'Mazda, I made thee king of Oas,
and from that day to this my ashars have been with thee and heard thee
oft praying privately for information of the infant thou sawest; for it
resteth heavily on thy judgment whether or no man be immortal. Sit thou
with me this night privily, and I will show thee So-qi's soul.

22\. Asha said: Thou wert to smite the city and it would fall. Behold,
it standeth! Yet I desire not to stand in my own light. Then Zarathustra
spake on his own account, saying: Fear not, O king, for this philosophy.
As thou wouldst bend a straw, so do the Gods wield the nations of the
earth. The city will fall ere six years pass, and thou shalt be reduced
to beggary, and yet thou shalt be happier than now.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah185)
