[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah156)  [Next](oah158.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXII

1\. FRAGAPATTI sent messengers to Hapacha, God of Ipseogee, apprising
him of the visit. So, Hapacha hastily called in his Lords and captains
and fathers, preparing a time of recreation, and also preparing suitable
reception and entertainment.

<span id="page_233a">p. 233a</span>

2\. And Hapacha provided in this manner: First, one hundred thousand
musicians, formed in eight parts of a circle, with eight intervening
spaces. With each group he provided one thousand marshals, and they
stood in front of the musicians, with eight intervening spaces also.
Next within, he provided places for the messengers, of whom there were
three hundred thousand. Then next came the asaphs, of whom there were
one million; next came the ashars, of whom there were two millions;
next, came the nurses and physicians; next, the teachers in factories
and schools and colleges; and of all these there were fourteen millions
six hundred thousand.

3\. Of the grade first above the es'yans there were twenty millions; of
the second grade, which was the highest, there were thirty millions; but
no es'yans were present.

4\. In the midst of the circle was the throne of Hapacha, now extended
so as to accommodate his Lords. To the south of his throne were the
seats of the captains of the hosts. In a crescent were his counselors,
of whom there were one million.

5\. Hapacha having thus called them together, and having explained to
but few of them the purpose, now addressed them, saying:

6\. By the Wisdom and Power of Jehovih I speak before you. That which I
say is not of myself, more than of the faith I have in Jehovih, of which
faith ye are likewise blessed.

7\. Since our youth up we have been advised by the guardian angels,
their Lords and God, to be firm in faith in Jehovih above all things.
For it was declared to us, in the olden times, that there was a higher
heaven and a lower heaven, and that through faith in the Father we
should all ultimately ascend and dwell in His Holiest Kingdoms.

8\. For which reason ye have been steady workers since your mortal lives
have been put away; even for this kingdom, raising up many, and causing
them to rejoice in everlasting life. But as it has been promised ye
beforehand that the Gods above us would surely come and deliver all who
are prepared for the next resurrection, even so, to this day, cherish ye
the hope for wider fields of labor, where ye may overtake your kindred
and others who have become wise in Jehovih's light.

9\. The time of that resurrection is near at hand for many of you. Our
Father hath brought this heaven into a lighter region, that ye may be
prepared for that still greater light beyond. <span id="page_234a">p.
234a</span> And because of the new light that is with us, ye have
beholden that many of the I'huan es'yans have deserted our nurseries and
gone back to the earth, for they love the darkness of earth more than
they love the light of heaven.

10\. My Lords have sent messengers to me from various parts of the
earth, saying to me: As much as they have deserted your places in
heaven, even so much have the es'yans returned to mortals in great
numbers. And it hath come to pass that great manifestations of spirit
presence are now common to men and women and children on earth.

11\. Many of these es'yans, falling in with drujas, have adopted their
roving habits, denying that there is any higher heaven, honestly
believing they will have an opportunity to re-incarnate themselves and
dwell again in mortal form. Knowing no higher heaven than the earth,
and, knowing no happiness save in the indulgence of lust, they appear to
mortals, and marry in manifestation, falsely pretending to be the kin of
the living.

12\. Which sign forerunneth the approach of a new dawn of dan near at
hand. Being thus doubly armed in prophecy, your God called you to
witness the words and proceedings of Fragapatti, who is on his way
hither, accompanied by Yaton'te, God of Yaton'te, Creator of Hochedowa.

13\. For more than six hundred years have many of us labored in this
field, and our harvests for Gau have been the most esteemed of all the
resurrections contributed by the Lords of earth. To comport with our
dignity, I have commanded the builders of otevans to have in readiness,
representing these harvests, a vessel for my Lords and their attendants,
and my chief marshal, to go part way and meet our visitors, bearing the
sign of the triangle, and of fruit, and the altar.

14\. Hapacha then gave instructions in full; and, presently, the
receiving hosts departed in the otevan, with music, rejoicing, being
cheered by the hosts remaining. In the meantime, Hapacha caused the
house to be put in order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](oah158.md)
