[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah126)  [Next](oah128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XII

1\. OSIRE, through his mathematicians, now furnished the Lords with maps
of corporeal stars, and moon, and sun, and the position of the earth,
with the sun-belt, and bestowed the names of animals upon them. Showed
where the region of Cows was; the place of Bulls; the place of Bears;
the place of Horses; the place of Fishes; the place of Scorpions; the
place of Sheep; the place of Lions; the place of Crabs; the place of
Death; the place of Life; the place of Capricornus; and marked the
seasons, and made twelve sections (months) to the year, which was the
width of the sun-belt.

2\. And he placed the sun in the midst and made lines thence to the
stars, with explanations of the powers of the seasons on all the living.

3\. And he gave the times of Jehovih, the four hundred years of the
ancients, and the half-times of dan, the base of prophecy; the
variations of thirty-three years; the times of eleven; and the seven and
a half times of the vortices of the stars, so that the seasons might be
foretold, and famines averted on the earth.

4\. When the tablets were completed and ready to deliver to the Lords,
Osire said: Take these and bestow them on mortals, both through the
oracles and by inspiration, making them sacred with the prophets, and
seers, and priests, and their kings and queens.

5\. And ye shall inspire them to build temples of observation, to study
the stars; teaching by the gau and by the travel of the sun north and
south, and by Cnest, and by dark chambers, that they may prove the
Fichtus of Haak, for nothing shall be left undone or untaught whereby
man's corporeal senses shall not prove adequate to a perfect corporeal
life.

6\. For this rule followeth on all corporeal worlds; that with the
culture of the corporeal senses, man becometh vigorous, strong, and
independent; and with the culture of the spiritual senses in corporeans,
they become weak, sensitive and dependent.

7\. In the first case, they ultimately become selfish and wicked; in the
second case, they become impotent, and unadapted to corporeal life, and
thus become extinct.

8\. On all corporeal worlds, Jehovih hath provided these two seasons for
every race He created; a season for the development of the corporeal
senses, and a season for the development of the spiritual senses. To
find the mean between these is to find kosmon, which lieth far in the
future.

9\. In this day, therefore, I give the matter into your charge, in the
name of Jehovih, that you consider not the spirutual nature of the
corporeans in any respect, leaving that matter to God and his sub-Gods,
who will receive them at the time of their mortal death.

10\. But ye shall teach them to fear no spirit, nor Lord, nor God;
teaching them that by their own wills they can cast out the tetracts
which assume to be spirits. Rather inspire ye them to be Gods and
Goddesses themselves; and by their aspirations they will become large
and powerful, and of fearless disposition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](oah128.md)
