[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah169)  [Next](oah171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXV

1\. THE Voice of the Creator was with Ah'oan from the time of his
landing in these lower heavens. And Ah'oan chose from his hosts a
Council of ten thousand, and they sat in a living altar; and the Voice
directed him to build a capital and a throne, and call the plateau
thereof Sang'hi; the which he did.

2\. And when it was completed, Jehovih said to Ah'oan: Thou art My Lord
and My God; the labor of thy hand shall endure on the earth and in
heaven. Whatsoever thou buildest, I will build, for thou art of My holy
place. Make thyself an otevan, and go around about in thy dominions, and
inspect all things, making a record of the same, which shall be
deposited in the libraries of these heavens, that angels and mortals, in
after ages, may read them.

3\. Ah'oan made an otevan, and traveled as commanded, making a record,
and preparing also a place of records, in Sang'hi, where these things
were deposited; of which these words are a brief transcript. That is:

4\. Heaven was without order or organization, save one kingdom, <span
id="page_263">p. 263</span> ruled over by Oibe, who falsely styled
himself Thor, the only begotten Son of Jehovih.

5\. The spirits of these heavens are mostly of the first resurrection;
nevertheless, there are millions of them who believe they are not dead;
and for the greater part, these are in chaos, still lingering on
battle-fields or in the places where they were cut off from the earth.

6\. In many places there are spirits who set up colonies, trying to
provide themselves with homes and clothing, and to found heavenly
abodes; but they are forever overrun and pillaged by drujas.

7\. With and around about the people of Jaffeth there are more than two
thousand million angels who know not how to get away from the earth. Of
these, millions of them are fetals, making themselves as twin spirits to
mortals. These spirits oft show themselves to mortals, but are believed
to be doubles; but the spirits thus bound know not themselves who they
are, or whence they came; neither can they go away from the mortals to
whom they are bound, and on whom they live.

8\. As for the mortals of Jaffeth, they have cities of warriors, huge
and fierce. The earth of this region hath been in a'ji thirteen hundred
years.

9\. After Ah'oan had thus discovered the condition of things, he
returned to Sang'hi, and they sat in Council, and Jehovih said to
Ah'oan: Forty Lords shalt thou appoint to dwell on the earth; and to
each Lord thou shalt give ten thousand assistants. And these Lords shall
go down to the earth, and drive away the drujas, and take possession of
the kings' and queens' palaces, and of the temples of the stars; and
they shall obtain control over the captains and generals of armies, and
blind their judgment, and lead them astray, so that they will be
powerless in war and destruction.

10\. And when Samati, God of Zarathustra, traveleth in Jaffeth, thy
Lords shall go with him, with a sufficient number of angels to
accomplish successfully all that Zarathustra professeth in My name. And
thy Lords shall shield Zarathustra around about, that no harm come to
him; and when enemies pursue him, thy Lords shall lead them astray or
detain them till such time as will enable Zarathustra to escape. For in
this dawn shall My word be established on the earth, to perish not
forever.

11\. And when thou hast thus established thy Lords, thou shalt colonize
thy heavens, giving them seventy colonies; but Sang'hi shall be the
central kingdom. Thou shalt choose from amongst the atmosphereans one
who shall be thy assistant God, who shall sit on thy throne during thy
absence.

12\. And thou, and thy Holy Council, shall instruct thy assistant God in
such manner that, when this dawn is ended, he shall become God, in My
name, of Sang'hi, for the next succeeding two hundred years.

13\. Ah'oan informed the Council of the words of Jehovih. And Ah'oan
appointed the forty Lords, as commanded; also appointing an assistant.

14\. These, then, were the Lords appointed, to wit: First, to have
control over the WORD OF GOD on earth: The; Seung-bin, Go-ma-git,
Ben-hong, She-ang, Bog-wi, Ah-tdong, Mwing-wi, Ah-tchook, Gonk-boy,
Yuk-hoh and Ahwotch.

15\. Second, to have control over the palaces of kings and queens, and
temples: Mina, Ahchaung, Ahyot, Yowgong, Ohonto, Yongwe and Ahma.

16\. Third, to have control over armies and kingdoms: Kear-ak-a,
Geeouh-young, Bi, Gwan-gouk, Gee-ooh-young, Sam-sin and Deth.

17\. Fourth, to have control over sea-farers: Shopgee, Agan-ha, Rax and
Lo.

18\. Fifth, to have control over mothers and births: Songheng, Someconc,
Yahiti, Ogne-ka-was and Hoah'ava.

19\. Sixth, to have control over marriages: First, the loo'is in
general, and then: Ahsam, Oanis, Yotsam, Ivitgom and Sap-sang.

20\. So Ah'oan sent his Lords to their several places, with their
assistants. And after that he began the colonization of the angels in
his heavens. And in one year he had raised up from Jaffeth more than a
thousand million, and prepared them with houses, hospitals, nurseries
and factories, and all such things and places as are required in hada.

21\. In the second year he delivered another thousand million, more than
half of whom had to be taken away from the earth by force. And these he
also housed and provided with teachers and overseers in like manner.

22\. So by the time Samati, God of Zarathustra, was prepared to travel
in Jaffeth, visiting the kings and queens, the Lords of Ah'oan had so
far banished the drujas that they were powerless to prevent the decrees
of the Father's word. And when Zarathustra went into Jaffeth, behold,
the Lords of heaven were with him, and God of the Word was with him, and
the kings and queens of earth were powerless before him.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

23\. And when Zarathustra went to a city, and, being inspired by God,
said: Fall down, ye walls! behold, the angels of heaven rent the walls,
and they fell. And when Zarathustra said: Come forth, ye spirits of the
dead! behold, the Lords seized the drujas and held them up so that
mortals could see them. And when Zarathustra said: O Ormazd, give Thy
children food! behold, the angels had previously provided fish and
fruit, which they let fall upon the people, the time and place being
previously arranged betwixt them and God of the Word!

24\. Thus did Ah'oan's dominions extend down to mortals; thus became the
word of Zarathustra Jehovih's Word to mortals.

25\. And now Fragapatti, Chief over all, was coming to inspect the
labors of his Lord God, Ah'oan, and of Samati. Ah'oan had sent commands
to his Lords, and to their assistants, to return to Sang'hi and remain
three days in recreation. And Ah'oan commanded the captains of the
colonies of heaven to come, and to bring with them as many of their
pupils and subjects as possible.

26\. And it came to pass that when Fragapatti's avalanza came to
Sang'hi, there were assembled upward of two thousand million souls to
witness the pageantry and proceedings. Ah'oan had provided the means and
facilities that these things should be magnificently carried out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](oah171)
