[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah170)  [Next](oah172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXVI

1\. NEVER in these heavens had there been such pageantry and display as
when Fragapatti's avalanza entered Sang'hi; never so many musicians, two
millions, distributed to lend so great an effect to a procession.

2\. Of this matter, Ah'oan said: By the pageantry and the music were my
hosts of delivered drujas made to realize the glory of the upper
heavens; by the glory of those three days' recreation did I shut out the
attractions of the lower world. My people were entranced with delight;
they were born for the first time into the kingdom of heaven!

3\. Ah'oan said: But the greatest glory of all was when Fragapatti
honored the throne of Sang'hi. Jehovih cast a sun upon the place; and
the Voice spake from the Light, so that all the multitude saw the Light
and heard the words of the Father! And when Fragapatti rose up and stood
in the midst of the throne, the Light was so great that millions of the
people fell down because of its glory.

4\. The lights were lowered to suit the newly born in heaven, and the
people of etherea mingled with the atmosphereans, diverting, explaining
and inspiring them with the magnitude and glory of the higher heavens.

5\. After the recreation, and when the multitude were in order,
Fragapatti spake from Jehovih's throne, first, to Es'pacia, Daughter of
Jehovih, assistant Goddess to Ah'oan, who was to succeed him after dawn.
To her he said: Es'pacia, Daughter of Jehovih, hear thou my words; I am
one with the Father, and in His name salute thee. Behold, from this time
forth the Father's Word shall dwell with mortals.

6\. It shall become anchored to the earth, never to depart; though it
may be mutilated and perverted, yet His hand is over it, and it shall
not fail. As a mother delighteth in the first spoken words of her child,
so shall we all take delight that the Father's word hath become
engrafted on the earth. Before this time, the Word was with the I'hin
tribe, but locked up in secret. It could not be maintained on the earth,
but by locking it up in secret, with a people prepared as seed for
delivering all the races of men. But now the Word is delivered openly to
mortals.

7\. If the spirits of the lower heavens know not the Father's Word, they
can be hereafter taken down to the earth and there taught His
commandments. Prior to this time, the angels of these lower heavens had
no Word at anchorage; they constantly fell in darkness, and pulled
mortals down with them. Behold, the Word is now engraved, through our
Sons, Samati and Zarathustra; it cannot be lost.

8\. Thou hast been exalted first Goddess of these heavens, and Lordess
of this division of the earth, to maintain the light of this dawn, to
angels and mortals. Thou shalt first of all labor to protect the Word to
mortals; to all the priests and cities of Zarathustra thou shalt appoint
the wisest of thy angel hosts, to protect them and to maintain the Word.

9\. But to such mortals as deny the Word, and to such as seek to destroy
the Word, thou shalt lend no assistance, but leave them either without
angels, or with only such as will lead them into failure. Maintain thou
thy hosts in the temples of worship, where they worship the Great
Spirit.

10\. Throughout Jaffeth thou shalt inspire mortals to hang the wheel of
the altar in country places, by the <span id="page_265">p. 265</span>
roadsides. And when mortals pass the places, they shall turn the wheel,
in remembrance of the Creator. For which reason thou shalt station at
each and every one of these altars angel sentinels, who shall have
messengers to thy throne. And when a mortal passeth the wheel and
turneth it, and is afflicted with sickness, thou shalt send angels to
him to heal him. But if he turn not the wheel in remembrance of the
Father, and yet be afflicted with sickness, thy sentinel shall not send
to thee, nor shalt thou send angels to heal him. Nevertheless, the wheel
and the altar shall cause men to think; and if, after a disbeliever hath
passed the wheel and not turned it, and he be afflicted with sickness,
and he repent and go back and turn the wheel, then shalt thou send to
him in haste and heal him, that he may proclaim abroad what the Creator
hath done for him.

11\. For as much as thou carriest out these decrees of All Light, so
shalt thou remain united with my heavens above, which are united with
those above, which are united with the Creator. And wherein thou shalt
lack in power or wisdom, ask thou the Father, and I will answer thee in
His name.

12\. Fragapatti then spake to the Council, which was after the manner of
his words in Astoreth. After that he walked down to the foot of the
throne, where the marshals had provided a place for the people to pass
before him, even as they had done in Astoreth. Accordingly, when the
musicians began singing and playing, the people marched before him, and
by the waving of his hands, he created drapery, and flowers, and
wreaths, and gave to all the people something, even though there passed
before him two thousand million angels!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVII](oah172)
