[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah154)  [Next](oah156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XX

1\. WHEN the recreation was ended, Yaton'te called his council together,
and he sat on the throne, and Fragapatti and Hoab sat on his left hand
on the throne, also.

2\. The Voice of Jehovih came to Yaton'te, saying: Behold, O My Sons and
Daughters, this heaven and this land shall not be like any other place;
for hither shall rise in time after, they that shall begin the founding
of My kingdom amongst mortals. For in the lands of the east, and the
heavens of the east, I have given them Lords and Gods before whom they
fall down and worship. But in this heaven, and this land beneath it,
shall not be given any Lord, nor God, nor any person born of woman for
their resurrection.

3\. To this end have I created this subjective heaven and her plateaux,
and they shall endure till the dawn of kosmon, and the overthrow of war
and mortal kingdoms. From this throne will I come in that day, through
My Chiefs, and reveal the histories of My kingdoms. And I will radiate
outward, around about from this heaven, until My kingdoms encircle the
whole earth, and until the earth's heavens are Mine also.

<span id="page_228a">p. 228a</span>

4\. And whether the I'huans be mortals or spirits, ye shall not here
teach them to worship any one, save the Great Spirit.

5\. For a question will arise amongst mortals in the beginning of
kosmon, as to whether mortals are ruled by the angels of heaven. And I
will prove it before them that in this land all Gods and Lords and
Saviors shall be cast out, and mortals shall become worshippers of the
Great Spirit, being ruled to that end by the inspiration that shall
descend from this heaven, through the spirits of the I'huan race. And
they shall know that I, Jehovih, alone rule over all, and within all My
works.

6\. Be wise, My Sons and Daughters, for as ye now find little aspiration
amongst the hosts of wandering spirits, so will the same lack of
aspiration be manifested in the beginning of kosmon, amongst mortals.
The Voice ceased.

7\. Yaton'te called Et'seing, his assistant God, saying: Come thou and
sit on the throne. I will go now for forty days with Fragapatti and show
him all my works. And I will go also with him to Hapacha, God of
Ipseogee, after which I will return hither.

8\. Et'seing came and sat on the throne, duly saluting, having been
anointed and crowned previously. Then rose up Fragapatti to speak,
perceiving that the great multitude desired to hear him. He said:

9\. In what they have done I am well pleased, O Jehovih. Through Thy
voice I selected them, and they deserve neither praise nor censure,
being Thy servants. Thou hast wisely chosen them, for in this dawn I
perceive the foundation of that which will reach mortals in the third
dan'ha that cometh after. And because Thou hast chosen this place, O
Father, great is the responsibility of these, Thy Lords, and Thy Lord
God.

10\. Because they have supplicated Thee, Thou hast guided them, and they
cannot err. Because their work hath been slow, they have great honor in
patience and persistence. May Thy Wisdom, Power and Love continue with
them, for Thy glory, now and forever. Amen! Fragapatti ceased, but the
light became brilliant above his head; and the Voice came out of the
Light, saying:

11\. More shall they concern themselves in a righteous foundation of My
kingdom, than in a multitude of conversions and resurrections. For the
standard of their Lords and Gods, and their successors, is of more value
than <span id="page_229a">p. 229a</span> tens of thousands of redeemed
who are of little wisdom and strength. For the latter will be raised up
afterward.

12\. The Voice ceased, and Fragapatti came down from the throne,
followed by Yaton'te and Hoab. The es'enaurs chanted, ALL HAIL, GREAT
JEHOVIH'S POWER! HIS LIGHT THE IMMORTAL VOICE! And when the Gods
advanced to Ctius, they halted, standing abreast, and then filed in
front of the throne, saluting in the SIGN OF OM, and were answered by
Fragapatti. Lastly came the marshals of the traveling hosts; and when
they had passed, the Gods followed after, thus passing out of the
capital to the place of the ships of fire, followed by the inhabitants
of Yaton'te.

13\. Thus they entered the avalanza, with music and cheering; and thus
they departed, first to survey the kingdom of Yaton'te, and then go to
Ispeogee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](oah156.md)
