[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah09)  [Next](oah11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### Chapter II

1\. JEHOVIH said: By virtue of My presence created I the seen and the
unseen worlds. And I commanded man to name them; and man called the seen
worlds Corper, and the unseen worlds Es; and the inhabitants of Corpor,
man called corporeans. But the inhabitants of Es he called sometimes
es'eans and sometimes spirits, and sometimes angels.

2\. Jehovih said: I created the earth, and fashioned it, and placed it
in the firmament; and by My presence brought man forth a living being. A
corporeal body gave I him that he might learn corporeal things; and
death I made that he might rise in the firmament and inherit My etherean
worlds.

3\. To es I gave dominion over corpor; with es I filled all place in the
firmament. But corpor I made into earths and moons and stars and suns;
beyond number made I them, and I caused them to float in the places I
allotted to them.

4\. Es I divided into two parts, and I commanded man to name them, and
he called one etherea and the other atmospherea. These are the three
kinds of worlds I created; but I gave different densities to
atmospherean worlds, and different densities to the etherean worlds.

5\. For the substance of My etherean worlds I created Ethe, the MOST
RARIFIED. Out of ethe made I them. And I made ethe the most subtle of
all created things, and gave to it power and place, not only by itself,
but also power to penetrate and exist within all things, even in the
midst of the corporeal worlds. And to ethe gave I dominion over both
atmospherea and corpor.

6\. In the ALL HIGHEST places created I the etherean worlds, and I
fashioned them of all shapes and sizes, similar to My corporeal worlds.
But I made the etherean worlds inhabitable both within and without, with
entrances and exits, in arches and curves, thousands of miles high and
wide, and overruled I them with ALL PERFECT mechanism; and in colors and
movable chasms and mountains in endless change and brilliancy. To them I
gave motions, and orbits and courses of their own; independent made I
them, and above all other worlds in potency and majesty.

7\. Neither created I one etherean world like another in size or density
or in component parts, but everyone differing from another, and with a
glory matchless each in its way.

8\. Atmospherean worlds I also created in the firmament, and I gave them
places and orbits and courses for themselves. But atmospherean worlds I
created shapeless and void of fixed form, for they are in process of
condensation or dissolution, being intermediate in condition betwixt My
etherean and My corporeal worlds. Of three degrees of density created I
them, and I commanded man to name them, and one he called A'ji, and one
Ji'ay, and one Nebulæ.

9\. But all of them are composed of the same substances, being like the
earth, but rarified. Nor is there on the earth or in it one thing, even
iron, or lead, or gold, or water, or oil, or stones, but the same things
are in My atmospherean worlds. As I have given light to the earth so
have I given light to many of them; and all such have I commanded man to
call comets. And even so named he them.

10\. And I also created atmospherea around about my corporeal worlds;
together made I them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah11.md)
