[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah164)  [Next](oah166.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXX

1\. SO for one day there was great rejoicing in Mouru; and when it was
ended, and the people retired to their respective places, the lights
were raised for business.

2\. Fragapatti said to Athrava: Come thou and resume Jehovih's throne.
As for myself, I will go now and establish another habitation in
Zeredho; and after that I will visit the Lord Gods of the divisions of
the earth.

3\. And when I have completed these labors, it will be near the end of
the dawn of dan. See to it, therefore, <span id="page_257">p. 257</span>
that all who wish to prepare for the third resurrection be duly
notified.

4\. And now, when Fragapatti had risen up from the throne, swift
messengers were announced from Sethantes, the inhabitor of earth. The
marshals were commanded to admit them; and presently the swift
messengers came in, greeting in Jehovih's name. They said: Sethantes
sends love to Fragapatti. When the resurrection of this dawn is come,
Sethantes will visit Mouru. And he will also bring with him Onesyi,
first deliverer of Brides and Bridegrooms of the first harvest of the
earth.

5\. When the message had been thus delivered, there was great rejoicing
in the capital. Fragapatti thanked the messengers in the Father's name,
and after that, the swift messengers withdrew.

6\. Presently, Fragapatti withdrew also, taking Hoab and Hapacha with
him; and when they departed out of the capital, and came to the
avalanza, the marshals had the accompanying hosts assembled, ten
millions, and so they entered the ship, and, amidst music and
rejoicings, they departed, going direct to the kingdom of Yima, Lord God
of Shem and her heavens.

7\. Yima had been notified of their coming, and had had a piedmazr (a
row-boat) made, in order to go and meet them. The piedmazr was
sufficient to carry ten thousand musicians, thirty thousand rowers, and
two hundred thousand travelers; and such were the numbers who embarked
on her to meet Fragapatti.

8\. Three years had now elapsed since Yima set out to establish the
Father's kingdom in the heavens of Shem; and, save through messengers,
little was known in Mouru of Yima's labors. Fragapatti had said of him:
Yima liveth with the Voice; he cannot err.

9\. In the seventh diaphragm of the east Apie, the vessels met, and
Fragapatti opened the lower division of the avalanza, and took in Yima's
boat and crew and passengers, amidst music and rejoicings. And, after
due ceremonies, Fragapatti caused the avalanza to proceed, conducted by
Leaps, one of Yima's messengers, and they proceeded rapidly until they
arrived at Astoreth, the capital of Yima's kingdom in atmospherea, first
grade, and resting upon the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI](oah166.md)
