[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah113)  [Next](oah115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III

1\. FOR two years the migrants tarried in the countries they visited;
going much about, showing themselves, and relating a history of the
country whence they came.

2\. Thence spake the Lord to the migrants in their respective places,
saying: Behold, the time is come for your departure. Gather together, O
my beloved, and return to your own country, and there relate all the
glories that your God hath shown you.

3\. So they departed, and returned to their own respective places. And,
behold, it took four years to accomplish the journey.

4\. Now during the travel of the migrants the Lord spake to them every
day; through the I'hin priests spake the Lord unto them.

5\. The Lord said: Keep together, O my beloved. I will lead you; ye
shall not be lost.

6\. Nevertheless, the journey was so long that many lost faith, and were
not heedful of the words of God. And some of them strayed off amongst
the I'huans, the barbarians, and were lost.

7\. Of the six thousand migrants, there were lost ten tribes; in all,
three hundred and eighty-six people, men and women. Some were lost in
one place and some in another.

8\. God said: Sing ye songs of lamentations to my chosen who are lost,
the Faithists in Jehovih. For this also shall become a matter of record
to the end of the world.

9\. Nevertheless, a time shall come when the Lord your God shall reveal
the mystery of this day.

10\. So, when the people had returned to their respective places, behold
they all sang songs of lamentation <span id="fr_29"></span>[3](#fn_29.md)
for the tribes that were lost.

11\. God said: I have shown you the <span id="page_134b">p. 134b</span>
far-off people; I have marked out the road. Keep the road open; keep the
travel open between the great countries I have shown you.

12\. Every eleven years shall one expedition start to the far-off
countries. And, if perchance ye find my chosen, bring them home.

13\. And on all the camping places of your journey shall ye build an
altar to the Lord your God. In a circle shall ye build it; and the
congregation shall sit in the circle thereof, but the priest shall sit
in the midst. And, behold, I will speak in the mouth of my priest words
of wisdom and comfort.

14\. But, in all your journeys, keep aloof from the I'huans, the
barbarians, the man-eaters. For they kept not my commandments; nor
preserved they their seed through the circumcision.

15\. But they mixed with the Druks (ground people) and went down in
darkness (barbarism).

16\. Keep ye away from them, O my beloved; carry with you, on all your
expeditions, I'hin priests, the sacred people, the mound-builders.

17\. In your journeys ye shall encounter your brethren coming and going,
who dwell in the far-off countries. That ye may distinguish them, keep
secret the sacred password <span id="fr_30"></span>[4](#fn_30.md) and the
rites of my chavah (order).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[133b:3](oah114.htm#fr_29.md) In all these
countries, to wit, China, India, Egypt, and Persia, there is still in
existence a legend that, long ago, the chosen of God went on a long
journey in search of their ancient brethren, and then ten tribes were
lost in the wilderness. A similar record is in the Ezra Bible, calling
the lost tribes Jews, who were in fact FAITHISTS IN THE GREAT SPIRIT.
Further on in this work it is shown how Ezra obtained his version from
the Egyptian and Persian records. In this work it is also related what
became of the lost tribes, who became the Persians (Parsa'yans) in fact,
whence sprang the great Zarathustra (Zoroaster).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[134b:4](oah114.htm#fr_30.md) E-O-IH, or Je-ho-vih,
was the master's word amongst the ancient Jews. The Chinese said
Che-hih-no, in their ceremonies, being the same phonetic word. The
Algonquins (North American Indians) said U-he-no-win, accented on the
second and fourth syllables. The Chinese word is accented on the first
syllable. The Algonquin "U" is, most likely, without any signification.
The word Git-che-ma-ne-to of the Algonquins means servant to the Great
Spirit, as the English word Lord means Land God, or and underling of
Jehovih.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](oah115.md)
