[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah105)  [Next](oah107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128a">p. 128a</span>

# Book of Thor, Son of Jehovih

BEING THE RECORDS OF THOR, APOLLO'S SUCCESSOR, ON THE EARTH AND IN HER
HEAVENS, FROM THE ARC OF MOS TO THE ARC OF DAE, IN THE ETHEREAN HEAVENS,
AND OF THREE THOUSAND TWO HUNDRED YEARS.

### Chapter I

1\. THOR, Orian Chief of Don'ga, in etherea, God of Palla, Surveyor of
Yorretz and Thassa, God of Galeb, Receiver of Saffer and Hoesonya, God
of Wartz and Lo and Yisain, Counselor in the ethereal worlds Hituna,
Ctaran, Seeing, Sethawan and Hababak, greeting:

2\. In the Holy Council of Gods and Goddesses in Don'ga, the voice of
Jehovih came to Thor, saying:

3\. My Son, behold the red star, the earth; she courseth from Mos to
Dae, and now draggeth in the swamps of Asath. Behold, thou shalt deliver
her through thy dominions, three thousand two hundred years. Even now
approacheth the dawn of Ghan. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md)

4\. Thor spoke before the Holy Council, on Jehovih's etherean throne,
saying: Behold the young world, the earth, cometh our way. For three
thousand two hundred years she will journey in the fields of Don'ga.

5\. Then, the Holy Council deliberated on the matters of the earth and
her heavens, and all other corporeal worlds that were to pass through
Don'ga for three thousand years. And it was found that the dawn of dan
would fall upon the earth first of all.

6\. Then called Thor for the swift <span id="page_129a">p. 129a</span>
messengers that course the firmament in the regions of Apperwaith, the
roadway of the earth's past history. And the swift messengers came and
laid their report before the throne of Jehovih, as to what world the
earth was, and the harvests of angels she had yielded up to the
emancipated heavens.

7\. When their reports were finished and deliberated on by the Holy
Council, Thor, Son of Jehovih, said:

8\. For further knowledge as to the present condition of this world, the
earth, it is my command that Yathai, God of Gammotto, choose one million
volunteers; and, in a airiata, proceed to the earth and her heavens to
visit her God and Lords, and ascertain the condition of their angels and
mortals, and report back in Don'ga.

9\. So, Yathai, God of Gammotto, in etherea, was appointed for this
purpose, and he provided an airiata, and took with him one million
ethereans, and proceeded to the earth and her heavens, as commanded.

10\. And Yathai came to the throne of God in Gau, in atmospherea; and
God sent to his Lords an invitation to come also. And there came seventy
and two of them.

11\. God said to Yathai: Behold, the earth and these atmospherean
heavens are full of false Lords and false Gods. Yathai inquired how many
there were? God said: More than thirty thousand Gods and one hundred and
sixty thousand Lords. Behold, in every great city on earth is there a
false God or a false Lord, and he hath a small heavenly kingdom of his
own, even on the earth. And the spirits of the dead of that place are
his slaves, for his own exaltation.

12\. And in many of these heavenly kingdoms there are wars and anarchy
(hells), where the angels torment one another endlessly. Nor will these
false Gods and false Lords and their subjects admit that there are
higher heavens than their own.

13\. The spirits of the newly dead are captured and kept in ignorance of
Jehovih and His vast creations; but made to bow in adoration and worship
to the false Lord or false God. And these again, being in contiguity to
mortals, inspire them to the same worship. Which fits them in time of
death to fall as slaves into the dominion of him whom they worshipped.

14\. The wars in heaven have inspired mortals to wars on earth; so that,
all around the world, everlasting battles are going on.

15\. And such as are slain on earth-battlefields are born in spirit in
chaos, not knowing they are dead (as to the <span id="page_130a">p.
130a</span> earth), and, so, they linger on the battle-fields, still
battling imaginary foes.

16\. All over the earth are these battle-fields covered with spirits in
chaos and with the spirits of druks, and druj, and Yaks, and ground
people, who know nothing more than the beasts in the field.

17\. Return, therefore, O Yathai, to thy Orian Chief, Thor, Son of
Jehovih, and say to him: The God of earth is powerless to rescue her
angels and mortals from the great darkness upon them. And beseech him in
Jehovih's name to come and deliver me and my kingdoms.

18\. Yathai inquired as to the races of men on earth, and as to the
times of their termination.

19\. God said: In twelve thousand four hundred years the I'hin race, the
mound builders, will come to an end. And in that day the Ghans will have
triumphed over all the lands and waters of the earth.

20\. When Yathai had obtained the required information, and also learned
the localities of the divisions of the earth and her heavens, he
departed in his airiata, with his companions, and visited all the chief
places, and then returned to Don'ga, in etherea, before Thor, Son of
Jehovih, to whom he reported all he had learned as to the condition of
the earth and her heavens.

21\. Then came the Light of Jehovih to Thor, saying: My Son, take thou a
sufficient host of ethereans, and go to the red star and her heavens,
and deliver them in My name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[128a:1](oah106.htm#fr_25.md) See the Lords' Fourth
Book, 1st chap., 11th v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah107.md)
