[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah14)  [Next](oah16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. JEHOVIH said: Let a sign be given to the inhabitants of the earth
that they may comprehend dan'ha in the firmament of heaven. For even as
I bequeathed to the earth a time for creating the living, and a time for
angels to come and partake of the first fruits of mortality and
immortality, so shall man at certain times and season receive testimony
from My hosts in heaven.

2\. And Jehovih caused the earth, and the family of the sun to travel in
an orbit, the circuit of which requireth of them four million seven
hundred thousand years. And he placed in the line of the orbit, at
distances of three thousand years, etherean lights, the which places, as
the earth passeth through, angels from the second heaven come into its
corporeal presence. As Embassadors they come, in companies of hundreds
and thousands and tens of thousands, and these are called the etherean
hosts of the Most High.

3\. Not as single individuals come they; not for a single individual
mortal come they.

4\. And Jehovih gave this sign to man on earth; which is to say: In the
beginning of the light of dan'ha, the spirits of the newly dead shall
have power to take upon themselves the semblance of corporeal bodies,
and appear and talk face to face with mortals. Every three thousand
years gave Jehovih this sign on earth, that those who learned the powers
and capacities of such familiar spirits, might bear testimony in regard
to the origin of man on earth.

Jehovih said: And when it shall come to pass in any of the times of
dan'ha that these signs are manifest, man shall know that the hosts of
the Most High come soon after. Let him who will become wise, enumerate
the great lights of My serpent, for in such times I set aside things
that are old, and establish My chosen anew.

5\. In the time of earth, when man was brought forth from mortal to
immortal life, the earth passed beyond se'mu and the angels of heaven
remained with corporeal man, but not in the semblance of mortals, but as
spirits; and by virtue of their presence, strove to make man wise and
upright before Jehovih. Upon the earth the number of such angels was
millions. To these angels spake Jehovih saying:

6\. Behold the work ye have taken in hand! It was commanded to you all,
to partake of all the fruits of the earth save of the fruit of the tree
of life, which is of the knowledge of the earth and heaven, lest ye lose
your inheritance in etherea.

7\. Behold, ye now have sons and daughters on the earth; by your love to
them are ye become bound spirits of the lower heaven. Until ye redeem
them in wisdom and power even to the sixth generation ye shall not again
arise and inherit My emancipated heavens.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

8\. To which end ye shall be co-workers with one another in system and
order. In My name shall ye become an organic body and known as the
heaven of the earth, or lower heaven, which shall travel with the earth.

9\. And I will allot unto you a Chief, who is wise in experience in
founding heavenly kingdoms; and he shall appoint, from amongst you,
officers, and messengers, and ashars, and asaphs, and es'enaurs and ye
shall be numbered and apportioned unto your labor and places like unto
My other lower heavens on other worlds.

10\. And he who is Chief shall be called God of this heaven and the
earth, unto his making bestow I them.

11\. And God shall have a Council and throne within his heavenly city;
and the place shall be called Hored, because it is the first kingdom of
God in this firmament.

12\. And God shall rule on his throne, for it is his; and his Council
shall rule with him; in My name shall they have dominion over angels and
mortals belonging to the earth.

13\. And God shall appoint Chiefs under him who shall go down and dwell
on the earth with mortals; and such Chiefs' labor shall be with mortals
for their resurrection. And these Chiefs shall be called Lords, for they
are Gods of land, which is the lowest rank of My commissioned Gods.

14\. And God and his Lords shall have dominion from two hundred years to
a thousand or more years; but never more than three thousand years.
According to the regions of Dan (light) into which I bring the earth, so
shall be the terms of the office of My Gods and My Lords.

15\. And God and his Lords shall raise up officers to be their
successors; by him and them shall they be appointed and crowned in My
name.

16\. At the termination of the dominion of My God and his Lords they
shall gather together in these, My bound heavens, all such angels as
have been prepared in wisdom and strength for resurrection to My
etherean kingdoms. And these angels shall be called Brides and
Bridegrooms to Jehovih, for they are Mine and in My service.

17\. And to God and his Lords, with the Brides and Bridegrooms, will I
send down from etherea ships in the time of dan; by My etherean Gods and
Goddesses shall the ships descend to these heavens, and receive God and
His Lords with the Brides and Bridegrooms, and carry them up to the
exalted regions I have prepared for them.

18\. And all such as ascend shall be called a Harvest unto Me, through
My God and Lords. And the time of My Harvests shall be according to each
dan, which is two hundred years, four hundred years, six hundred years,
and five hundred years; and these shall be called My lesser cycles
because they are the times of the tables of prophecy which I give unto
My servants.

19\. But at no other times, nor in any other way, shall My Harvests
ascend to My emancipated worlds in etherea. Seven dans have I created
for each and every dan'ha; and six generations of mortals have I given
unto each dan.

20\. The angels understood the commandments of Jehovih according to
their knowledge in the etherean heavens; being heirs of other planets,
and having died in infancy, and having matured in the es worlds; but
they understood not the Creator according to the practice of the lower
heavenly kingdoms. Wherefore their knowledge was incomplete.

21\. Jehovih said: I condemn ye not because ye have become joint
procreators with the asuans; for ye have done two services unto Me;
which are to teach yourselves corporeal things, that ye may understand
and sympathize with corporeans, and, secondly, because ye have caused
the earth to become peopled with such as are capable of immortality.

22\. Behold ye now what shall happen on the earth: such as are of your
flesh and kin who cohabit together shall rise in wisdom and virtue; but
such of them as cohabit with the asuans will bring forth heirs in the
descending grade of life. The first shall bring forth heirs unto
everlasting life; but the second shall bring forth heirs that shall go
out in darkness.

23\. In the dominion of which matters your God and Lords will instruct
you, that ye may, by inspiration and otherwise, learn to control the
behavior of mortals unto everlasting life. And that these labors be not
too severe upon you, I created the dans and dan'has in the firmament,
wherein ye may be relieved from the watch by other angels from other
worlds coming to exchange with you.

24\. This also do I put upon you: That to rule over mortals to virtue,
by your own wills governing them in all things, is contrary to my
commandments. For what honor hath any man if made to do a thing?

25\. But ye shall give mortals of My <span id="page_13">p. 13</span>
light, leaving them to choose. Better is it for them suffer some than to
grow up in ignorance of the stings of disobedience.

26\. Behold, I make this a willing service on your part: because ye have
bound your affections on the earth, to your own kin, ye willingly become
guardian angels over mortals. Yet I made not a separate law unto you; as
it is with you, so shall it be with the spirits of these mortals when
they are born into the es world: They will also desire to become
guardian angels over their mortal kin.

27\. But these spirits, never having known My higher heavens, will be
unsuitable for the office of ashars; they would be but the blind leading
the blind.

28\. To prevent which, God and the Lords shall provide these spirits in
the first resurrection with places to dwell in; and with occupations and
opportunities for education. For I desire them not to remain bound to
the earth, but to rise up and inherit My etherean kingdoms.

29\. And in this also shall ye be discreet in governing them, giving
them the light of My heavens with some liberty to choose and to perfect
themselves. Otherwise they would only be slaves in heaven. According to
their weakness or strength, so shall ye provide for these new spirits
entering my es world.

30\. Therefore such of you as are appointed by My God and My Lords as
guardians over mortals shall be called Ashars, and ye shall report to
your respective Lords, according to the section of the earth where ye
may be. Of many watches shall be the ashars.

31\. And such of you as are appointed to receive the spirits of the dead
into heaven shall be called Asaphs, and ye shall report to your
respective Lords and their kingdoms.

32\. And the ashars shall make a record of every mortal, of the grade of
his wisdom and good works; and when a mortal dieth, and his spirit is
delivered to the asaphs, the record shall be delivered with him; and the
asaph, receiving, shall deliver such spirit, with the record into such
place in these heavens as is adapted to his grade, where he shall be put
to labor and to school, according to the place of the resurrections
which I created.

33\. As ye shall thus become organic in heaven, with rulers, and
teachers, and physicians; and with capitals, and cities, and provinces;
and with hospitals, and nurseries, and schools, and factories, even so
shall ye ultimately inspire man on the earth to the same things.

34\. And mortals that are raised up to dominion over mortals shall be
called kings and emperors. As My Gods and My Lords are called My Sons,
so shall kings and emperors be called sons of God; through him shall
they be raised up to their places, and given dominion unto My glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah16)
