[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah132)  [Next](oah134.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter V

1\. THUS the Lord established the five peoples who were saved from Pan;
and he commanded them to preserve Panic words in their respective
countries, and they so preserved them, many of which exist to this day.

2\. Here followeth, then, what became of these I'hins, to wit:

3\. Those that came to Guatama survived twenty-one thousand years, and
then became extinct as to tribes.

4\. Those that came to Jaffeth survived twenty-one thousand years, and
then became extinct as to tribes.

5\. Those that came to Shem survived twelve thousand years, and then
became extinct by amalgamation.

6\. That that came to Ham survived twenty-one thousand years, and then
became extinct by amalgamation, and even after this Jehovih preserved
them in all the world as a scattered people.

<span id="page_153b">p. 153b</span>

7\. Those of Guatama attained to one thousand large cities, and three
thousand small cities, being more than four million souls. And they
never had any king or queen, or other ruler, save the Lord, who
ministered unto them through the city fathers. And they retained their
sacred name of Guatama to the last; but the I'huans called them
Oech'lo'pan, signifying, people of another world. (continent)

8\. And in course of time they became diminutive, and desired not to
marry. And there came great darkness (ocgokok) on the earth, with
falling ashes, and heat, and fevers; and so the Lord took them up to
heaven.

9\. Those of Jaffeth attained to two thousand large cities, and seven
thousand small ones, being more than eight million souls. And they
retained the name Jaf-fa, to the last; but the I'huans called them Tua
Git, signifying, people of spirit light.

10\. And there came a'ji on the earth, and it touched them with
impotency, and they brought forth no more heirs; so the Lord took them
home.

11\. Those of Shem attained to six hundred large cities, and two
thousand small cities, being more than two million souls. Neither had
they any king, but served the Lord through the city fathers. And they
retained their name, Shem, to the last; but the I'huans called them
Sri-vede-iyi, signifying, people of the true light, woman-like. And
impotence came upon them, and they disappeared, even as a drop of water
in the sunlight, and no man knew when they ceased to be.

12\. But hoping to preserve their seed to the Lord, many of them married
with the I'huans; but their children became I'huans also, neither having
the silken hair nor the musical voices of the I'hins, nor the light of
the upper heavens.

13\. Those of Ham attained to one thousand two hundred large cities, and
three thousand small cities, being four million souls. But, being of
mixed colors, they did not become impotent. But they broke the law of
God more than all other Faithists, being of warm blood; and they mixed
greatly with the I'huans. And they had no kings nor queens, serving the
Lord only, through the city fathers. And they retained the name of Ham
<span id="page_154b">p. 154b</span> to the last, when they ceased to
exist as a separate people, because of their amalgamation with the
I'huans.

14\. The tribes that went in the two ships to the north land (Japan), no
man could draw the line, after a thousand years, betwixt them and the
I'huans, for they mingled therewith, and were lost, as I'hins.
Nevertheless, they redeemed the barbarians into wisdom and peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](oah134.md)
