[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah111)  [Next](oah113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128b">p. 128b</span>

# The Lords' Fourth Book

BEING COTEMPORANEOUS WITH THE BOOK OF THOR, CYCLE OF THOR, SON OF
JEHOVIH. AS THE LATTER BOOK IS OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER HEAVENS, SO IS
THE LORDS' BOOK OF THE LOWER HEAVENS AND THE EARTH, BOTH BOOKS BEING FOR
THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME.

### Chapter I

1\. BY altars and temples, and by idols and images, and by painted signs
and engraved words, God foresaw that the knowledge of one generation
could be handed down to the next. And though all these things are false
in fact, as a written word is not a word, but an image of an idea which
hath been spoken, so by symbols conveyed God the living truth.

2\. God said: Behold, with my sacred people have I established myself in
written words. Now hath it come to pass that all the races of men on
earth shall be made to know me.

3\. God commanded man to make stone and wooden images, and engravings
also, of everything upon the earth; and man so made them according to
his own knowledge.

4\. God said: As every living creature hath a name, so shall the image
thereof and the engraving thereof have the same name. And even so shall
it be with all things on the earth, and in the waters thereof, and in
the air above the earth; the image and the engravings shall have the
same names, even as the real things themselves.

5\. And God sent his angels down to man, to inspire him in the
workmanship of images and engravings, and <span id="page_129b">p.
129b</span> man thus accomplished the commandments of God.

6\. And these were the first writings since the flood, other than such
as were kept secret amongst the I'hins. And of this manner were the
writings, to wit:

7\. A picture of a man was a man; a picture of a tree was a tree; a
picture of a bird was a bird; and even so was everything represented by
its own name and image.

8\. Then God said: When thou hast made the picture of a spear, behold it
is a spear. And when thou desirest to show which way a man goeth, thou
shalt add to the graven image the likeness of a spear; and the way it
pointeth, shall show the way man goeth. Even so shalt thou express the
going of everything on earth and in heaven.

9\. Thus man made a written language, and in every region of the earth.
By many men were these things done; according to the light of God upon
them, so accomplished they the written languages of thousands of tribes
of men.

10\. God said: This shall be called the Panic language
(Ah-ce-o-ga) <span id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26), because it is made of
earthly images. And, in after ages, whoever desireth to find the first
written words of man, shall have recourse to the pictures of all things
on earth, and in the waters, and in the air above the earth.

11\. God said: As in the olden time man named all things according to
their own spoken words and sounds uttered, so in the days of Thor came
the written words of everything on earth and in heaven.

12\. When man had written the name of all things, ONE only had he not
written, even the name of his Creator.

13\. God said: Even that also shalt thou write. Then man inquired: O
Lord, how can I find a word to express the Creator?

14\. God said: Many tribes have I raised upon the earth, and, behold,
they have all written the names of all things, save only the Creator. Go
to, therefore, and write thou His name also.

15\. Man said: Alas, O my God! I know no name, save the names I have
already made. If I could hear the Creator, or see Him, then could I
write His name.

<span id="page_130b">p. 130b</span>

16\. God said: Thou hast named the wind (wh-sh!), which thou hast not
seen. Name thou thy Creator. And His name shall comprehend all things,
far and near, seen and unseen.

17\. Then man drew a circle and called it O, for it represented that
which was without beginning or end, and which contained all within it.
Then man drew a line cutting through the circle from east to west, to
represent the light of the east traveling to the west. Then man drew a
line from below upward, cutting the circle at right angles with the
horizontal, to represent the one road of all things, from the bottom
upward forever. The first line man called E, for it was the same as the
wind speaketh in the leaves. But the second line he called IH, for it
represented that unseen shaft that cutteth all things in twain.

18\. And when man had completed the engraving, he called it E-O-IH!

19\. God said: In this, thy symbol, thou hast found the way of a true
square (true cross) and the four quarters of the world. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

20\. Keep thou His name and the image thereof a secret betwixt the
rab'bahs and thy God. Neither shalt thou utter it aloud, for it is
sacred upon the earth.

21\. Betwixt thee and thy Creator standeth thy God, who is Lord of
heaven and earth. Behold, I am the key of life and death; through me,
thy Lord, shalt thou unlock all the mysteries of heaven and earth.

22\. Neither shall my rab'bah, nor my prophets, call on the name of any
spirit, save the Lord, who is God. The words I give corporeally I have
recorded in heaven; neither can man alter my records and make them
accord with that which is written above. But in the lapse of time I
provide seers and prophets, to whom I can reveal to mortals the things
of heaven.

23\. This have I spoken to Jehovih for thee: Man shall measure Thy hand
upon him; remember Thy eye upon him; seek for Thy wisdom within him; and
be thankful for Thy good things before him; to consider the little good
of them that deny Thee; the conceit of them that claim to be self-made;
and the folly of uttering other glories than Thine, and yet to mention
them not; for these are the attaining of wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[129b:\*](oah112.htm#fr_26) Earth Language

<span id="fn_27"></span>[130b:1](oah112.htm#fr_27) See tablet Se'moin,
Book of Saphah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah113)
