[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah114)  [Next](oah116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

1\. HEAR the word of thy God, O man, and be considerate in thy little
learning; interpreting the records of the ancients rather by the spirit
than by the word.

2\. Wherein it was constantly commanded, in the ancient sacred writings,
to avoid GOING DOWN TO DESTRUCTION, and they obeyed not the commandments
of the Lord, behold ye the light of your God in this day.

3\. For the I'huans, even before the flood, were in the first place born
capable of everlasting life. But they mixed with the druks until the
seed of the spirit of eternal life became exhausted, and they brought
forth heirs incapable of self-sustenance in heaven. Hence it was said of
them: They went down in darkness.

4\. Now after awhile a new race of I'huans was brought forth, and they
were at first capable of All Light and <span id="page_135b">p.
135b</span> of everlasting life. But they also kept not the commandments
of the Lord; but also mixed with the druks (the ground people), and they
descended rapidly on the road of everlasting death (as a race).

5\. But the Lord your God created the new race, the Ghans, capable of an
upward inspiration.

6\. And he gave unto them the same commandments, to preserve their seed
from the races beneath them, lest they go down in darkness also.

7\. To which end thy Lord gave unto them certain rites and ceremonies
and pass-words, in addition to the circumcision, which would enable them
to distinguish with whom they should mingle according to the
commandments of God.

8\. Behold ye then the testimony which I lay before you, that ye may
perceive the wisdom of my ways: For it wil be said by some that there is
a law of evolution whereby man riseth from a lower to a higher state as
the earth groweth older.

9\. But I say unto you, there is no such law. Save but by the labor of
thy Lord and thy God, through their angels, man riseth not upward; but
he goeth the other way.

10\. In which matter, behold, I have left many nations and peoples
before you to this day, who are on the downward road. And ye have
corporeal records before you, showing you that in times past, the same
countries were inhabited by a higher race.

11\. For thus Jehovih created man, to go as readily down the mountain as
up it.

12\. Behold, all resurrection cometh from above; all aspiration cometh
from the Lord and his angels. For man, being in the flesh, goeth rather
to the desires of the flesh than to the spirit.

13\. As the light of the sun causeth sleep to pass away, so doth the
light of Jehovih, through His Gods and Lords and angels, cause the soul
of men to awake to the possibilities of everlasting life in the exalted
heavens.

14\. This also have I, thy Lord, proven in the world: that they who fall
from the light of the Father, lose their symmetry and beauty of
proportions.

15\. Behold, in the time of Thor man <span id="page_136b">p. 136b</span>
considered not the shapeliness of his spouse, nor the mold of her face,
nor the clearness of her voice, nor her wit, nor conversational powers.

 

<span id="img_13600"></span> ![](img/13600.jpg)  
Plate 6.--SEMUAN FIRMAMENT

Jehovih said: Behold I caused all living creatures to gestate in the
darkness. And this shall be the testimony to the end of the world, that,
when I created life on the face of the earth, she travelled in my
se'muan firmament. See page 8, Book of Jehovih.

 

16\. By all strategems, and devices, and rites and ceremonies, have the
Gods and Lords labored to make man mindful of the way of resurrection
through the tree of life.

17\. But even in this day, behold, the mother bartereth off her daughter
to a rich man; and the man seeketh a spouse of wasted flesh for the sake
of gold. And they bring forth heirs of crime.

18\. And man crieth out: He cannot be a good God that createth these!

19\. But I say unto you, they keep not my commandments; they have gone
astray in the wilderness.

20\. Be wise, O man; from that which is before you, remember the times
of the ancients, and the labor of the Lord your God.

21\. In the beginning of the cycle of Thor, the Lord opened up many ways
for the deliverance <span id="page_137b">p. 137b</span> of the tribes of
men on the earth; and man prospered in the way of God for a long season.

22\. Then darkness came upon the races of men; millions of them returned
to a state of savagery. And angels of darkness came upon the earth,
verily taking upon themselves the semblance of corporeal forms, and
dwelling with mortals, and engaging in practices whereof it is unlawful
to write or speak.

23\. So that, at the termination of three thousand years, the lands of
the earth were covered with darkness.

24\. And Jehovih cast a vail over the face of the sun, and it shone not
in brightness for many years.

END OF THE LORDS' FOURTH BOOK.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah116)
