[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah176)  [Next](oah178) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLII

1\. AND now the Lord Gods, and Lords and Gods, began to arrive in Mouru.
The marshals, and their officers and workmen, had extended the
landing-places for the hosts of ships; receivers had been appointed and
allotted their various places. Heralds and messengers had been provided
with places of announcement; and lines of intercommunion had been laid,
so that the words of heralds and messengers could be heard by all the
millions in waiting.

2\. Be it known, O angels and mortals, such is the glory of Jehovih's
works that, stand where ye will, His kingdoms are always seeming above.
As ye of the earth look upward and behold the stars, so they that live
on the stars look upward to see the earth. If, therefore, ye were
receiving messengers from the stars, it would seem to you that they came
downward; but to them, as if they rose upward, even until near the
landing-place, when it would be downward to them also. Because the feet
of a mortal or the feet of an angel are on the foundation of his place,
and because his head standeth in the opposite way from his feet.

3\. First came Ardi'atta, Goddess over the spirits that had been
delivered out of the hells of Aoasu by Fragapatti and Hoab, housed in
Zeredho and Haraiti. And with her, her successor, Gaipon, manager of the
hosts. Ardi'atta brought one thousand and three hundred millions of
souls in her ship, mostly visitors who had been delivered out of hell.
Besides these, were twenty millions raised to light, clothed as Brides
and Bridegrooms of Jehovih. These latter were the harvest of Ardi'atta,
and in her charge. The receivers of her ship stationed it in its place,
and then the receivers of her hosts conducted them to their places.

4\. And now came E'chad, Lord God of Arabin'ya, in his ship, with more
than four thousand million souls, half of whom were Brides and
Bridegrooms. His ship was received by the proper officers, and stationed
in its place; and his hosts received by the proper persons, and
conducted to their respective places. With the Brides and Bridegrooms
E'chad entered the south wing of the capital; and E'chad's successor was
with the visiting hosts. When E'chad entered before the throne,
Fragapatti saluted him on the sign JEHOVIH'S REST, and E'chad answered
in THE GLORY OF EVENING!

5\. Before the hosts of E'chad were landed and placed, there came
Ots-ha-ta, Lord of North Oceya, with his successor, in a ship of thirty
millions, of whom Ots-ha-ta had two million Brides and Bridegrooms. His
ship was received and stationed in its place; and his hosts received and
assigned to their places.

6\. In the meantime, Kow'anea, God of South Guatama, came in his ship,
with his successor, bringing seven hundred million souls, of whom
Kow'anea had sixty million Brides and Bridegrooms. And they were
received by the proper officers and assigned to their places.

7\. Hardly had Kow'anea landed, when Yaton'te came, with his successor
and his hosts. Yaton'te's ship was the most beautiful of all that had
yet arrived. His hosts were four thousand million souls; but of Brides
and Bridegrooms he had but thirty millions. Him Fragapatti saluted on
the sign of STAR OF THE WEST, and Yaton'te answered in the sign of the
GOLDEN CIRCLE! He and his hosts were then assigned their places.

8\. Now came M'wing'mi, God of South Oceya, and his little ship was
laden with four hundred million souls, and he had three million Brides
and Bridegrooms. His ship was received and stationed in its place, and
his hosts received and stationed in their places.

9\. Next came Soo'fwa, God of Japan and her heavens. His was the most
brilliant of all the ships, and he had three thousand five hundred
million souls aboard, of whom two hundred millions were Brides and
Bridegrooms. His ship was received and stationed, and his hosts also;
and when he entered before the throne, Fragapatti saluted him on the
sign of BEFORE THE ANCIENTS! And Soo'fwa answered him in the sign of
LITTLE STAR!

10\. And now the most loved of all came, Uropa, Goddess of the
barbarians! Her ship was the swiftest and best trimmed, and she brought
one thousand million souls, of whom she had eighty million Brides and
Bridegrooms <span id="page_275">p. 275</span> as her harvest. When she
entered before the throne of Jehovih, leading in her Brides and
Bridegrooms, Fragapatti saluted on the sign, PERSISTENT FIRE! And Uropa
answered him in the sign, JEHOVIH'S TRUST!

11\. Now came great Ah'oan, Lord God of Jaffeth and her heavens. His
ship was the largest of all, and he brought five thousand million souls,
of whom nearly two thousand millions were Brides and Bridegrooms. When
he came before Jehovih's throne, Fragapatti saluted him on the sign, THE
POWER OF LOVE! Ah'oan answered him in the sign, EVERLASTING LIFE!

12\. And now the ship of Gir-ak-shi came in, bringing a thousand million
souls, of whom eighty millions were Brides and Bridegrooms.

13\. Besides there were seventy and six other Gods, from departments of
the grand divisions of the heavens, bringing, some five million souls
and some even twenty millions. And there were Lords of islands and Lords
of small places on the earth, who had also come in small ships,
bringing, some five and some ten million souls. And all these Gods and
Lords had Brides and Bridegrooms according to the place and number and
condition whence they came. And they were all received and stationed in
their proper places.

14\. Thus there came to Mouru upward of thirty thousand million
atmosphereans that had sprung up from the earth by Jehovih's will; and
of these there were ten thousand millions and eight hundred million
spirits prepared as Brides and Bridegrooms unto the Great Spirit.
Besides these, there were the hosts of Fragapatti, the ethereans, ten
millions, mostly Gods and Goddesses, and these formed the inner sacred
circle of the Holy Council. Next to these were their successors, ten
millions, who were to be the Holy Council of Mouru after the ascension.
And next outside of these were stationed the Lord Gods and their
attendants, behind whom stood their Brides and Bridegrooms. Next stood
the Gods and their attendants, and Brides and Bridegrooms; and then the
Lords, their attendants, and their Brides and Bridegrooms.

15\. And next outside of these stood the successors, the Gods and Lords,
with their attendants; and yet behind them, their visiting hosts. And
within and amongst them all, the musicians, the marshals, messengers,
swift messengers and heralds were assigned their respective places. But
so vast was the multitude of angels, and so great the glory, that one
might look thereon all day and not even see the millionth part; nor is
it possible for corporeal words to convey but a crude picture of the
magnificent scene.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](oah178)
