[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah180)  [Next](oah182.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III

1\. WHEN Asha had gone,I'hua'Mazda spake to Too'che, the virgin mother,
saying: Take thou thy child away and hide thyself, lest the king have
thee and thy child put to death. So Too'che departed with her child, and
hid away in another part of the city.

2\. Now Asha went direct to So-qi, the king, and related what had
transpired. When he had finished, the king said: According to the
histories of the ancients, when a God appeared amongst mortals, there
were signs and miracles. Thou hast told me only words. Go, therefore,
again to the child and say: The king desireth a miracle.

3\. Asha returned the next day, but lo and behold, woman and child were
gone, and not one of the neighbors knew whither. Asha said: If I go
before the king with this story, he will have me slain as an inventor of
lies. So he returned not to the king.

4\. But where Too'che and her child dwelt, there came a maker of songs,
by name Choe'jon, and he spake to <span id="page_177b">p. 177b</span>
the virgin, saying: Where is the child? She answered: He sleepeth in the
rack of hay; I will fetch him. So she brought the child from its bed of
new hay, fetching straws with its mantle, neither had the straws roots.

5\. I'hua'Mazda spake through the child whilst its own spirit slept,
saying: I came to thee, O Choe'jon; I brought thee hither, for thou
shalt frame songs about the virgin's babe. Choe'jon was frightened, but
nevertheless, he said: Can it be true, in this enlightened age! A
miracle! Shall I talk to thee,O child? Then I'hua'Mazda said:

6\. Behold, thou speakest not to the child, but to I'hua'Mazda. Take
these straws to thy writing-box and plant them in new earth, and in one
day they shall grow and bear ripe wheat. So Choe'jon departed and
planted the straws, and in one day, they grew and bore ripe wheat.

7\. Choe'jon had sung his songs before the king, and so had permission
of the court; and he went and told the king of the miracle. The king
said: The philosopher, Asha, told me about this child, and I sent him
for a miracle, but he returneth not. Thou hast come and said: Behold, a
miracle! What value is a miracle, save to those who witness it? Shall
thy king take a thing in belief only? Is not belief the fruit of
darkness? Go, therefore, again to the child and bring it before me, that
I may see with mine own eyes.

8\. Choe'jon returned to the place, but, lo and behold, virgin and child
were gone; neither knew the neighbors whither. But she was concealed in
another part of the city. And now there came before her one Os'shan, who
was weeping because of the apparent death of his son. To him I'hua'Mazda
spake, saying: Weep not, O man; I have healed thy son and also given
sight to thy daughter.

9\. Os'shan trembled at such words coming from the lips of a child, and
he ran away, finding of a truth his son was healed, and his daughter
restored to sight. In his joy he returned to the place, but the virgin
and child were gone. Os'shan was hostler to the king, and capable of
audience, and so he went and told the king of his good fortune.

10\. The king said: Asha, the philosopher, told me a fine story of this
child, but when I sent him for information, he returned not. Then <span
id="page_178b">p. 178b</span> came Choe'jon, the maker of songs, telling
me what he had witnessed. I sent him to have the mother and child
brought before me, but he returneth not. Now thou comest with a miracle,
such as were told in the dark ages. Go thou, therefore, and search the
city over till thou findest this wonder, and bring it before me.

11\. On the next day another man, even the king's brother's son, came
before the king, saying: This day I have seen such a wonder as would
have been marvelous in the days of angels and Gods. Behold, a little
child hath spoken to me such words of philosophy as made me tremble. And
yet, O king, thou knowest I am no coward. My house is hung with a
hundred scalps. Ay, and this child already proclaimeth itself
Zarathustra in communion with the God, I'hua'Mazda! To me it said: Why
killest thou the sons and daughters of thy God? Think not that thy
multitude of scalps are a glory before heaven. Behold, I am stronger
with my little finger than So-qi, thy king.

12\. So-qi, the king, said: It is enough. Save this mother and child be
brought at once before me, that I may behold the truth of these wonders,
every male child in Oas shall be cast into fire. The king's brother's
wife had a child, and the son's wife had a child, and they foresaw that
the decree of the the king touched them closely; so there went forth
many, searching for Too'che and Zarathustra.

13\. But the spirit, I'hua'Mazda, directed the mother to go beyond the
gates, and led her far off into the Forest of Goats, where the tribes of
Listians lived by fishing and hunting, and on goat's milk. I'hua'Mazda
talked to the virgin, saying: Twenty years shalt thou tarry in the
forest, fearing nought, for thy God will provide for thee. And when thy
son shall be larger and stronger than other men, behold, thy God will
manifest for the redemption of the races of men who are hunted and slain
for the glory of the kings.

14\. So it came about that the virgin and her son dwelt in the Forest of
Goats until Zarathustra was a large man and of mature years, and his
stature was equal to three ordinary men; nor could any number of men lay
him on his back. But because of <span id="page_179b">p. 179b</span> his
gentleness like a young goat, the tribes of the forest called him the
Lamb of God, signifying, strength and good-will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](oah182.md)
