[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah162)  [Next](oah164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXVIII

1\. THE Goddess Arieune slackened the speed of her arrow-ship to suit
that of Hoab's vessel; so, onward together they sped in a direct line,
propelled as a rocket is propelled, by constant emissions from the hulk;
the which expenditure is manufactured by the crew and commanders,
skilled in wielding Jehovih's elements. For as mortals find means to
traverse the ocean and to raise a balloon, so do the Gods and spirits
build and propel mightier vessels through the firmament, betwixt the
stars and over and under and beyond the sun.

2\. And when the ethereans, highest raised in the most subtle spheres,
send their ships coursing downward in the denser strata of a corporeal
world, their ready workmen take in ballast, and turn the fans, and
reverse the whirling screws to match the space and course of travel; for
which purpose men learn the trade, having rank <span id="page_250a">p.
250a</span> and grade according to proficiency. Many of them serving a
thousand years' apprenticeship, becoming so skilled in wielding the
elements, and in the knowledge of the decrees of density, that thousands
of millions of miles of roadways in heaven are as a well-learned book to
them.

3\. And, thus conversant with Jehovih's wide domains, they are eagerly
sought after, especially in emergent cases, or on journeys of millions
of years; for so well they know the requirements, the places of delight,
the dangers of vortices and of eddies and whirlpools, that when a God
saith: Take me hither, or yonder, they know the nearest way and the
power required.

4\. For, as Jehovih hath made icebergs on the corporeal ocean, dangerous
to ships; and heavy currents of trade winds, and currents in the oceans,
so are there in the etherean firmament currents and densities which the
well-skilled God can take advantage of, be it a slow trip of pleasure,
or a swift one on urgent business to suffering angels or mortals.

5\. And, be it God or Goddess, dispatched by a higher Council, to a
distant place suddenly, he, or she, must be already acquainted with
navigators sufficiently to know who to choose; and, likewise, understand
the matter well enough to lend a helping hand if required. For oft the
navigators have not swift messengers to pilot them; and yet a short
journey of fifty thousand miles may require as much skill as a million,
especially in descending to a corporeal world.

6\. Hoab knew, and he managed well. Following close on the arrow's trail
till they neared the ruined plateau, and then, amidst the broken
currents, Arieune dropped alongside, perceiving Hoab's less wieldy
vessel, and made fast. She said to Hoab:

7\. Behold, we are near the place. Then Hoab asked: How foundest thou a
knot in such a wasted country? Arieune answered him:

8\. When Jehovih created women, He gave to her two chief attributes,
curiosity and solicitude for others. So, passing here, surveying the
place where the first heavenly kingdom was, I remembered it had been
said that Aph left some island places where once a colony in heaven had
been built, and I halted to examine it. A moan and terrible sound
greeted me! I heard the Osivi knots, as I had oft heard others before.

9\. We landed and made fast, and presently went about searching, led
<span id="page_251a">p. 251a</span> by the sad, sad noise. Then we came
to the great mound, the knot, a thousand million drujas bound in a heap!
Wailing, muffled, moaning as if all the heap of them were in the throes
of death, but could not die!

10\. Being myself powerless to overcome such fearful odds, I took the
bearing of the regions where I should find the nearest God; and so,
having measured the knot, I set sail as thou hast heard.

11\. Hoab said: Every day I behold Thy wisdom, O Jehovih! In a new light
Thy wondrous judgment riseth up before me. Who but Thee, O Father, had
seen the fruitage of Curiosity made perfect in Thy daughters? From the
little bud seen in mortal form, to the overscanning of Thy heavens by
such Goddesses!

12\. As thus Hoab discoursed, they arrived at a suitable landing-place,
where they made their vessels fast, and then hurried to the knot.
Without much ado, Hoab walled the knot around with low fire, leaving a
gateway to the east, where he placed a thousand sentinels. One million
of this army he stationed outside of and beyond the walls, and these
were divided into groups of selectors, guardsmen, physicians, nurses and
bearers, and manufacturers of fire and water. The selectors were
provided with rods of fire and water, and the guardsmen with shields and
blinds.

13\. Then Hoab stationed another million betwixt the knot and the
gateway, and these were stationed in four rows, each two rows facing,
and but two paces apart; so that betwixt the rows it was like a walled
alleyway. And the other three millions Hoab caused to surround the knot
on every side. Each and every one of these was provided with a fire
lamp, which they held in the right hand. And when all things were thus
in readiness, Hoab commanded the attack to begin. And at once the
attackers thrust their fire lamps in the face of of the druj nearest by,
and, seizing them with the other hand, pulled them away. The druj do not
all relinquish their grip in the knot at the sight of the lamp, but
often require to be nearly burned and stifled with the light before they
release their hold. Neither cometh this grip of evil, but of fear.

14\. The knot is nothing more nor less than a mass of millions and
millions of spirits becoming panic-stricken and falling upon their
chief, or leader, who becometh powerless in their grip, and is quickly
rolled up in the midst of the knot.

<span id="page_252a">p. 252a</span>

15\. And when the deliverers thus begin at the exterior of the knot,
peeling off the crazed and moaning spirits, they hurl them backward,
where they are caught by the seconds, who, in turn, hurl them into the
alleyways, where they are again thrust forward till past the gate in the
wall of fire. From the time, therefore, that the druj receiveth the
thrust of the fire lamp in his face, he is not suffered to linger, but
is whirled suddenly from one to another, so quickly he cannot fasten to
any person or thing. For were they to fasten on even the deliverers,
first one and then another, soon a second knot would result. Because of
which, to untie a know of a thousand million crazed angels is not only a
dangerous proceeding, but a feat of unusual grandeur to be undertaken by
five million ethereans.

16\. To provide against accident, Hoab appointed Athrava to take charge
of the delivered after they were beyond the walls; for Athrava had been
long practiced in such matters, thousands of years. So Athrava divided
and arranged the drujas into groups, placing guardians with fire rods
over them; and in some cases taking the groups away and walling them
around with fire also.

17\. Now by the time five hundred millions of the knot were released,
some of the external, delivered groups, began to tie themselves into
knots. And when Athrava saw this, he said unto Hoab: Behold, they are
becoming too numerous for my hosts. I have not sufficient guardians.
Hoab said:

18\. Then will I cease awhile, and, instead of delivering, come and
assist thee. Accordingly, Hoab suspended the battle for a time, and
together they labored with those without, untying the small knots and
arranging them in safer ways, placing a greater number of guards over
them.

19\. This done, the es'enaurs struck up lively music, starting dancings
and marchings; for such is the routine of <span id="page_253a">p.
253a</span> the restoring process practiced by the Gods. Then come the
nurses with cheerful words, with mirth and gaiety, following one
diversion with another in rapid succession. But to the raving maniacs,
and to the stupid, and to the helpless blind, the physicians now turn
their attention.

20\. Again Hoab and his army fell upon the knot, pulling the external
ones away and hurling them out, but not so rapidly, having fewer
deliverers, for he had bequeathed an extra million to Athrava, outside
the walls. And after another three hundred millions were delivered, Hoab
ceased again, and joined with Athrava to assist and divide and group
them in the same way. And he bequeathed another million of his army to
Athrava, and then again resumed the attack on the knot, and thus
continued till he reached the core of the knot, having untied the whole
thousand million drujas, gradually lessening his own army and enlarging
that of Athrava.

21\. And when Hoab came to the core of the knot, behold, he found Oibe,
the false God, who falsely styled himself Thor, the etherean. And in the
midst of the knot they had jewels of rare value and stolen crowns and
stolen symbols, and rods, and holy water, and urns, and incense, and a
broken Wheel of Jehovih, a broken triangle of the Gods, and, in fact, a
sufficiency of things whereof one might write a book in the description.
Suffice it, a false God and his kingdom had collapsed, and he fell,
crushed in the glory of his throne. And there were with him seven false
Lords, who were also crushed in the terrible fall.

22\. Oibe and his Lords, from their confinement in the knot, were also
crazed and wild with fear, screaming and crying with all their strength,
even as were all the others, like drunkards long debauched, delirious
and fearful of imaginary horrors, which have no existence. Or as one's
hand, long compressed, becometh numb, <span id="page_254">p. 254</span>
so that when the pressure is taken away it still seemeth not free. So
would not Oibe nor his Lords believe they were free, but still cried,
calling for help.

23\. At this time there came from Ah'oan, God of Jaffeth, a messenger
with forty companions, and with five hundred apprentices; and the
messenger's name was Turbe, an atmospherean, three hundred years, grade
two. Greeting from Ah'oan, in Jehovih's name! Turbe said: To whom shall
I speak; to whose honor this deliverance credit, save Jehovih's? Athrava
said:

24\. To Hoab, a Zeredho'an disciple of Fragapatti, who is sojourning in
Mouru, capital of Haraiti. And Athrava further asked Turbe his name,
whence he came, and especially if he knew about this knot before, and
the history of its cause? To which Turbe replied:

25\. From Ah'oan this I have learned: Some four hundred years ago, one
of the sub-Gods, named Oibe, because of his modesty and bird-like
fleetness, was promoted by Samati, who is now commissioned master of the
I'huans by Fragapatti. This, whom Hoab hath delivered, is Oibe, the
one-time faithful sub-God of honorable purposes. His kingdom prospered
for two hundred years, and his name and fame spread throughout all these
heavens, and even down to mortals, who were inspired by his admiring
spirits to make images of birds (oibe or ibis), and dedicate them to
Oibe.

26\. He became vain of the flattery, and, losing faith in Jehovih,
finally came out in unbelief, saying there was no All Highest, save as
each and every God chose to exalt himself. Within his dominions, which
numbered nearly a thousand million angels, were a score or more of Lords
under him; to the wisest of whom he began to preach his views, looking
to personal laudation and glory.

27\. In the course of a score of years, the matter culminated in Oibe
and a few of his favored Lords proclaiming a new kingdom, styled, THE
ALL HIGHEST KINGDOM IN THE ALL HIGHEST HEAVEN! And the title he assumed
was, THOR, THE ONLY BEGOTTEN SON OF ALL LIGHT! THOR, THE ALL LIGHT
PERSONATED! THOR, THE PERSONAL SON OF MI, THE VIRGIN UNIVERSE!

28\. Thus Oibe cut loose from the true God and his kingdoms; and he
immediately walled his kingdom around with a standing army; promoting
seven of his most efficient admirers as Lords; and others as generals
and captains. And at once he sat about enlarging and enriching his
throne, and his capital, which he called Osivi, and known as Howts on
the true charts.

29\. In the course of one hundred years his kingdom became a place of
two thousand million souls. His chief city, Osivi, was the richest and
most gaudy city that had ever been in these heavens. The streets were
paved with precious stones; the palaces for himself, his Lords, and his
marshals and generals, were built of the most costly jewels with
pillars, arches and chambers of the most elaborate workmanship, and of
the most costly material.

30\. Oibe became a tyrant; and, save his Lords and a few favored
friends, none were permitted to approach the throne but by crawling on
their bellies, and even under guard. Nor were they permitted to raise
their eyes upon him, save at a very great distance. And all his subjects
were his slaves, in fact, though under progressive discipline. These
slaves were sent far away into atmospherea, or else down to the earth,
to gather tribute for the glory of Thor (Oibe) and his favorites; nor
did these slaves mistrust but they were working for Jehovih, believing
that he lived in the capital, Osivi!

31\. At first, Thor educated and otherwise improved his slaves; but,
finding them less obedient in consequence of knowledge, he finally
destroyed all the heavenly schools and colleges, and resolved to keep
his subjects forever ignorant. Consequently, the wiser ones deserted
him, save his officers, and his angels were without knowledge, knowing
nothing, save that they had to work for Thor forever!

32\. In addition to ignorance, Thor kept his subjects forever in fear of
himself, forever threatening them with terrible punishments if they
ceased to pray to him as the only personified All Light, Jehovih. And in
the course of time, his people forgot all aspirations for any other
heaven or any other God. Many of these were deputized to dwell with
mortals as guardian spirits, persuading mortals to worship Thor and
Ibis, threatening them with being turned into serpents and toads after
death if they obeyed not these injunctions.

33\. Thus ruled Thor, the false, for four hundred years in Osivi;
neither was it possible for Samati to send an army of sufficient
strength to overcome such a kingdom. But a change finally came. A light
descended from the higher heavens six generations ago; and, according to
the legends of <span id="page_255">p. 255</span> old, it was ominous
that the Gods of higher worlds would intercede.

34\. So, Samati, taking advantage of this, sent emissaries to Thor,
otherwise Oibe, and solicited him to give over his evil ways, and
re-establish Jehovih. Thor, the false, sent back word, saying: When I
was a child, I was taught to fear Jehovih, and I feared Him. After long
experience I have discovered there is nothing to fear in all the worlds.
If there be any Jehovih, He is without form or person or sense! I fear
Him not! I revere Him not! My heaven is good enough for me and my Lords.
As for my subjects, let no man, nor God, nor Lord, meddle with them.

35\. Samati, who was the lawful God of all these heavens and of the
earth, thus perceived no way to reach Thor's slaves, for the slaves were
too ignorant to desire anybody or thing save Thor. Nevertheless, he sent
word the second time to Thor, this time saying: Thy kingdom is even now
destitute of intelligent people sufficient to protect thee in case of
panic. If a comet, or any sudden light, or the passage of an avalanza
through thy dominions should take place, thou wouldst surely find
thyself overthrown in a knot. Thy subjects look upon thee as the All
Highest; they will surely rush upon thee.

36\. Thor sent the messengers back with an insulting answer. Thus the
matter stood till after Ah'oan's appointment as God of Jaffeth and her
heavens, which at once cut off Thor's emissaries to mortals, and
confined him within his own kingdom. At this time, Samati was
commissioned to establish the word of God amongst mortals, but he
communicated Thor's position to Ah'oan.

37\. Ah'oan sent embassadors to Thor, the false, beseeching him in the
same manner to give up his personality, and return with his kingdom to
Jehovih, promising him the best of assistance. To this, Thor, the false,
replied, by the messengers, saying:

38\. Ah'oan, thou usurper! If thou desirest favors of me, thou shalt
approach me as all Gods and angels do, by crawling on thy belly before
me. Encroach thee not one jot or tittle on my Most High Kingdom, or I
will banish thee back to thy miscreant regions with stripes and curses!

39\. Ah'oan was surprised, but perceived that till trouble came upon
Oibe nothing could be done for him. So the time came; Jehovih suffered
him to go the full period of self-glory. Thus Oibe fell!

40\. Turbe ceased, and Athrava said: O Jehovih, when will man cease to
fall? Thou hast proclaimed Thyself in all places, high and low; Thy Gods
and Lords and countless angels have proclaimed Thee! Thou alone art the
pass-word to all the universe! Thy name hath a thousand exalted devices
to win the souls of mortals and angels from darkness to light, and yet
they turn away from Thee, Thou Creator of suns and stars and countless
etherean worlds! And they set up themselves as an object of worship! O
the smallness of Gods and men! O the vanity of Thy little children!

41\. Thou hast said to mortals: Go not into the marshes, for there is
fever; build not large cities, for there is sin; go not after lust, for
there is death! But they go in headlong, and they are bruised and dead!

42\. To those who are risen in heaven, Thou hast said: Remember the
lessons of earth, lest ye fall! Remember the fate of self-conceit, lest
ye be scourged. Remember the king and the queen of earth, how they
become bound in heaven, lest ye also become bound.

43\. But they will not heed; vain Self riseth up in the soul; they
behold no other God but themselves in whom they acknowledge wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](oah164.md)
