[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah102)  [Next](oah104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110b">p. 110b</span>

# The Lords' Third Book

BEING COTEMPORANEOUS WITH THE BOOK OF APOLLO, SON OF JEHOVIH. AS THE
LATTER BOOK IS OF HEAVEN, SO IS THE LORDS' BOOK OF EARTH, FOR THE SAME
PERIOD OF TIME.

### Chapter I

1\. IN the time of heaven known as the arc of Rupta and Mos, the Lord
descended to the earth in a sea of fire, to the land of Guatama.

2\. And the Lord spake over the land and over the waters, calling and
speaking: Where are the I'hins, the chosen of the Lord? Speak, O man;
come forth at the call of thy God.

3\. Then spake man, answering to the call of God, saying:

4\. More than a million; more than two, more than four millions, are thy
people, O Lord!

5\. The Lord inquired: Where are my people? Where is the place and
boundary of the sacred people, the I'hins, whom I delivered in the time
of the flood?

6\. And man answered, saying: From the head of the Ca'ca'tsak, the
mountain river of rivers (Amazon). In Thes'onka, wide as the ocean, and
the mountain plains of Om (Mexico). To the great cities of O'wan'gache
and Nathon; and Neshesh, and Tesumethgad, and Naphal; and Yeshuah, by
the Lake Owane (Nicaragua), here standeth the tower of Rakowana, shining
with copper and silver and gold. And by the river Raxaa and her lake,
Jon'gan. And over the plains of Go'magat (crescent) and Takshan, where
<span id="page_111b">p. 111b</span> they build great boats with sails of
cloth, and beams across. And to the north land of Uphsic and E'chaung,
where beginneth the still river Eph'su (a canal), running to the wide
oceans, Vid and Sajins (Lakes Superior and Michigan), where the I'huans
dig deep down and bring copper and silver and lead in boats to the King
of Avaya, I'huan monarch and good protector.

7\. The Lord said: The greatest place of all thou has not named. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) Thine eyes have not seen, thine ears heard
not. Search, therefore, and be wise. Man said:

8\. I was ashamed before God, so I set out to get great learning to know
of what the Lord spake. And I traveled one year to the north, and many
moons to the south and east. And I found a rab'bah <span
id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22) of great learning, both in books and
spoken words; and not a few prophets of the Lord in the great cities. So
I inquired, saying: Which is the greatest place of the Lord's chosen?
And, lo and behold, they answered even as I had answered the Lord. Then
I came to the city of Ta'zuntqua, a place for the yearly dance in the
valley of On-out-si, where the rab'bah's temple is covered with copper,
polished; and I asked the same question. For the che'ba within me
desired to make a record of all things valuable; but, alas, I got no
other answer than the echo of my own words.

9\. God said: Where are my chosen? Where is the greatest place of the
I'hins? Thou hast shown me the I'huans, their great cities and kingdoms;
their places of great learning. But the greatest of all, thou hast not
shown.

10\. Man answered: I know not, O Lord. Speak thou?

11\. The Lord said: In amongst the I'huans are the I'hins, the little
sacred people. The little cities in the suburbs of the large cities of
the I'huans, these are the greatest cities.

12\. Man inquired of God: How can that be? Behold, the I'huans are three
to one, compared to the I'hins!

13\. The Lord said: These that build temples of hewn stone, and cover
them with polished copper, are not my people. These warrior kings, that
fortify their cities with soldiers, are not my people. They are not
great.

14\. But these are my chosen, that live in mounds, and in cities with
wooden walls, and clay walls. They are the greatest of all people. They
<span id="page_112b">p. 112b</span> dress not in gaudy colors, nor
ornament themselves with copper and silver and gold.

15\. They are the people of learning. They survey the way for the
canals; they find the square and the arch; they lead the I'huan to the
mines, where lead and copper and silver are buried. These are a great
people.

16\. Without them the I'huan could not build his own house; he could not
find the level for a canal; nor provide the square of his temple. The
I'hins are the greatest people.

17\. My chosen have shapely legs and arms, and feet and hands; and their
hair groweth long and straight, white and yellow.

18\. The Lord said: Because the I'huan is of all shapes and sizes; and
of all grades and judgment, even down to the ignorance of a beast,
behold, he is bringing forth heirs of darkness.

19\. Come unto the Lord, O ye that are chosen. Ye have built houses and
temples for the I'huans, but of what avail are these things?

20\. Behold, they are at war, tribe against tribe, nation against
nation. They no longer hearken to my rab'bahs, the priests of my chosen.

21\. Go to, now, ye shall build temples unto God.

22\. Then the I'hins inquired the meaning of the word of God.

23\. The Lord said: Long have I prophesied through my chosen, the
I'hins. Now will I raise up prophets amongst the I'huans, the
copper-colored race.

24\. This is the temple ye shall build unto the Great Spirit and His
kingdoms in haden. <span id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23)

25\. Two peoples there are before my judgment, saith the Lord: The one
that heareth not the voice of God, nor knoweth him; but the other people
know me, and endeavor to obey my commandments.

26\. And God was weary with laboring for the I'huans; for they went more
after the way of darkness than light.

27\. And the Lord called hence his guardian angels, leaving the I'huans
alone for a season. And spirits of darkness came upon them and obsessed
them.

28\. And in that same time the Lord caused his chosen to display the
mould <span id="page_113b">p. 113b</span> of their thighs, and their
short shapely arms. And the I'huans tempted them, contrary to law. So,
it came to pass, that the I'huan women boasted of their conquests,
bringing forth heirs of more shapeliness.

29\. Now, in course of time, these heirs grew to be men and women; and,
behold, they had the gift of prophecy, and of seeing visions and of
hearing the voice of the angels of heaven. And they were called
Ongwee-ghan, signifying, good shaped men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[111b:1](oah103.htm#fr_21) In another place
described, this country seems to have been inhabited first in Central of
South America, and to have embrace South America, Mexico, Texas, and the
Western Mississippi, whence a canal extended to the Lake Superior mines.
Further research now shows that these wonderful people also extended
over a large portion of and part of Kentucky, and a large portion of and
part of Kansas. The extent of the country shows that not less than
4,000,000 could have occupied it.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[111b:2](oah103.htm#fr_22) The modern Chinese
omit the firs syllable, saying "bah," signifying "father." The usual
spelling of the Hebrew word rabbi is not phonetically true. The "i" is
sounded more like "oi," and the accent is on the second syllable. "Ra"
usually signifies earth or mortal, and, if accented, destroys the
spiritual value of the word. The Hebrew pronunciation should be
"r-r-b-boi," accented on the second syllable. This would specify
spiritual father or priest; while the pronunciation "rab'bi," accented
on the first syllable, makes the meaning "earthly priesthood," which is
nothing.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[112b:3](oah103.htm#fr_23) Haden is both the
Chinese and Algonquin name for sky. Phœnicians said, Aden; the modern
Hebrew, however, is sha-chag. Aven is the mythical Hebrew for an
undefinable place or idol. Some scholars trace the English word Heaven
to the same source. Galgal is a condition of the mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah104)
