[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah184)  [Next](oah186) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VII

1\. WHEN night came, the king sat privately with Zarathustra; and
I'hua'Mazda cast a light on the wall, and the soul of So-qi came and
appeared before Asha. So-qi said: Knowest thou who I am? And Asha said:
Yea, So-qi.

2\. So-qi said: True, O king, the soul is immortal! And then it
disappeared. Asha said: It seemeth to be So-qi. And yet if it were he,
would he not have called me, Asha, instead of, O king? Then spake
Zarathustra, saying: Call thou for some other spirit? Asha said: Suffer,
then, the soul of my wife to appear.

3\. Again the light appeared, and the soul of Asha's wife inhabited it,
and he saw her. Asha said: It is, indeed. And then she disappeared. Asha
said: Had it been she, she had spoken. Zarathustra said: Call thou for
another spirit. Asha called Choe'jon, the songster, who looked like no
other <span id="page_187b">p. 187b</span> man under the sun. And
Choe'jon also appeared; and even sang one of the songs about the
slaughter of the infants.

4\. Asha said: It was like Choe'jon; but had it been he, he had surely
mentioned the miracle. Then Zarathustra said: Call yet for another
spirit. And Asha called, and another appeared; and thus it continued
until twenty souls of the dead had shown themselves, and talked with
him, face to face, and every one had related things pertinent to
themselves.

5\. Then spake Zarathustra, saying: To-morrow night shalt thou again sit
with me. Now, on the next night, twenty other spirits of the dead
appeared and spake face to face with the king. But yet he believed not.
Then spake I'hua'Mazda through Zarathustra, saying: What will satisfy
thee, O man? For I declare unto thee, that spirit is not provable by
corpor, nor corpor by spirit. There are two things; one groweth by
aggregating, and the other groweth by dissemination, of which All Light
is the highest. As by darkness light is known, and by light darkness
known, similarly diverse are corpor and spirit known.

6\. I'hua'Mazda said: Thy generations, O king, have been long bred in
unbelief in spirit, and unbelief is so entailed upon thee that evidence
is worthless before thee. Who thinkest thou I am?

7\. Asha said: Zarathustra. Then Zarathustra asked him, saying: Who
thinkest thou I am?

8\. Again Asha said: Zarathustra. To which I'hua'Mazda said: Because
thou seest with thine eyes this corporeal body, and heareth with thine
ears this corporeal voice, so dost thy corporeal judgment find an
answer.

9\. But I declare to thee, O king, there is a spiritual judgment as well
as a corporeal judgment. There is a spiritual man within all men, and it
never dieth. The spiritual man, which is within, is the only one that
can discern spiritual things. It is the only one that can recognize the
spirits of the dead.

10\. Then Asha said: How shall I prove there be not some element
belonging to thee personally, that is as a mirror, to reproduce a
semblance of whatsoever is within thy thoughts?

11\. I'hua'Mazda said: What would <span id="page_188b">p. 188b</span>
that profit thee if proven? And what profit if not proven? Hear me,
then, for this is wisdom: There are millions of souls in heaven that are
in the same doubt thou art now in, not knowing that they themselves are
dead. Especially those slain in war and in unbelief of spirit life.

12\. The king said: Who, then, sayest thou, thou art? I'hua'Mazda said:
First, there is Ormazd, Creator, Who is over all and within all, Whose
Person is the Whole All. Then there are the unseen worlds in the sky;
then this world, and the stars, and sun, and moon. After them, mortals,
and the spirits of the dead.

13\. Hear me, O king; because the dead know not the All High heavens,
the Ormazd, Whose name signifieth Master of All Light, sendeth His
exalted angels down to the earth as masters and teachers, having
captains and high captains, that their labor be done orderly. The
highest captain is therefore called I'hua'Mazda, that is, master voice
over mortals and spirits for their exaltation.

14\. Know, then, O king, I, who speak, have thee and thy city and thy
country within my keeping. I am come to stay man's bloody hand. And
through Zarathustra will I reveal the laws of Ormazd; and they shall
stand above all other laws. Because thou art the most skilled of men, I
made thee king; because thou hast seen that man must have an All Highest
Law, I have come to thee. Yea, from thy youth up, and during thy long
life, I have spoken to thy soul, saying: Asha, find thou the All
Highest: Asha, thou shalt have a strange labor before thou diest! Asha,
thou, that hast attained to the measurement of the stars, shalt find a
Power behind the stars!

15\. The king said: Enough! Enough! O stranger! Thou turnedst my head
with wonders. I scarce know if I am living or dead, because of the
mastery of thy wisdom. Alas, my kindred are dead; my friends are fools!
I have none to tell these wonders to. All thy days shalt thou live in my
palace, and whosoever thou demandest for wife, shall be granted unto
thee.

16\. I'hua'Mazda said: Till I come again to thee, O king, keep thine own
counsel. For the present, I must return to the forest. Give me,
therefore, of thy choicest ink and brushes <span id="page_189b">p.
189b</span> and writing cloth, and send thou two servants with me. Asha
said: Suffer thou me to be one of thy servants, and I will abdicate my
throne!

17\. I'hua'Mazda said: I shall need thee where thou art. Thus ended the
interview with the king. The next day Zarathustra returned to the
forest, to write the Zarathustrian laws.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](oah186)
