[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah133)  [Next](oah135.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VI

1\. GOD said: In the time of Osiris, thy Lord provided for the light and
knowledge, that had been with the I'hins, to be merged into the new
races, the Ghans and I'huans. By the Lord and his angels was such
foundation laid.

2\. Before this time, the I'hins could not inspire the barbarians to
make leather and cloth; nor could they inspire them to industries of any
kind in the way of virtue and peace.

3\. The Lord provided unto the inhabitants of the earth, oracle houses,
wherein the Lord could speak face to face with mortals; through his
angels, chosen for this purpose, did the Lord thus teach mortals.

4\. Persuading them to industries, and peace and righteousness, after
the manner of the I'hins.

5\. Teaching them of the stars and sun and moon; showing them how to
find the times and seasons of the earth.

6\. Inspiring them to observe the stars, and to name them, which names
are preserved to this day.

7\. I have established landmarks, saith the Lord. What I do, man cannot
do. I lift the barbarian up; he giveth over his cruel practices by my
command.

8\. I call him to the observation of the stars, and he heedeth my voice.

9\. Behold, O all ye that say there is no Lord, I have left a remnant of
the barbarians. Go try your hand. Let them that find the cause of the
progress of man, to come of the earth, go raise up the barbarian.

10\. I say to man: Go commune with the spirits of the dead, and man
doeth it. I say: Come away from such worship, and fall down before the
stars, and man doeth it.

<span id="page_155b">p. 155b</span>

11\. Jehovih said: My Lord, My God, go thou; call man to one thing
to-day, and let him worship it. And to-morrow call him to another, and
let him worship it. For man shall fall down and worship everything in
heaven and earth. By trying them shall man know them. For in the day of
my glory, kosmon, man shall put away all worshipful things, save Me, his
Creator.

12\. The Lord God said: Through the worshipful talents man can be raised
up. Even as to great learning, man will not pursue it till he first
worshippeth it.

13\. In the time of Osiris, the Lord named the stars in heaven after the
legendary names of Gods and Lords. And the Lord taught not that man
should worship them, but that he should learn their glory and majesty in
the firmament.

14\. But man forgot the Creator because of the wonder of His works. Even
to this day man inclineth to view as substantial and real, things that
are seen, and to reject the All Potent, which is Unseen.

15\. This was the command of God (Osiris), for man should learn
corporeal things as well as spiritual. And I, the Lord, carried away the
spirits of the dead, not suffering man and angels to commune together.
For heretofore they had done this, and so had, both, rejected the higher
heavens.

16\. Jehovih saith: It is not the plan of My heavens for the spirits of
the dead to remain on the earth forever, engaging in mortal servitude
and practices.

17\. Behold, the way of My kingdom, is upward; rather shall man on the
earth seek to rise upward, than that the angels of heaven go downward.

18\. Hence the Lord carried away the spirits of the dead, and he turned
man's judgment to learning the glories of the lower kingdoms (corpor).

19\. And man advanced in great learning; both of the sun, moon and
stars, and of all things on the face of the earth.

20\. The Lord said: These signs have I given to man, that he may
comprehend the cycles of his Creator. When spiritual research is chief
amongst men, they advance not in science, nor art, nor inventions, that
belong to the earth. But, when man is bereft of spiritual aspiration, he
advanceth in <span id="page_156b">p. 156b</span> corporeal knowledge,
and inventions, and investigations.

21\. These signs foreshow the changes being wrought on mortals by the
hand of the Almighty, through His Gods and Lords.

22\. God said: Behold, I raised up great kings and queens on the earth;
and I gave them pageantry, and rites and ceremonies, after the manner of
heavenly things. And these I made as an aspiration to the multitude,
that they might learn to provide themselves with the luxuries of all
created things.

23\. For I desired not that man should become spiritual until the earth
and all manner of savage beasts and serpents were subdued. Otherwise man
had descended into impotence, and failed on the earth.

24\. These testimonies have I left before thee to this day; that the
spiritual man inclineth to shut himself up in seclusion and prayer; but
that the Osirians go forth to work manfully.

25\. The Lord established reciprocities between kings and queens in
those days. And this was the manner thereof:

26\. The central kingdom was called the sun-kingdom, and the others were
called satellites. And the chief ruler was called THE SUN-KING, or KING
OF THE SUN.

27\. And the king maintained an observatory, for determining the times
and seasons of the sun, moon, earth and stars. The name of the
observatory was TEMPLE OF THE STARS (OKE'I'GIT'HI).

28\. The Lord said unto man: Build thou a chamber unto God within the
temple of the stars.

29\. And man so built it. And the Lord chose seers, one for every STAR
CHAMBER; and the seer sat therein, with a table before him, on which
table sand was sprinkled. And the Lord wrote in the sand, with his
finger, the laws of heaven and earth.

30\. Thus gave God to man the names of the stars, and their seasons; and
the seasons of the sun and moon and earth.

31\. And the seer gave it to the king; and the king proclaimed the words
thereof. And God gave man sacred days, for feasts and rites and
ceremonies; according to the times of the moon and stars gave he them.

32\. And the king, by command of God, caused the people to watch the
<span id="page_157b">p. 157b</span> stars and moon and sun, so they
would know the sacred days.

33\. The Lord said: I have days for planting, and days for reaping, and
days for sailing of ships, and days for males and females. By the stars
in the firmament, and by the moon's changes, shall man learn to know my
times and seasons.

34\. So man took to learning from the stars and moon and sun, to
ascertain the will of God.

35\. And nowhere in all the world prospered man in the Osirian
philosophy as in Parsi'e, and in Jaffeth (China), and chief of all were
the shepherd kings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](oah135.md)
