[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah157)  [Next](oah159.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXIII

1\. FRAGAPATTI had previously visited Hapacha, but told not who he was,
save that he was God of Lunitzi, in etherea; consequently, Hapacha, now
knowing that Fragapatti was <span id="page_235a">p. 235a</span> coming,
mistrusted not that it was the same person, but expected to see one
coming in great pomp and glory. For he had heard of the wonders
Fragapatti had already accomplished in the eastern heavens, particularly
the breaking up of the hells of Aoasu and the deliverance of the
tortured inmates.

2\. Thus came Fragapatti to Ipseogee in his avalanza, displaying neither
lights nor curtains; coming with the receiving hosts within his vessel,
anchoring near the throne of Hapacha.

3\. Presently Fragapatti came down out of the ship, Yaton'te and Hoab
with him, also the marshals, who were on the left, the receiving hosts
being on the right. Hapacha's en'enaurs struck up, PROCLAIM JEHOVIH'S
NAME, O YE LORDS AND GODS! and the hosts of the avalanza joined in
singing, and with trumpets and harps and triangles, knowing the symbols
of their kingdom, and great was the glory of their music.

4\. When Fragapatti approached the throne, the music ceased. Hapacha
said: Who cometh here? and he made the ancient sign of Jehovih's name.
Fragapatti said: A Faithist in Jehovih; and he gave the countersign.
Whereupon, Hapacha said: In His name, welcome brother, and welcome to
thy hosts also. May His love and wisdom be manifested in me and my
people during your sojourn with us.

5\. Fragapatti said: Jehovih is All Wise. He fashioneth some men as
suns, and out of their souls the light extendeth into the far-off
spheres. Coursing these vast fields at certain times and seasons, He
sendeth swift messengers from His most exalted heavens. And these
messengers, passing through both light and darkness, with their great
wisdom, scan the distant kingdoms where mortals and angels dwell, and
quickly catch from the guardian hosts, and from the scenes around, the
brightest, best stars, and carry the record to the reigning Gods above.
And when these Gods descend to the regions and places of these immortal
gems, they go visit them.

6\. Even so, O Hapacha, standeth thy record in the higher heavens. And
when the Father called me to visit the red star and her heavens, I
looked over Jehovih's messengers' reports, where was set thy name,
radiant with love and fire. So to thee I made haste and came, unknown,
because as yet unproved in these heavens; and thy much worth, and the
amity of thy hosts, won my love. I told thee thou shouldst hear from me
soon, and so thou hast. Behold, Fragapatti is before thee!

<span id="page_236a">p. 236a</span>

7\. Hapacha said: Blessed, O Jehovih! Come thou, O Fragapatti, and honor
my throne, in the name of the Father! And come thou also, O Yaton'te,
and thou, O Hoab! And they went up and sat on the throne, and Fragapatti
sat in the midst.

8\. Again the es'enaurs sang and played, and during the singing the
light of the upper kingdoms began to envelop the throne. Then spake
Fragapatti, explaining:

9\. Hear me, O all ye people, and be ye attentive to my words:

10\. Because ye have been faithful from the first, ye are become the
light of the earth, and of this heaven, and inasmuch as ye have
maintained your altar and times of sacrifice, there have been maintained
in the upper heavens altars and sacrifices in conjunction with you.

11\. Whereby ye have been blessed in hearing the Voice in all the
darkness through which the earth and her heavens have passed.

12\. As the Father hath given voice betwixt mother and child, though
they be distant from each other, so, in like manner, do Jehovih's
kingdoms, which are in sympathy in righteousness and love.

13\. As ye behold the light gathering about this throne, think not that
I bring the light, nor that it is sent to me in person. There is a cord
betwixt me and my etherean kingdoms, and I am one end thereof; the other
end is the throne in etherea. When I sit in the midst of this throne,
behold, it is also illuminated by the higher heavens.

14\. Think not that my heavens are the highest of all, for such, the All
Highest, can never be attained. Nevertheless, my heavens are connected
as with a cord to them above me, and they to others still above, and so
on forever, upward, upward! The All Highest conceived of, is called
Jehovih; and no matter how long it descendeth, still the Voice is His
Voice.

15\. That ye may hear Jehovih's Voice, I will now set my sun above the
throne.

16\. Fragapatti ceased, and a light most brilliant, in the figure of the
sun, settled above his head back of the throne. Many could not look upon
it because of its brightness. Presently Jehovih spake out of the Light,
saying:

17\. Rejoice, O Hapacha, in the name of thy Creator! Sing thy songs of
delight, and let thy people hold up their heads. Behold, I have watched
over thee and thy hosts; in My promises have ye fulfilled the dawn of My
Light!

<span id="page_237a">p. 237a</span>

18\. Three thousand years are as one day in My sight. Yesterday I said:
Sit ye here, stand ye there, for to-morrow I come again. And this was my
commandment for thousands, and tens of thousands of years.

19\. But others remembered Me not; in the night they went down, as a
child that falleth asleep. And when I came on the morrow, behold, they
had not awakened. But I roused them up, and showed them My great Light.

20\. Again I said to them: Three thousand years are as one day in My
sight. Sit ye here, stand ye there, and remember Me. To-morrow I come
again. But lo, they went down in sleep; they remembered not Me, their
Creator.

21\. But thou, O Hapacha, hast maintained the watch all night long. Thou
art the first of Gods who hath kept this kingdom whole from dawn to
dawn. Thou art the first of Gods who hath kept My kingdom safe in the
lower heavens till the morrow came.

22\. Now have I come to thee to deliver thee and thy kingdom to Haraiti,
whither thou shalt tarry till the close of dawn, when My Sons and
Daughters shall bear thee upward to My emancipated worlds; and thy hosts
shall go with thee.

23\. The Voice ceased. Then spake Fragapatti, saying: For three days
will I tarry here; two days shalt thou have of recreation, but on the
third day thou shalt appoint thy successor, and I will then again speak
before thee and thy people.

24\. Hapacha then proclaimed two days of recreation, and the hosts
mingled freely together, those of the avalanza coming out and rejoicing
with the Ipseogee'ans, and great was the glory of those two days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV](oah159.md)
