[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah106)  [Next](oah108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter II

1\. THOR called in thirty million volunteers; and he provided an
avalanza, an ethereal ship of fire, in which they embarked for the red
star, where they should remain four years and two hundred and thirty and
eight days, which was called the dawn of dan, for Thor, of Don'ga.

2\. Then outward, onward, through etherea, sped Thor and his thirty
millions. Through the swamps of Asath. and the fields of Broddwuski;
through the ethereal seas of Hoesonga, toward the arc of Mos, and thence
to Chinvat, the boundary of the earth's vortex. Nor halted here, but
sped onward in his ship of fire for Gau, the throne of God.

3\. God and his Lords, being apprised of Thor's coming, had the capital
in readiness for his reception. And they had beside gathered in all the
angels of the second resurrection, and as many of the first as chose to
<span id="page_131a">p. 131a</span> come. In all, there were in Gau
assembled nine hundred million angels, Fathists in Jehovih, Of these,
not more than one million had ever seen an etherean, nor had they
visited outward from the earth farther than the seventh plateau in
atmospherea.

4\. Amongst these, even into the heavenly capital of Gau, alighted Thor
and his thirty millions. And after due salutations, in the manner of
Gods and Goddesses, a day of recreation was proclaimed from the throne
of God; and thereupon the atmosphereans and ethereans mingled together
joyfully.

5\. Then ascended Thor on the throne of God, and he ordained as
followeth, to wit:

6\. One million constables to go to the false Lords and false Gods and
arrest them, and bring them to Gau for judgment.

7\. One million captors to possess the thrones and temples of the false
Lords and false Gods, and hold them.

8\. Eight million captors to gather in the angel slaves in all the hadan
heavens.

9\. Six million dispersers to overthrow and disperse the hells (heavenly
battle-fields of spirits in chaos).

10\. Six million physicians to disrupt fetals from mortals.

11\. Two million founders of es'yan nurseries, for the spirits of
infants and helpless ones, born into heaven before their full time.

12\. One million founders of hospitals, for chaotic angels and others
stricken in disease.

13\. Half a million marshals; half a million messengers; and three
million builders.

14\. And when these had been selected by the proper officers, they were
dispatched to their several places and duties.

15\. Then Thor reorganized the Council of Gau for the period of dawn.

16\. So, God and his Lords rested for a season, whilst Thor and his
hosts delivered earth and her heavens.

17\. In one year all the false Lords and false Gods and Goddesses were
captured and brought to Gau; neither passed Thor judgment upon them
until they were all brought in. And on this occasion, there were
assembled in Gau millions of angels to witness the proceedings.

18\. Thor said unto them: Perceive ye not that my power is greater than
yours? How can that be? I have but thirty millions; and of you there are
more than thirty thousand millions! Wherein, then, am I more powerful?
Behold, I have arrested all your heavens and heavenly rulers. How it
this? Whence my power?

<span id="page_132a">p. 132a</span>

19\. Not one could answer Thor.

20\. Then Thor said: My army is a unit. Yours are divided, one against
another. Yea, each one was in anarchy.

21\. This I declare unto you all: Jehovih, first of all; and His
creations, which He hath given unto all His creatures.

22\. To learn to master the elements of earth and heaven, this is the
foundation for acquiring all power.

23\. Because ye bound yourselves in heavenly places on the earth, ye
rose not up to the places prepared for you. Answer me now: How standeth
the world as to what is to come?

24\. Many of the false Lords and false Gods answered after this manner:
I fear to speak my mind, lest thou in anger cast me in hell.

25\. Thor said: He who hath learnt to know Jehovih, and to serve Him,
feareth nothing on earth nor in heaven. Fear is but the manifestation of
weakness.

26\. Speak, therefore, what ye desire; no harm shall befall you.

27\. Then many of them said: This do I perceive, O God: There lie the
earth and many heavens. The strongest mortals rule over the weaker; the
strongest Gods rule over the weaker. Therefore, make me thy slave. I am
content.

28\. Then Thor said: A greater hardship give I unto all: I give you your
liberty and freedom. Go, therefore, whither ye desire. I ask not one to
serve me; but say unto you: Go serve Jehovih by lifting up whoever is
beneath you.

29\. They answered: Whither shall we go? We know not the way from one
heaven to another, nor the way down to the earth. Thou sayest: Go serve
Jehovih by lifting up such as are beneath us. Now, verily, we cannot
lift up ourselves. Had we great riches, or power, or wisdom, then would
we willingly do for those beneath us.

30\. Thor said: Verily are ye Gods of darkness. I say unto you, wait not
for any of these things, but go at once and serve Jehovih.

31\. They answered: When we have first provided a way for ourselves,
then will we serve Him.

32\. Thor answered: Ye have spoken the darkness of all the world. I say
unto you: Go serve Jehovih first; and after that come to me that I may
see wherein ye lack in anything.

33\. They answered: How can one serve Jehovih by lifting others up, if
<span id="page_133a">p. 133a</span> he have not clothes, nor food, nor
habitation.

34\. Thor said: It is well ye ask that question; but I say: Direct that
question to your own souls; and, behold, the Father will answer you. Let
that be the question ye ask yourselves every hour of the day; and watch
ye for an opportunity to answer it by the labor of your own hands.

35\. Then the false Gods and false Lords were dismissed from custody.

36\. Thor commanded the light of the throne and of the pillars of
heavenly fire to be raised to a higher grade. The false Lords and false
Gods desired to flee because of the brilliancy of the light, but knew
not whither to go.

37\. Thor said unto them: Why have ye assumed to be Lords and Gods,
since ye cannot even master the elements in the lower heavens?

38\. i say unto you, the regions of Jehovih's universe are boundless.
Let no one assume to do that which he cannot do; but, little by little,
learn to master the elements surrounding him, and he will in time learn
to traverse Jehovih's beautiful firmament, and be indeed a fit companion
for Gods and Goddesses.

39\. Then spake the false Lords and false Gods, saying: O that we had
some one to teach us; some one to show us the way to learn!

40\. Then Thor, perceiving they were in proper humor for resurrection,
allotted unto them certain teachers and disciplinarians, and they were
taken into educational colonies and put to work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](oah108.md)
