[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah107)  [Next](oah109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter III

1\. THOR said: To induce men and angels to find the way of resurrection,
this is the greatest of all teaching. Man saith: O God, raise up thy
servant!

2\. And the Lord saith: Hold up thy hands and I will lift thee up. But
man will not. Man saith: Send wise and holy angels to me, O Lord, to
guide me in righteousness and good works!

3\. And the Lord saith: As thou asketh of God, even so do thou to thy
fellows. But man will not.

4\. As it is with man on earth, even so do we find it in hada.

5\. To induce angels to develop themselves, by taking hold with their
own hands, and by the exercise of their own talents, this is the work of
Lords and Gods. To rule over them without their knowing it, so as to
lead them in the right way, this is wisdom.

<span id="page_134a">p. 134a</span>

6\. The first passion of man is to eat; the second, the sexual desire;
the third, to make others serve him. And if he accomplish the latter,
then is he indeed the prince of evil. For he then holdeth dominion to
the hurt of others.

7\. So, also, as man buildeth these habitations in his soul on earth,
how vain his effort for happiness in heaven! To teach him to undo all
his past, and to make full restitution unto others, this is the work of
Gods and Lords over spirits of darkness.

8\. Thor established two thousand educational colonies in atmospherea,
besides innumerable places of manufacturing and building; teaching the
angels of heaven how to provide habitations for those born of earth into
spirit life.

9\. In three years of dawn Thor had prepared for etherean ascension four
thousand million Brides and Bridegrooms.

10\. Now all this while the angels of atmospherea had been taught much
in regard to the emancipated kingdoms in etherea; of the splendor and
majesty and power of Gods and Goddesses there abiding.

11\. Thor spake from the throne of God, before the Holy Council, saying:
Send swift messengers to Betatis, Goddess of Terow, in etherea,
greeting, and say unto her: Thus saith Thor, Jehovih's Son, Orian Chief
of Don'ga: Come thou to the heavens of the earth; I have four thousand
million Brides and Bridegrooms as Jehovih's harvest. Provide thou an
airiata of great size and splendor, for its presence shall enchant my
people.

12\. The swift messengers departed. And proper officers at once set
about making ready to receive Betatis. Others were sent into other parts
of atmospherea with fire-boats to bring atmosphereans to Gau, that they
might behold the glory of the higher heavens as manifested in the
descent and ascent of the airiata.

13\. All these things were accomplished; Betatis came in great splendor;
and all the kingdoms and sub-kingdoms of Gau were filled with the
thousands of millions come to witness the ceremonies.

14\. This, then, was the size of Betatis' airiata: Diameter, east and
west and north and south, two thousand miles to the borders of the
photosphere, and nine thousand miles high. The ship, within the
photosphere, was one hundred miles east and west and north and south,
and was two hundred miles high. Of beams, the entire length, there were
twelve million four hundred <span id="page_135a">p. 135a</span>
thousand; and of uprights, they were numerous accordingly. And there
were a sufficient number of chambers within the airiata for every soul
to have one; and besides these, there were halls and temples within,
also suitable for music and other entertainments.

15\. The colors, shades and tints, with mirrors, and with opaque
ornaments, both movable and fixed, were provided in all possible ways,
for ornament and for service, the like of which, for beauty, had never
been surpassed in Don'ga. And when the whole airiata was completed, it
looked like an oval globe of light, with a frame-work, transparent and
opaque within, alternated so as to add beauty to every part. And it was
fitted and equipped for the third resurrection, having no storage places
for atmosphere, or any thing in common with the lower heavens.

16\. To add still further to its splendor, Betatis had her airiata
ornamented with banners and streamers illuminated, so that at a
distance, when seen descending, the whole vessel seemed like a sun
surrounded on every side with movable stars and waving streams of light.

17\. Amongst her hosts were one million trumpeters and players on harps;
and two million singers.

18\. In the midst of the forepart of the ship was the Holy Council
chamber, with four million members. Above the Council chamber was the
chamber of worship; and at either side were the halls for dancing and
social reunion.

19\. When Betatis' ship neared the atmospherean kingdom of God, millions
of her hosts stationed themselves on the galley-beams and stay-lines,
adding a scene of life to the ethereal ship of surpassing beauty.

20\. With ballast had Betatis provided her ship, so that when she came
within the earth's vortex she could stand where she desired whilst the
earth and her heavens turned their axial course, that both mortals and
angels might witness the brilliancy and glory of the works of Don'ga's
chief Goddess.

21\. And thus Betatis stood in her ship of fire, just beyond the plateau
of Gau, whilst the earth and her heavens made one revolution.

22\. The next day she descended into Gau, where God and his Lords, under
direction of Thor, Jehovih's Son, had prepared their mighty audience.

23\. When the ship was made fast, the chief marshal of Gau and of
Betatis' hosts met <span id="page_136a">p. 136a</span> and conducted
Betatis up in front of the throne of God.

24\. Thor said: In Jehovih's name, welcome, Daughter of Light!

25\. Betatis said: Praise the Almighty! In love, am I come to answer thy
prayer.

26\. Then spake God, saying: Welcome, O Goddess! Come and honor my
throne!

27\. Then went Betatis forward in a flame of light, and was greeted
after the manner of Gods and Godesses. After which she sat in the midst
of the throne. And at once the ceremonies of initiation for the Brides
and Bridegrooms were accomplished.

28\. Then came a day of recreation; and after that, Betatis and her
hosts, together with the four thousand million Brides and Bridegrooms,
entered her airiata and departed upward for the etherean heavens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](oah109)
