[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah256)  [Next](oah258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIX

1\. AND the angel of God appeared in the midst of the circle, in
sar'gis, and talked with them face to face. And Hog said unto the angel:
Of a truth, I know thou art not mortal, and yet thou hast the semblance
of flesh, and limbs, and arms, and a very body, and art clothed withal,
and thy clothes are like mortal clothes.

2\. Now I tell thee face to face, I believe thou art no angel of the
dead, but a very reflected self-substance, produced out of the substance
of my father. How sayest thou? The angel answered, saying:

3\. Mortal words cannot convince thee; neither the words of a spirit.
Behold, I will show thee a friend of thine who is dead. With that, the
angel showed the spirit of Hog's friend who was dead, and the man's name
was Aara-acta; and so Hog said unto him:

4\. Thou art a very counterpart of him I knew. What is thy name? The
spirit answered: Aara-acta! I tell thee, O Hog, these things are true. I
am the spirit of thy friend; yea, I am that very friend. Hog said: Where
dwellest thou? Where hast thou been? Art thou happy? Hast thou visited
all the heavens?

5\. The spirit answered him, saying: I dwell on the earth even as before
death; around about. I am happy; the glory of my present world
surpasseth the earth. I have not visited the highest heavens. I am only
as yet in the first resurrection. Up above us there are heavens where
all the people are Gods and Goddesses. I cannot go there; they are too
white. The spirit then disappeared, and Hog said:

6\. What I have seen I have seen; what I have heard I have heard. Yet I
believe not that I have seen a spirit nor heard one. A spirit must in
reason be thin and subtle and air-like.

7\. Then spake the angel of God, saying: How shall I please this man, O
Ormazd? This day I showed myself in the door of the hut, thin and subtle
and air-like, and he saw me not, nor heard me. Who can find a way to
open this man's soul to Thy Wisdom, O Ormazd?

8\. Now spake Yu-tiv: Great is the glory of Thy angel, O Ormazd!
Heavenly are the spirits of the dead. Welcome, O ye angels of heaven!
Then spake Whe-ish, saying: Even the lowest of heavens hath great glory!
O the delight to dwell in such a paradise! Then Vus spake, saying: Such
wisdom and truth! What are Thy kingdoms, O Father, when even the first
heaven hath such glory. Git-un said: Because I have lived to behold
these things, I will proclaim Thy wonders, O Ormazd, as long as I live!
Vede said: Truth is Thy mightiest work, O Ormazd! Oos said: How wisely
hast Thou framed Thy worlds, O Ormazd! Even Thy lowest of angels are a
delight of my soul! Next spake Sa-it; he said: Give us of Thy abundance,
O Ormazd. Open wide the gates of the lower heavens. I will <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> take Thy angels to my arms and rejoice
forever!

9\. Brahma then came out of his trance, though he had heard and seen
all. He said: Whoever cometh that can make me better, and show me how
most to benefit Thy world, him, O Ormazd, send Thou unto me. And, lo,
first of all, Brahma was answered! A light, bright as a sun, stood in
the midst of the circle, and it was higher than the clouds, and
displayed a staff on which was a banner of gold and silver; and on the
banner, stars clustered to spell the words, Love, Wisdom and Power!

10\. Presently the scene changed, and the angel of God said: He that
spake last (Brahma) hath been answered first, because his words reached
to the Fountain Head. Wheresoever ye send your prayers, there are ye
answered. To which end I will now open the gates of the lower heavens,
and ye shall witness what ye may.

11\. The angel withdrew all the lights around about, so that great
darkness might be upon the circle. Presently, Yu-tiv started as if
affrighted somewhat. Then Vus sprang up, saying: What was that? And then
another started, till presently all but Brahma and Hog were wild and
startled, whispering: What do mine eyes behold! O that foul smell! O
that vulgar touch! And then one screamed; and another, and another,
until all broke and fled, screaming and crying out in fear and distress;
flying in the darkness of the grove, frantic; almost dead with fear!

12\. Hog ran not; saw nothing to fear; heard nothing to dread; felt
nothing to make him ashamed.

13\. And his father, Brahma, ran not, nor was afraid, and the twain
called to the rest, pleaded, coaxed and called in vain; could not stop
them; could not find them in the darkness. They returned to the hut,
Brahma and Hog; saw the torches burning brightly, and came in and found
Yu-tiv and her sons huddled together in each other's arms, white and
pale as death.

14\. Hog asked the reason. Yu-tiv said: Sh----, are they gone? Sh----,
keep them away! Then spake Vus, saying: O my brother, ask not what we
saw! Ask not what we felt, and what felt us! These things would not be
lawful to mention! Say no more, in heaven's name! The air of heaven is
full of demons (drujas).

15\. Now spake Vede, saying: Alas, O my father, I dropped the holy book,
the Veda I am writing. In my fright I let it fall. It is not sized yet,
and should it rain ere morning, the holy words will be lost! And not for
a thousand worlds would I go back to the grove this night. Oos said: Nor
I, for a thousand worlds! Whe-ish said: For all the gold and silver in
the world I would not go there this night.

16\. So they all spake save Hog, and with all the love they bore for
Ormazd's words, nothing doubting they were His very words, not one would
venture amongst the evil spirits they had seen, to recover the book.

17\. Then spake Brahma, saying: For many generations Ormazd hath labored
for this; I will go myself; I know He will protect me at all times and
in all places. And Brahma rose up to depart; but then spake Hog, saying:
Nay, father; thou art old; I am fresh and young, and withal, know there
are no spirits but in the imagination of men. I will go alone!

18\. Nor will I bear a lantern nor a torch; nor will I whistle nor sing.
I will confront all the evil spirits of hell and their captains. I will
recover that book this night though I scrape every leaf from Ebon grove!
And mark ye, too, I will return unscathed; nor will I see nor hear a
spirit the while I am gone. So, Hog and Brahma only were fearless.

19\. With that Hog departed, and after a while he returned, rejoicing,
bringing the book; and he said: I neither saw nor heard a spirit, and I
declare unto you, that none of you saw nor heard them, for there are
none. By the extreme bent of your minds, these imaginings seem real. And
as to the great Light, with the words, Love, Wisdom and Power, which I
also saw, I say unto you it is some emanation from this, our holy and
most loved father. How oft have we heard him use those same words! And
as to those figures that talked, and had the semblance of men and women,
even to their garments, I say unto you all, they emanate from the same
source, even from our father, even Brahma.

20\. Now spake Yu-tiv, saying: O happy unbelief, my son! O that I had
been born as thou! O that I had never seen such sights as I saw this
night!

21\. Then said Oos: O happy brother, our youngest born! Would that I
were like unto thee! O the vulgarity of those hands that came upon me
this night!

22\. Vus said: O that I had never <span id="page_357">p. 357</span>
known the unseen world! O that I had been born in darkness like unto
thee, our most favored brother!

23\. After that manner they all spake deploringly of their gift of
su'is; and when they had thus spoken, the angel of God spake through
Brahma, saying: Whilst it is yet night, I speak. With the dawn, at
sunrise, is the Father's Voice. Hear me, then, briefly, expecting not
much wisdom, for I am not long born in heaven.

24\. Two great men created the Creator, the Faithist and the unbeliever;
the one who hath passed through the trials of the flesh, and attained to
the Father's Voice; for in becoming one with the Father, he no longer
standeth in fear of anything in heaven or earth. The glory of constant
resurrection is before him forever.

25\. All men who have not attained to this may be likened unto a man
going up a slippery hillside, who oft riseth high, but suddenly slideth
low. They glorify themselves for their own light and wisdom and good
gifts, rejoicing for self-sake for the glories that have fallen upon
them. But they are cowards.

26\. Nevertheless, the Creator created a great man amongst these; and
such is the unbelieving man. He hath neither gold nor silver, nor house
nor land; and he is without spiritual sight or spiritual hearing; but
his glory is in understanding his own understanding.

27\. He it is that subdueth the forest, and tameth the beasts of the
field to man's service. He goeth alone in the dark, fearing naught. He
followeth not the course of any man, but searcheth for himself; the
priest cannot make him believe, nor can the angels of heaven; none can
subdue his judgment. He beholdeth the glory of the earth and of manhood.
He calleth to the multitude, saying: Why permit ye others, even priests,
to think for you? Arise, O thou, and be a man! Arise, O thou, and be a
woman!

28\. He inspireth of the earth and for the earth; through his arms are
tyrants and evil kings overthrown. Through him are doctrines and
religions sifted to the bottom, and the falsehood and evil in them cast
aside. Yea, who but Ormazd could have created so great a man as the
unbeliever?

29\. And these two men, the Faithist and the unbeliever, do mostly all
the good that is done in the world; the one laboreth at the top of the
hill, calling upward; the other laboreth at the bottom of the hill,
pushing upward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](oah258)
