[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah266)  [Next](oah268.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

# Book of Wars Against Jehovih

OF GOD'S LABORS IN ATMOSPHEREA.--CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF THE
ESTABLISHING ON THE EARTH THE NAMES: LORD GOD, AND DE'YUS, AND DYAUS,
AND DEITY, AND TE-IN, AND SUDGA, AND OSIRIS, AND BAAL, AND ASHTAROTH.
COVERING A PERIOD OF TWO THOUSAND FOUR HUNDRED YEARS; THAT IS, FROM THE
TIME OF ABRAHAM, AND BRAHMA, AND PO, AND EAWAHTAH, TO THE TIME OF MOSES,
AND CHINE, AND CAPILYA. THIS BOOK OF GOD PERTAINETH TO BOTH, THE EARTH
AND LOWER HEAVENS, AND CONTAINETH AN EXPOSITION OF THE LABORS OF THE
ABOVE FALSE GODS, AND THEIR FALL AND ENVIRONMENT IN HELLS, ALL SAVE BAAL
AND ASHTAROTH.

### Chapter I

1\. JEHOVIH spake to God on the throne, in Craoshivi, saying: These are
My divisions in the cycle of My Daughter, Cpenta-armij: Two hundred
years; four hundred years; five hundred years; three hundred years; four
hundred years, and six hundred years; after which I shall send dawn.
Five successors shalt thou have, and their reign shall be according to
the divisions I have made.

2\. Forty years' indulgence in a great light have I allotted to thee, My
Son; so thou shalt perfect all the orders of Lords and Lordesses in the
lowest lower kingdoms of these My heavens. Neither shall it be dark
during my reign; and thy labor shall be productive of a great harvest
for My etherean worlds. For which reason thou shalt prepare to reap in
fifty years, and again in fifty years, and again in fifty years, and
again in fifty years. And for each reaping, behold, My daughter
Cpenta-armij will send to thee ships of deliverance for all thou mayst
have prepared as Brides and Bridegrooms.

3\. And behold, I give a new law unto thee; which is, that thou shalt
cause thy Lords to deliver unto thee for thy kingdoms all whom they have
raised to grade fifty, in advance of thy reapings, in divisions of time
like unto thine.

4\. And thou shalt call together to thy capital thy Lords from all the
divisions of the earth, once every reaping; and ye shall sit in COUNCIL
OF DIV for seven days each time, and ye shall constitute MY HOLY ELEVEN;
nor shall the Div be larger or smaller than eleven during its life-time.
And the Div shall make laws relating to the affairs of each of the
heavenly places, to make them harmonious, one with another, and these
shall be called DIVAN LAWS.

5\. God inquired concerning the light and darkness of the cycle. Jehovih
said: The first division shall rate seventy; the second, fifty; the
third, forty; the fourth, eighty; the fifth, thirty; and the sixth,
twenty.

6\. God inquired concerning the Lord of the Lord-dom. Jehovih answered
him, saying: Because he is not a teacher, he shall not be eligible to
the rank of Div. But he shall have the benefit of all the decrees, and
all the kingdoms of My other Lords; for he is the earth's body-guard,
and a beneficent unto them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah268.md)
