[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah286)  [Next](oah288) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXI

1\. THUS laid the three great countries, Arabin'ya, Parsi'e and Heleste,
of which Parsi'e was mightiest, peopled with very giants; lofty-bearing
men and women, of red, copper colored; and with an abundance of long
black hair; high in the nose and cheek bones; with determined jaws, and
eyes to charm and command; mostly full-blooded I'huans, half-breeds
betwixt the I'huans and the burrowers in the ground, the brown people,
dull and stupid. The Parsi'e'ans were a proud race, built up in great
comeliness by the God Apollo, whose high-raised office was to fashion
the breeds of mortals into noble forms. Foremost in all the world was
Parsi'e in all great deeds, and in men of learning, and in ancient wars.
It was here great Zarathustra was born and raised for Jehovih's Voice
and corporeal words. Here the first great CITY OF THE SUN was built,
Oas, whose kings aspired to rule all the world; and great riches amongst
men were here first tolerated by the Gods.

2\. A strip of Par'si'e'an land cut betwixt <span id="page_398">p.
398</span> Jaffeth and Vind'yu, and extended to the sea in the far east;
but the great body laid to the west, covering the Afeutian Mountains,
still plentiful in lions and tigers and great serpents. In these
mountains came the I'huan hunters to catch lions and tigers to fight in
the games, where men oft, unarmed, went into the arena, and fought them
with their naked hands, choking them to death before applauding
multitudes. From these mountains the hunters supplied the private dens
of kings and queens with lions, whose duty was to devour thieves and
other prisoners, according to mortal law.

3\. And oft these traveling hunters dwelt with the sacred little people
in the wilderness, the I'hins, whom Jehovih had taught to charm even the
great serpents and savage lions and tigers to be their friends and
worshippers. And herefrom sprang a people called Listians, who, living
mostly in the forests, went naked, to whom the I'hins taught the secret
of CHARMING AND SACRED HAND POWER, who worshipped Jehovih, owning no man
nor God as master, for which the Great Spirit named them SHEPHERD KINGS,
for they ruled over flocks of goats, which supplied them with milk, and
butter, and cheese, and wool for cloth for crotch-clothes, the only
covering they wore.

4\. These Shepherd Kings, the Listians, lived in peace, wandering about,
making trinkets, which they oft exchanged with the inhabitants of cities
and the agricultural regions. One-fourth of the people of Pars'ie were
Listians, who were well guarded by Jehovih's angels. And these were such
as De'yus meant to obsess for future use in terrible wars, but the other
three-fourths lived in the fertile regions of Parsi'e, the lands of
which were rich in yielding ample harvests. The cities were filled with
mills, and factories, and colleges, and common schools, free for all
people to come and learn; and altars, and temples of worship, and oracle
structures, made without windows, so Jehovih's angels could come in
sar'gis and teach His Holy Doctrines. Besides which were temples and
observatories for studying the stars, which were mapped out and named
even as their names stand to this day. And next to these were the HOUSES
OF PHILOSOPHY, in all the cities; where great learned men undertook to
examine the things of earth, to learn the character and property
thereof. And whether of fish, or worm, or stone, or ores, or iron, or
silver, or gold, or copper, they had learned to read its worth and
nature. And of things dead, no longer living on the earth, and of
strange stones, and of skins and bones of animals, their houses were
well filled, for benefit of students and visitors. It was these that
De'yus meant to have his armies possess, body and soul, for his own
glory, knowing that by their researches in such matters for many
generations they had strayed away from Jehovih. For such is the rule
pertaining to all children begotten on the earth. If the father and
mother be on the downward road in unbelief, the child will be more so;
but if on the upward way, to glorify an All Highest, the child will be
holier and wiser than its parents.

5\. In olden times the Gods had inspired the Parsi'e'ans to migrate
toward the west and inhabit the lands of Heleste, also a country of
giants, but less given to rites and ceremonies; and they carried with
them three languages: the Panic, of Jaffeth; the Vedic, of Vind'yu, and
the Parsi'e'an; and because they used the same sounds, mostly, but
different written characters, a confused language sprang out of these,
and was called Fonece, and the people thus speaking were called
Foneceans, that is to say: We will use the same sounds, but take to our
judgment to use whatsoever written characters we choose. Hence, Fonece
is the first and oldest of mortal-made languages; and this was styled in
heaven the period of the emancipation of mortals from the dictatorship
of angels in regard to written signs and characters and words. Jehovih
had said: In that respect man on earth hath advanced enough to stand
alone; and it was so, for, from that time to this, neither Jehovih nor
his angels have given any new language or written characters to mortals.
And all languages that have come from that time onward, are but
combinations and branches, and amalgamations and malformations of what
existed then on the earth.

6\. The Helestians were rich in agriculture, and in herds of cattle and
goats, both wool goats and hair goats; for it was in this country that
the angels first taught man how to breed the goats for hair or for wool,
accordingly as he desired. And these people were also mostly worshippers
of Jehovih, and had many altars and temples; dwelling in peace, and
loving righteousness.

7\. Arabin'ya had four kinds of people within her regions: The I'huans,
the Listians, the I'hins, and the brown burrowers in the ground, with
long noses and projecting mouths, very strong, whose grip of the hand
could <span id="page_399">p. 399</span> break a horse's leg. The brown
people, though harmless, were naked, living mostly on fish and worms and
bugs and roots; and they inhabited the regions of the great river, Tua.
Over these people, to subdue them and destroy them, Osiris allotted his
great angel general, Egupt, servant of De'yus. Egupt called the region
of his allotment after himself, Egupt, the same which is corruptly
called Egypt to this day.

8\. In the time of Abraham this country was called South Arabin'ya; but
when, in after years, the great scholars entered the records in the
kings' libraries, the later names were used, being written in the
Fonecean language and not Eguptian, which was the language of the
unlearned.

9\. But the chief part of all the people in Arabin'ya were I'huans, of
color and size and figure like the Parsi'e'ans, being also the offspring
of the I'hins and the brown earth-burrowers, the hoodas, from whom they
inherited corporeal greatness, even as from the I'hins they inherited
holiness of spirit. But the flat heads had mostly disappeared from
Arabin'ya.

10\. And here were thousands of cities, great and small, even as in
Parsi'e and Heleste, and they had colleges and houses of philosophy,
even like Parsi'e, besides thousands of public libraries, which supplied
books freely to the poor, who came here to be taught in the sciences,
and in the arts of painting and engraving and sculpture, and in
astronomy, and mathematics, and chemistry, and minerals, and assaying,
and in the rules for inventing chemical combinations. But the Listians
were the only people who dealt in charms and the secrets of taming
serpents and beasts by virtue of the hand, and by curious scents,
prepared secretly. And the Listians maintained the fifth rite in the
resurrection, whereby, on the fifth day after death, the soul appeared
in mortal semblance to his living people, and advised them lovingly,
after which he ascended in their burning incense going to Jehovih!

11\. Of such like, then, were the people over whom De'yus, named Lord
God, had set his thousand millions, to subdue them for his own glory.
And thus it came to pass, Jehovih spake in Craoshivi, saying: The time
shall come when angels and mortals shall know of a truth that the Lord
God is a false God and a vain-glorious usurper. For I will leave one
race of I'huans on the earth, in Guatama, even till the era of kosmon.
And men and angels shall see and understand that man of himself never
inventeth a God in figure of a man born of woman. And that only through
the inspiration of My enemies, who build kingdoms in hada for their own
glory, hath any people ever fallen from My estate to worship a God in
image of man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](oah288)
