[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah259)  [Next](oah261) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXII

1\. ON the day of Yu-tiv's death, Brahma said: Sing no songs; pray in
silence only. Let her soul be in quiet with Ormazd.

2\. On the second day Brahma said: Pray in whispers; praise in whispers,
the best, good deeds of the dead.

3\. On the third day Brahma said: Burst forth a song of praise to
Ormazd; extol the virtues of the dead.

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

4\. On the fourth day Brahma said: In song and in prayer bid the dead
arise and go onward, upward!

5\. Thus they put Yu-tiv in the ground on the fourth day; and then they
went and sat in the sacred circle and sang and prayed for her soul to go
on to Nirvana (paradise). And when they had finished, a light came down
in the midst of the circle, and an angel in white appeared. It was
Yu-tiv; the soul of Yu-tiv in the glory of Ormazd, the Creator!

6\. Then spake the angel Yu-tiv, saying: Out from the head of the
corporeal body the spirit is born; and angels stand around; on a spirit
blanket receive they the spirit of the dead. One day, in quiet, they
keep the spirit, teaching it to reconcile and understand. On the second
day, the spirit heareth the prayers of the earth-people coming upward;
and on the third day, the spirit understandeth death and birth of
spirit.

7\. And on the fourth day, when ye sang: O Goddess, arise from the dead!
The Father calleth thee from on high! Arise, O Goddess, and go thy way!
Then was my spirit free from the earth; resting in the arms of Gods and
Goddesses, who had come from on high to receive me. Thus, O my beloved,
on the third day is the first resurrection; and to the holy, the second
resurrection beginneth on the fifth day. After the fifth day call ye me
not back again! My labor lieth yonder! I must build houses for you all.
Thus Ormazd sendeth me on before! If it be his will for me to return to
you at times, I will return. His will above all; this is the greatest
wisdom.

8\. Whe-ish, her first-born, asked: What of the angels of the
intermediate world, O mother? Then answered his angel mother, saying:
They were shown to us in Ebon grove! Alas, some of them do not begin the
resurrection for a thousand years!

9\. Then came the angel Yu-tiv over, near Hog, her latest born, whom she
loved so well. She said: Canst thou see me, my son? Hog answered: Nay, I
see only a glimmering light faintly; I hear a voice, but it soundeth not
like my mother's voice. Yet, if it be that there is a soul that liveth
after death, and if of a truth, thou art the very spirit and soul of her
who brought me forth, be thou not unhappy because of my unbelief. As for
myself, I am happy because thou broughtst me forth in unbelief; neither
would I of my own will be any other way. Whether our eyes be blue or
black, or whether we are tall or short, or whether we are believers or
disbelievers, even as we are created, and to fill our place in doing
good unto others with all our wisdom and strength, is this not glory
enough?

10\. Yu-tiv said: O thou wisest of men! In the day thou art born in
heaven, thou shalt not linger long in the intermediate world, but be
crowned a very God indeed! Here endeth my labors with the earth, O ye,
my beloved. An otevan waiteth by the way for me to ascend; the Gods and
Goddesses are calling me! Farewell, my beloved! Farewell!

11\. And now the music of heaven descended, and even whilst the mortals
sang, the very gates of heaven opened, and the angel Yu-tiv rose upward
in a sea of fire!

12\. But behold, the love of great Brahma was too much for him! His eyes
raised upward after the ascending light, and his soul burst within him.
He fell down and stretched himself on the cold earth! He, too, was dead.

13\. Then burst the mighty hearts of Brahma's sons. The whole earth
shook with the wail of Gods. The wind, the air above the earth, stood
still, and the forest of Roam shuddered as if the earth were bent in
twain. Then wailed the sons and daughters of Haraoyo. Though no man
uttered it, yet all knew that great Brahma was dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](oah261)
