[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah238)  [Next](oah240.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_311b">p. 311b</span>

# First Book of God

BEING COTEMPORANEOUS WITH THE BOOK OF CPENTA-ARMIJ, DAUGHTER OF JEHOVIH.
AS THE UPPER BOOK RELATETH TO THE HIGHER HEAVENS, SO IN LIKE MANNER
DEALETH THE FIRST BOOK OF GOD WITH THE LOWER HEAVENS AND WITH THE EARTH,
FOR THE SAME PERIOD OF TIME. FOR WHICH REASON THIS BOOK IS PLACED BELOW
THE OTHER. THIS BOOK TREATETH FULLY OF THE FOUR GREAT PERSONS CHOSEN BY
GOD, NAMELY: PO, OF CHINE'YA, INSPIRED BY THE GOD YIMA; BRAHMA, OF
VIND'YU, INSPIRED BY THE GOD DIV; ABRAM, OF PARSI'E, AND AFTERWARD OF
EGUPT, INSPIRED BY THE GOD VISHNU; AND EA-WAH-TAH, OF NORTH GUATAMA,
INSPIRED BY THE GOD OS. AND THESE INSPIRATIONS WERE FOR THE SAME PERIOD
OF TIME, KNOWN IN THE KINGDOMS OF HEAVEN AS THE TIME OF THE ARC OF BON.
THESE FOUR GODS WERE THE CHIEF DIVAN GODS OF THAT DAY, HA'CHUE BEING DIV
IN CHIEF.

### Chapter I

1\. THE Creator of creations: Out of Whom are all voices: Of Whom are
all things in semblance. From Him and in Him these utterances. By His
Gods and Lords and high-raised angels and mortals.

2\. Into Whose dominion gave He the earth for the glory of Jehovih,
Whose God came and walked and talked with such as had been prepared for
the deliverance of His chosen.

3\. For the four preserved divisions of the earth gave he four Sons of
holy light and power for the voice of God and his Lords:

<span id="page_312b">p. 312b</span>

4\. Po, of Jaffeth; Abram, of Arabin'ya; Brahma, of Vindyu, and
Eawahtah, of Guatama, whose records are everlasting on the earth, which
are testimony that these men were raised up by the Father for His Own
glory, and for the deliverance of men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah240.md)
