[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah204)  [Next](oah206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXVIII

1\. SO Zarathustra suffered himself to fall into the power of the Sun
King; and the soldiers caused him and Asha to march in their midst to
the place of the skulls. And there came thousands and tens of thousands
of <span id="page_242b">p. 242b</span> people forth to witness the
proceedings; for at this time there were many who were in sympathy with
Zarathustra, as well as many against him.

2\. And in order to stay the multitude, the captain of the army called
out many soldiers in addition to those who made the arrest. Others ran
to the king's palace, carrying the news of his arrest, and the place he
had been taken to.

3\. The king said to the heralds: Though this man shall die, it is fit
that proper judgment be rendered against him, as an example before all
men. Go, therefore, to the executioners, and command them to bring
Zarathustra into my presence, that I may adjudge him to death according
to law.

4\. This was accomplished. Zarathustra was brought before the king, who
accosted him, saying:

5\. By thy behavior thou art accused before thy king, and I adjudge thee
to death. But that thou mayst be as an example before the world, I will
render my judgments before the heralds, who shall proclaim my words unto
all who desire to witness thy death.

6\. First, then, thou wert ordered for arrest by my predecessor, and
thou deliveredst not thyself up to my soldiers; neither could they find
thee. For which thou art adjudged to death.

7\. Second. Without permission from the KING OF THE SUN, thou hast
traveled in foreign lands, sowing seeds of disallegiance against the
CENTRAL KINGDOM. For which thou art adjudged to death.

8\. Third. The KING OF KINGS offered a ransom for thy head, and the
king's soldiers were disappointed in finding thee. For which thou art
adjudged to death.

9\. Fourth. In thy youth thou threatenedst to overthrow the city of Oas,
the CITY OF THE SUN, and failedst to make thy word good, thereby being a
teacher of lies. For which thou art adjudged to death.

10\. Fifth. Thou hast cut off the foreign tribute to the rightful OWNER
OF THE WHOLE WORLD! For which thou art adjudged to death.

11\. Sixth. Thou hast revived the doctrines of the dark ages, teaching
of spirits and Gods, which things cannot exist, because they are
contrary to nature, and contrary to the laws of the KING OF THE WORLD!
For which thou art adjudged to death.

<span id="page_243b">p. 243b</span>

12\. Seventh. Thou hast taught that there is an unseen Creator greater
than thy king; which is contrary to reason. For which thou art adjudged
to death.

13\. Eighth. Thou returndst to Oas not openly, but as a thief, and hid
thyself in a chamber of the wall. For which reason thou art adjudged to
death in the manner of thieves, which is the most ignoble of deaths.

14\. Therefore, I command the executioners to take thee to the den of
thieves and cast thee therein; and on the morrow, at high noon, thou
shalt be hung up by thy feet along with the thieves, where thou shalt be
left hanging till thou art dead.

15\. That my judgment may appease thy best friends, what sayest thou
against my decrees?

16\. Zarathustra said: All the charges thou hast made against me are
true this day; but ere to-morrow's setting sun I will have disproved
some of them. To-day thy kingdom is large; in two days I will be dead,
and thou wilt be dead; and this great city will be destroyed. Yea, the
Temple of the Sun will be rent in twain, and fall as a heap of rubbish.

17\. The king laughed in derision, and then spake to Asha, saying: Thou
art an old fool. Go thy way. So, Asha was liberated, and Zarathustra was
taken to the den of thieves and cast therein. And the den of thieves was
surrounded by the dens of lions that belonged to the king's gardens. And
a bridge passed over, and, when the prisoners were within, the bridge
was withdrawn. And no prisoner could escape but would fall a prey to the
lions, which were fed on the flesh of the persons executed according to
law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](oah206.md)
