[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah236)  [Next](oah238.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XII

1\. CPENTA-ARMIJ said: Who can understand Thy models, O Jehovih! Who
cannot understand Thy models, O Jehovih! Thou hast shown to mortals the
food of the flesh, and the source of the substance of the blood. As a
symbol before them of Thy es'sean worlds and Thy es'sean peoples, Thou
hast created Thy corporean members; to receive and to impart, but this
is not all. Thou createdst poison, to show man that that which receiveth
not, and imparteth not, is death.

2\. Most wisely, O Father, hast Thou provided the degrees of subsistence
unto all Thy creations: To the corporean, corporeal food; to the
atmospherean, atmospheric food; to the etherean, ethe'ic food. Wide will
I spread my tables, O Jehovih. Thy Gods and Goddesses, and Thy
high-raised Chieftains, shall sit at the Feast of Spe-ta.

3\. The Chieftainess sent swift messengers into the regions of etherean
worlds, near the Roadway of the Great Serpent, five hundred thousand
swift messengers. Down to the atmospherean regions she sent messengers
to the Gods and Lords, her laborers, ten thousand messengers. To her
invited guests she privileged each one million attendants.

4\. Next Cpenta-armij sent fifty thousand arrow-ship makers in the
regions of Cventagma, in the etherean Itis, to prepare ceremonial
salvers and connecting rods, so that all the thousands of millions,
being united, could hear the Voice of Jehovih from her throne, movable,
in her airavagna. Twelve counterparts to these she sent down to the
lowest heavenly regions, so the All Light should pierce the corporeal
earth.

5\. And now, when her well-skilled workmen, of tens of thousands of
years' experience, had saluted and gone off to their respective labors,
the Chieftainess spake before the Council, saying: Because of my arc
upon the earth and her heavens, the Light of our Father will forever
remain with mortals <span id="page_348a">p. 348a</span> and in the hadan
fields. But, behold, even as a young man, coming to maturity, goeth away
on his own account, in great hope and self-conceit of his powers, to
meet many misfortunes and great darkness, so will it be with the earth
and her heavens after Spe-ta. Because I plant my arc in these heavens,
and say to the Gods thereof, Ye are free! Behold, there shall rise
numerous false Gods of great power. And as a young man going forth is
puffed up with conceit, so will the atmospherean Gods believe they know
all things, and so bring great darkness and misery upon their kingdoms
and upon themselves.

6\. But the Light of my arc shall stand; shall grow like a small seed
planted; and in time to come, both angels and mortals shall understand
that there is but ONE ALL LIGHT, a very center, to Whom all Gods are but
as small diadems. As a young man of the earth must have experience of
his own to realize his own shortness, so must even the Gods of these
lower heavens be left to run with a loose rein, for the glory of
Jehovih, and for themselves in final deliverance. For which reason,
hereafter, the bondage of the discipline of the God and his Lords shall
be as nothing. Only hells and knots shall they longer cast out with fire
and water; only by persuasion, and the example of practice, shall they
hold dominion in their respective places.

7\. As in the early days, a king ruleth with a rod and with tyrannous
laws; and as, in a riper age, the king and his armies give way to a
power vested in the people, so shall my arc be the giving of the lower
heavens, and the earth beneath, into the keeping of themselves. But my
arc, which is the foundation of the Father's upper kingdoms within the
lower heavens, shall stand forever.

8\. I go, now, on my journey down to the earth, in my airavagna, to
receive and deliver my four Gods, Os, and Vishnu, and Yima, and
Ela-elia, God in Chief.

9\. Thus saying, Cpenta-armij descended to the foot of Jehovih's throne,
and the light fell upon Thale, and he rose up from the throne and
descended, taking her hand, saying: Arise, O Goddess, and hear thou the
Voice of thy Father, Creator and Ruler! Behold, thy labor on the earth
and her heavens is near the end; and because of thy steadfastness, I am
honored in thee, My Daughter.

10\. Whilst thou art delivering My Gods, behold, I will be with thee,
and whatsoever thou desireth of Me I will <span id="page_349a">p.
349a</span> give unto thee. My Sons and Daughters shall receive the
visiting hosts from the high heavens, and allot them places in the
feast; and My Sons and Daughters shall receive and adorn My Brides and
Bridegrooms; and My trumpeters shall proclaim Me in My works, from the
surface of the earth to the farthest places in Salkwatka. Yea, My
Light-makers shall plant the staff of My holy fire in the throne of
Craoshivi, and the foot thereof shall pierce the earth in the land of
Vind'yu, to receive and deliver My earth Son, Brahma.

11\. Go thou, O Chieftainess, Holy one, of Great Wisdom and Power; it is
the Voice of thy Father!

12\. Cpenta-armij stood aside, and then said: To ye, my beloved
companions, Owks, and See-wah-Gon, and Ha-o-ha, when the staff of the
Father's light hath descended to the earth, come ye then to me quickly
in my arrow-ship of fire, for it shall be a signal betwixt us that in
that hour I will raise up my Gods from the corporeal earth; and I will
open the earth and bring forth the bodies of my son, Brahma, and his
wife, Yu-tiv, whose youngest son holdeth the leaven of the Osirian law.
And I will have there assembled the hosts of my ten Lords, and I will
deliver into their hands, for their successors, the fulfillment of the
Divan laws.

13\. Her companions responded: In Jehovih's wisdom and power, we will be
there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](oah238.md)
