[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah251)  [Next](oah253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIV

THE FIRST BIBLE OF VIND'YU.--BEING OF BRAHMA, A MAN CHOSEN BY GOD FOR
THE CHILDREN OF VIND'YU. GIVING AN ACCOUNT OF BRAHMA BECOMING AN IESU;
OF HIS LABORS AND HIS RESURRECTION AFTER DEATH.

1\. THESE are the races of Brahma: Gons, Shone, Gamma, This, Ram, Zerl,
Mex, Shriv, Vat, Eun and Delta, each a thousand years. Of Gamma and
Delta, in the upper country (Wa-wa-o-gan), were born Gu-sem and Hagu by
Gamma, and by Delta, Yots, Rammus, Borgl, Otesiv and Riv. Gamma was of
the fourth descent of Git-ow; and Delta the third descent of
E'wangga--I'hins from the land of Jaffeth.

2\. The ascending caste of light in the lower country (Ho-jon-da-tivi)
was by Ram, first; then Zerl, I'hin migrants <span id="page_340b">p.
340b</span> from the land of Ham; then Shriv, then Vat, then Gons and
Eun, the half-breed Druks; then Shone, and then This.

3\. Jehovih, who by the Brahmins was called Ormazd, sent His light to
the earth world once for every hundred generations. And the light fell
upon His sons, prepared from before their births by the angels of
Ormazd. Of the times before the submersion of Pan, each cycle was called
one man, and the length of his life three thousand years.

4\. But of the times after, Ormazd commanded the nations of the earth to
be rated as a man, and it was so. Ormazd said: That man may not be
confounded, thou shalt number Osiris with the generations that believe
not, save in the sun; but of the Zarathustrians, their number shall be
as those who survived in the darkness of his cycle.

5\. Which were: Zarathustra from the races of Shone and This; and of
Zarathustra, Haman; of Haman, Wonchakaka, who begat Zoar, who begat
Theo, who begat Andassah, who begat Mur, who begat Romsat; these were
tribes of the Zarathustrian order, who rejected idols, Lords, Gods,
Saviors, kings, queens, and all other rulers on the earth or in the
heavens above the earth, save Ormazd, the Creator. And in Him had faith
that to do righteously, and practice good works, made the best, nearest
perfect man.

6\. The Light by the Voice was lost in the sixth hundredth year after
Zarathustra, but regained in Romsat by the I'hins, whence came the tribe
Lo-jon, who begat Thonegalahogreif, who begat Subinij, and from him to
Wowthutchi-subinij, which were forty-four generations, the Voice always
came to the chief rab'bah.

7\. In Chusa-king the Voice was lost, but again restored by the I'hins,
whose heirs were called Wah-sin-chung, who begat Avar, who begat
Irigavagna, who begat Ben-haoma, from whom was descended thirty
generations, the chief rab'bah of whom could hear the Voice.

8\. Ben-haoma numbered the Faithists of his day, and there were of them
four thousand, men, women and children, and all other nations and tribes
in Vind'yu were idolators.

9\. Through the descendants of Romsat the Voice was again regained by
the I'hins, through a tribe called <span id="page_341b">p. 341b</span>
Shriviyata, who begat Them-saga, who begat Friavamargalum, who bred with
the I'hins and begat Thace, who begat with the I'hins Anu, who begat the
I'hins Maha, who begat with the I'hins Brah, who had both voice and
power from the Father. And he was called Brahma because of his great
wisdom.

10\. The angels of Ormazd had prophesied, saying: Out of thy seed shall
come one called BRAHMA, who shall have su'is with power. Things that
were revealed to Zarathustra have been lost, but shall be recovered in
Brahma.

11\. Romsat had prophesied, moreover: With the coming of Brahma is the
end of the I'hin race in Shem (Vind'yu).

12\. God spake in kosmon, saying: Let no man say: With Brahma, or with
Abram, or with Po, or with Eawahtah, was the beginning of the doctrine
of One Spirit. For since man walked upright on the earth, behold, I have
said unto him: Thou shalt have but one God, even the Creator. And in the
cycles of my times I have raised up many who have comprehended my words,
but others constantly put away the I AM, and raise up idols instead.

13\. But let all men understand who and what, is meant by the terms, Po,
and Abram, and Brahma, and Eawahtah, which is, that though I walked the
earth with these, teaching and speaking through them, yet none of these
were idolized by men. For the nations of the earth, in the time of these
four men, comprehended that they were not Gods, but men through whom,
and to whom, I, even God, had spoken.

14\. Brahma said: Have all men stars? Behold, since my childhood up, I
have had a star above my forehead.

15\. No man could answer Brahma. They said: Brahma is foolish, with all
his wisdom.

16\. Brahma asked the star: Who art thou?

17\. God said: I am thy star; I am the light of the second heavens.

18\. Brahma asked: What is thy name, O star, thou mysterious light?

19\. God said: Call me Ormazd; I am the same light that spoke to
Zarathustra in the olden time.

20\. Brahma asked: Who art thou, O Ormazd, thou voice of light?

21\. God said: With one only shalt thou commune, thy Creator; one only
shalt thou worship, He who made thee alive.

<span id="page_342b">p. 342b</span>

22\. Brahma said: Why hast thou taken up thy abode above my head?

23\. God said: Attain thou to be one with thy Creator, in wisdom, and
goodness, and purity, and thou shalt answer thine own questions.

24\. Then Brahma applied to the rab'bah, the Zarathustrian priests, and
he learned abnegation of self, and the rites and ceremonies of the
ancients.

25\. When Brahma was grown up, God said to him: Arise on the morrow, my
son, and I will lead thee into another country, where thou shalt marry,
and settle down for a long season.

26\. Brahma said: Peaceful have been my slumbers, and joyous my wakeful
hours all my life. I have made labor a pleasure, and I give all I have
to the poor, doing Thy commandments with all my wisdom and strength.

27\. From my youth up I have killed not any living creature of Thine
that goeth on the earth, or swimmeth in the waters, or flieth in the
air. Neither ate I of anything that had ever breathed the breath of
life; and I have been most abstemious in plain food and water only,
according to the Zarathustrian law. Hear Thou me, O Ormazd; for I will
break my soul unto Thee, and hold nothing back.  
Ormazd said: It is well.

28\. Brahma said: Woe is me, if my soul turneth toward woman! Was I not
wed to Thee, O Ormazd? Was I not Thy Bridegroom from my youth up?

29\. Why, then, protectest not Thou me unto Thyself? Ormazd said: In
times past I raised up many an iesu, and they were without flesh desires
all their days.

30\. Such men could not perpetuate the earth; they were good for their
day. Zarathustra was an iesu. My Light is now for them that can
perpetuate. All things are possible in my hands. Grieve not, nor smother
out any talent I created unto the pure in flesh.

31\. Brahma said: If I love a woman, O Ormazd, may I not lose my love
for Thee? Ormazd said: By faith in Me thou shalt triumph by the road I
marked out for thee, since before thou wert born. Arise, then, O Brahma,
and follow thy star. I will lead thee.

32\. Brahma said: Can there be another way than by celibacy? Can a
married man serve Ormazd?

33\. So, Brahma traveled, and came into the country of Etchoyosin, where
<span id="page_343b">p. 343b</span> lay the mountains of Talavitcha,
under King Tyama, who had enforced the Zarathustrian religion with sword
and spear, and with chains and death, being himself sole interpreter.

34\. When Brahma came to Au'watcha, he halted to inquire the way to the
high priest's house, that he might be absolved for twenty days in
Tyama's kingdom, according to law, paying the price as apportioned for
strangers.

35\. In answer to his summons, there came to the gate, the damsel
Yu-tiv, fairest of women, draped, also, to go before the priest for
confession. Brahma inquired of her concerning the priest and the tax.
Yu'tiv informed him, and, moreover, said: I am going thither, and shall
delight to lead thee to the place. So Brahma went with Yu-tiv, and when
they were gone a little way she said unto him: Whence camest thou, and
what is thy mission? Peradventure, I may serve thee. Behold, I see a
star above thy head!

36\. Brahma said: Seest thou a star? Now I say unto thee, there is an
old legend that the pure in heart, looking upward, oft see their own
paroda, and think it belongeth to another. Yu-tiv reassured Brahma that
she saw the star, whereupon Brahma took heart and said:

37\. Yea, I have a star, and the Voice of Ormazd cometh to me at times.
For some years I strove to be a priest, for I saw the wickedness of the
world, and, moreover, the tyranny and tortures of the church (ha'oke),
and my soul cried out for the oppressed who had faith in the Great
Spirit more than in the priests. And Ormazd came to me and said: Brahma,
my son, forsake thy studies, and take thy broad-axe, and go and hew
logs. Behold, I will come to thee some time, and thou shalt bless the
earth.

38\. So I gave up my studies and became a hewer of wood, living
abstemiously day and night, and praying and striving with all my soul
and with all my strength to purge myself of all earthly thoughts. So I
grew, as thou beholdest, to be a large man of great strength. But, alas,
evil overtook me; my soul desired a woman. And I cried out unto Ormazd,
saying: Why hast Thou put this matter upon thy son? Lo, I strove to be
wedded to thee only; I shut my eyes to all the earth, but <span
id="page_344b">p. 344b</span> thou hast suffered me to fall. Rescue thou
me, I pray.

39\. Then spake Ormazd to me, saying: Behold, I have revealed my word
through such as have no earth desires; but that time is past. I will now
prove unto the nations of the earth that I have power in directing the
flesh, that heirs may be born unto me. Arise, therefore, and go whither
I will lead thee, for thou shalt take a wife and raise up seven sons,
and I will deliver my edifice (church), unto liberty.

40\. So I rose up and walked after the light of my star; thus far have I
come, but how much further I must go I know not; but I will go to the
end of the earth if Ormazd require it of me.

41\. Yu-tiv said: I pity thee, O man! One so holy should never with
woman wed. To win such a man's love, the best of women would forget her
God! To bear thee one child, instead of seven, a woman would cleave the
earth in twain. It would be like peopling the world with Gods and
Goddesses.

42\. O promise me, stranger, thou wilt turn from such unholy desires. I
know not what moveth me past all modesty thus to speak to thee, but
before Ormazd, Creator of heaven and earth, erst thou camest to my
father's gate a voice spake in mine ear, saying: Quickly, thou, put on
thy robes for confession, and hasten to the priest.

43\. I tell thee, O man, to save thee, the angels of Ormazd came to me.
It is true that two can see more than one.

44\. Brahma said: Who are thou, O woman? Yu-tiv said: A weaver of mats;
no more. My father liveth in yonder thatch; my mother's soul ascended to
heaven, giving me birth. She was of the I'hins. From place to place my
father and I have been driven; all the ills of earth are written on my
soul. And the rudeness of men; the light-heartedness of women! By day
and by night my soul crieth out for the miseries of the earth. O the
sins of the earth! O the death of little infants! O the trials of the
poor! O the suffering of the sick! O the anguish of the imprisoned! O
stranger, stranger, stranger! People not this world more!

45\. Let us turn our souls upward; to Nirvana; to the regions of endless
paradise! To the voices of angels and Gods! To wisdom that erreth not;
to <span id="page_345b">p. 345b</span> music never discordant! To love
that never separateth! Never!

46\. Brahma said: Now I beseech Thee, O Ormazd, that I may never marry!
But because Thou hast raised up here so fair a woman, and withal so
wise, give me leave that I may dwell near at hand!

47\. Then spake Ormazd, out of the midsts of the voices of their stars,
saying: Hold up thy hand, O man! Hold up thy hand, O woman! And they
held up their hands, and Ormazd said: I am the Father, and ye are My
children. That I may have joy, dwell ye near together.

48\. Now after this, Brahma and she proceeded to the priest's house and
made their sacrifices, and returned and came to Yu-tiv's father's house,
and the father's name was Aliegan-is, called Ali. And Yu-tiv told her
father all that had happened, but Brahma said little. Ali said: What the
All Light doeth is well done. My house is ample. Brahma shall sojourn so
long as he desireth.

49\. Brahma said: Of mine own accord I am not master of many words. When
it pleaseth Ormazd to speak with me, I will raise my voice. Then Yu-tiv
spread mats and provided food, and sat it before Brahma, and he ate; and
after that they said prayers according to the laws of the king, and then
retired to sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](oah253)
