[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah235)  [Next](oah237) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

1\. IN the Council of Craoshivi the Voice of Jehovih came to
Cpenta-armij, saying: Behold, the time of thy sun and stars riseth in
the Road of Salkwatka. The red star neareth the fields of Abarom; Great
Oteson hath filled the sinks and slues of Yosawakak; thousands of
millions of My Sons and Daughters behold the Feast of Spe-ta.

2\. Hear thou thy Creator, O Cpenta-armij! For thou shalt spread broad
the table of My hosts; such like as hath never been before in
Haot-saiti. And thou shalt send Obed, God of Oise; Gavaini, Goddess of
Ipthor; Ab, Shriever of Riv-Seing; Raisi, Goddess of Esdras; Wish-tse,
God of Zuth; <span id="page_345a">p. 345a</span> Harava, God of Yon-yon;
Vraga-piet, Goddess of Zoe; and Loo-chung, God of Ata-bonaswitchahaha.
And thou shalt send for the Gods and Goddesses of the Plains of
Cnoe-Chang; and for the Gods and Goddesses of the Chi-ha-wogo Roads; and
for all the Gods and Goddesses in their own Nirvanian fields; and for
the Great Chief, Shoo-lo, of the Roads of Jinihassij, and for all the
Gods and Goddesses in his dominions in My etherean worlds.

3\. And yet thou shalt remember of thine own knowledge many Gods and
Goddesses; and thou shalt charge thy companions, Owks, and See-wah-Gon,
and Ha-o-ha, to sit in Council with thee, that ye may remember
whomsoever of Chiefs and Chieftainesses, of Shrievers and Gods and
Goddesses, that may be delightful:

4\. And thou shalt command them in My name to meet in the Feast of
Spe-ta, for it is the first in this, My new world. Make way for them;
make place for them, O My Daughter! Make wide the roadways in My lower
heaven; make My Holy Feast glorious.

5\. Cpenta-armij said: Too wide are the dans of earth; too far apart and
cumbersome, O Father! More than two thousand millions and four thousand
millions will be my harvest unto Thee, O Jehovih! Great is Thy wisdom in
Spe-ta; the time for the beginning of quarter ascensions, fifty years.

6\. Thy Gods and Goddesses, O Jehovih, and Thy Chiefs and
Chieftainesses, will bind up these loose heavens into wholesome
discipline. I will send my swift messengers into Thy far-off etherean
worlds, and bring Thy Sons and Daughters to Thy Feast.

7\. Cpenta-armij sent off into the wide heavens, high beyond the earth
heavens, invitations to tens of thousands of high-raised Sons and
Daughters of the Great Spirit. Then she called her surveyors and
table-makers before Jehovih's throne, and said unto them:

8\. The end of dawn is near at hand; I will give a feast, a very great
feast. Go ye and survey the ground from Craoshivi to the Lakes of
Oochi-loo, in etherea, and for the length thereof make ye a width in the
form of Fete; and the road of the Fete shall be sufficient for the
passage of twelve avalanzas abreast; and the depth of the Fete shall be
as from the surface of the earth unto Chinvat. Within twelve sios of
Abarom, and of the height of the circuit of Bilothowitchieun shall ye
carry the border flames; and the flames shall be of double currents,
going and coming, that the food of the feast may be <span
id="page_346a">p. 346a</span> brought from any region suited to the
high-raised grades.

9\. And the arc of the feast shall encompass the whole earth, and extend
outward to the belt of Craoshivi, and then downward in two lines, east
and west; and the downward lines shall be like the feet of a compass,
one stationary and the other movable. And the light that extendeth from
the arc down the movable line shall rest on the delivered hosts of
Abram, and it shall bear upon his people, that they may hereafter draw
Light direct from the Father's throne in Craoshivi; and it shall move
westward and be as an inheritance of Jehovih's light upon His corporeal
sons and daughters.

10\. But the line that standeth in the east shall be a base line and
centre, whither shall descend the Father's light upon the delivered sons
and daughters of the hosts of Brahma and Po. And because of the arc of
Spe-ta upon them, they shall remain in their own divisions of the earth.

11\. And for the deliverance of the harvests of the quarter, the
high-raised horns of the arc shall stand to the four quarters, east,
west, north and south.

12\. Jehovih then spake through Cpenta-armij, saying: For I will illume
the horns thereof, and My new world, the earth and her heavens, shall
rest in the light of My Roads forever. That no man, having My examples
before him, can misunderstand Me.

13\. Behold, it is given to a child, only one lesson a day; and to a
youth, two lessons a day; and to a mature man, many lessons a day; so,
in the early creation of man, I give few lessons; then in the youthful
age of the race, many more lessons; but when the race hath attained to
full manhood, behold, I lay My light at their feet, that they may take
My lessons every day.

14\. In one time I send the angels of the dead to lead man up to a
knowledge of Me and My places; but when man hath attained to think for
himself, I set up my arc of Spe-ta; and it is as a candle in the
firmament of heaven, wherefrom My Light falleth upon the soul of My
people, without any interpreter, save Mine Own Voice.

15\. For which reason, when one of My worlds hath attained to Spe-ta, I
come to deliver them from kings, and queens, and priests, and angels,
and it is as the maturity of a son in his father's house, when he
inviteth his neighbors and spreadeth a feast.

<span id="page_347a">p. 347a</span>

16\. Open wide thy places, O Cpenta-armij! A great joy is upon My
etherean worlds; My high-raised Sons and Daughters shall have great
glory in the earth and her heavens. Behold, I have proclaimed Myself in
the words of mortals; four high-raised sons have learned to know their
Father in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah237)
