[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah249)  [Next](oah251) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XII

1\. ABRAHAM inquired of God concerning the peoples of the kings and of
the Faithists. And God said: Whoever I lead to thee shall be thine; thou
shalt henceforth be father to all men and women and children that are
thine. And they shall be thy family. But all other peoples shall not be
thine; nor shalt thou be to them a father nor a prophet. Neither shalt
thou make laws for the kings' peoples; nor laws betwixt thy people and
them. Of thine own people shalt thou be, and for thine own people shalt
thou be forever.

2\. Nor shall thy people have anything in common with the kings'
peoples, nor with any other people under the sun. Nor enter into
treaties, nor alliances, nor in any way whatsoever. Both thy labor and
the labor of thy people are for Jehovih, through the Lord thy God.

3\. But touching the intercourse betwixt thine and the kings' peoples,
be circumspect to the value of a fraction in buying and selling, to give
the full value. Neither suffer my chosen to accept presents, or
otherwise to become obligated to other peoples, for it is the law of thy
God. For it shall not be said by the kings' peoples: Behold, I made
them!

4\. For I say unto thee, neither kings nor rich men make the people of
thy God.

5\. Whosoever would give thee gifts, let him quit his people and come
and dwell with my people in person and spirit. I cannot be put off with
money and with gifts, like a peevish child or a wanton woman.

<span id="page_334b">p. 334b</span>

6\. Shall a man say: Here are gifts for thy God, he is a good enough
God! But as for my soul it is too good to give to thee or thy God.

7\. Neither shalt thou suffer thy people to marry with the kings'
peoples, for the same reason. But whosoever will marry my daughters, let
him come and dwell, first with my people, proving that he hath forsaken
all the idolatrous gods for Jehovih's sake. It shall be the same of thy
sons; if they desire strange damsels or wives, they shall first bring
them to dwell one year amongst my chosen.

8\. Abraham inquired concerning government. And God said unto Abraham:
To teach people to dwell together in peace, order, harmony and love;
being disciplined to these, what more is required? Government belongeth
to the kings' peoples.

9\. Abraham said: That I have spoken before thee, O God, teach thou me,
for I am as one in the dark cellar groping about? Behold. my people are
unlearned!

10\. God said: Who is learned? I say unto thee, he who knoweth the stars
and the rocks, and the mountains and valleys, and all that is living and
dead, and the tongues of the ancients, but knoweth not the Creator, is
unlearned. But he that knoweth the Creator is learned indeed.

11\. Better is it that thy people dwell in tents and under trees; and
their children roll on the ground, and die not, but grow strong in
person and in spirit for the glory of the Creator, than to dwell as the
kings' peoples, in magnificent cities, and in lust and death. Before thy
God, thy people are a most learned people.

12\. Abraham inquired of the Lord concerning servitude. And God answered
him, saying: There is but one Master, even Jehovih; thy people shall be
His servants only. But all people have loves; a damsel saith to her
lover: I will be thy servant, and he marrieth her. A man saith to
another: Thy judgment is greater than mine; I will be thy servant. And
the man taketh him in love to work for him.

13\. Therefore, for convenience sake, thou mayst say, master and
servant. Nevertheless, my chosen shall not, in fact, have either masters
or servants, for the one shall not have authority over the other but by
love and free consent.

14\. Abraham asked concerning the products of labor. God said unto <span
id="page_335b">p. 335b</span> Abraham: Even as I have said of servants
and masters, so also is it of the productions that come out of the
earth. Nothing belongeth to any man, for all things are Mine, saith the
Creator.

15\. Nevertheless, for convenience sake, thou mayst say: This is his
product, or that is such an one's product. But still he holdeth it only
by his Creator's consent.

16\. Let all men render unto the Creator His creations, for they are
Jehovih's. After that, Abraham said: Some men grow flax, and some wool,
and some corn; but the seasons bring forth not alike unto all. Others
spin and weave; and others make butter and cheese. And yet this
happeneth also: One man is strong, another weak; one riseth with the sun
and toileth all day; another sitteth on the bank, fishing.

17\. Now when the products are brought in, lo and behold, there are no
two that are equal.

18\. And God said: Every man's matter is betwixt him and his Creator.
According to diligence and industry He rewardeth them in the end. He
that perceiveth this, knoweth his heavenly Father; he that perceiveth it
not, dwelleth in darkness.

19\. Abraham said: Shall the lazy be rebuked, and they that shirk be
upbraided?

20\. And God said: Nay. Let all thy people bring their products and cast
them before thee, saying: This is my sacrifice unto Jehovih; distribute
thou it. And if some bring not anything, neither rebuke them nor pity
them; they are the sons and daughters of thy God. And if some decorate
themselves with fine raiment, or jewels, censure them not; thy God
searcheth their hearts.

21\. Abraham asked concerning lands. God said: Consider thy God. Did I
go to the king and to the rich man and say: Give thou me thy sons and
daughters? Nay, but I went to them that were despised by the rich, and
by the king, and I said: Come ye! and they came.

22\. And when thou wert come hither, did I say: Take thou the king's
lands, or the rich man's? Nay, but I led thee to that which was
neglected and waste in the eyes of the kings' peoples, and I said: This
is thy inheritance.

23\. Sufficient is it for thee and thy people to buy burying-places for
the dead, which shall not be disturbed. But of all other lands, neither
buy nor sell.

<span id="page_336b">p. 336b</span>

24\. And after thy people have improved a place, and a king cometh
against thee, saying: Either by purchase or by battle, I will have this
land; thou shalt say: Nay, neither by purchase nor by battle, shalt thou
inherit that which is Jehovih's. But if thou desirest the land, then
will I give it thee without money and without battle.

25\. And it shall come to pass upon my chosen that they shall be driven
from place to place, whither I will lead them; and they shall make the
waste lands to bloom like gardens, and the deserts to yield ample
harvests; for they shall dig wells, and till the soil, and prove unto
the nations of the earth the glory of thy works.

26\. And they shall be cut down and driven away, and scattered, but I
will come and gather them together. Their places shall be inherited by
idolators and worshippers of strange gods, who will build mighty
temples. But my people shall not build in stone, nor wood, nor iron,
that shall endure; for they shall go from place to place, proclaiming me
and my works; but where they have been, there shall be nothing left on
the earth to show their labors.

27\. But when I have taken them across all the earth, and they are
scattered as dust before the wind, and no man can say: Here is a nation
of the children of Abraham, lo. I will raise up my voice for them, even
I, the God of heaven and earth. And in that day the idolators and
worshippers of strange Gods will be on the wane; their temples of stone
and mortar will still be standing.

28\. But a voice shall go up from the whole earth, even from the far-off
nations of the earth, saying: What of them who laid the foundations of
the temple of ONE GOD, EVEN JEHOVIH! Who were the sons and daughters of
Abraham! O that mine eyes could have beholden the Faithists of that!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](oah251)
