[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah228)  [Next](oah230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

OF THE BIRTH OF PO, ABRAM, BRAHMA AND EAWAHTAH.

1\. FOR two whole days Cpenta-armij left the people in recreation, but
on the third she ascended the throne, <span id="page_322a">p.
322a</span> and lo and behold, even in that same moment of time, a light
spread abroad over all the place, so that the people comprehended indeed
what was meant by Jehovih's hand being upon them. And they all resumed
their places, whereupon Jehovih spake through Cpenta-armij, saying:

2\. Whom I brought with Me from Haotsaiti shall be My Council during
dawn; but the portals shall remain open on every side.

3\. Who are not of My Council are not bound unto these, My labors, and
the same shall go and come as they choose, remembering the call of their
respective Gods.

4\. For know ye all, that whoever aspireth to Me shall come to Me; but
the nearest way for many is round about. Ye being above grade fifty are
already more to Me and for Me than against Me or from Me, and in equal
degree are cast upon your own responsibility. For such is the light of
My kingdoms, from the first to the highest: To the child, no
responsibility; to grade twenty-five, one quarter; to fifty, one-half;
to seventy-five, three-quarters; but to the emancipated in My etherean
realms, responsibility not only to self but to all who are beneath.

5\. Wherein My highest worlds are responsible for the lowest, being
bound unto one another through Me for the resurrection of all.

6\. In this day am I come to deliver My Gods down to the earth, to walk
on the earth with mortals, raising them up in My name.

7\. They who shall be raised up in Me, even though still of the earth,
shall be holden alike responsible for all who are beneath them; for with
My light and power before them, and doing in My name, they that are
beneath them will hold them, not only on the earth, but in heaven, for
their labors and words.

8\. The Voice departed, and then Cpenta-armij spake in her own behalf,
saying: Once around earth and heaven will I now travel, seeing with mine
own eyes and hearing with mine own ears, even as is commanded of me by
the Father; that I may know of mine own knowledge the condition of
mortals and of the spirits who dwell both with them and in the lowest
heavens. He who is still your God shall abide with you, and on this
throne, until I return.

9\. Cpenta-armij then descended and sat at the foot of the throne, and
Owks and Ha-o-ha and See-wah-Gon with her, whereupon God went down and
took her hand, saying: Arise, O Goddess, and go thy way. And then he
<span id="page_323a">p. 323a</span> raised up the other three in the
same way, and they saluted and stood aside. Now, as soon as God raised
them up, the All Light settled upon him, and he again ascended the
throne, and sat in the midst. Then spake Cpenta-armij, saying to God:

10\. Jehovih hath commanded the raising of a voice in four divisions of
the earth; what is thy light, O God? God said:

11\. In Jaffeth I have raised up a man named Po, an Ihuan of the I'hin
side, of grade ninety-five. In Arabin'ya I have raised up a man named
Abram, an I'huan of the I'hin side, of grade ninety-five. In Vind'yu I
have raised up a man named Brahma, an I'huan of the I'hin side, of grade
ninety-nine. I Guatama I have raised up a man named Eawahtah, an I'huan
of the I'hin side, of grade ninety-five.

12\. The loo'is who have accomplished this labor are still with their
wards, but are apprised of thy coming. Behold, I send with thee
messengers who will answer thy commands.

13\. Hereupon, Cpenta-armij, with her hosts, departed, and entered an
otevan which God had had previously prepared for her; and she took with
her one million attendants, going straight down to the earth. And first
of all to visit mortals and mortal kingdoms, kings and queens, temples
and oracles, and then to see Po and Abram and Brahma and Eawahtah, all
of whom were sufficiently illumined to see her and to know she was the
Person of the All Voice.

14\. Next after these she visited all the heavenly kingdoms belonging to
the earth, going first to the heavenly kingdom, belonging to Japan,
thence to Ah'oan, of Jaffeth, thence to E'chad, and so on until she saw
them all.

15\. After that Cpenta-armij returned to Craoshivi, making a circuit
sufficient to examine all the plateaux below the belt meteoris.

16\. Now the whole time Cpenta-armij had been gone was thirty and two
days. Whilst she had been absent, God extended the receiving grounds of
Craoshivi twelve thousand miles in breadth toward the south, and founded
sixty colonies. For even now were, and would be, for the four years to
come, ships arriving daily with hundreds of thousands of angels who were
being prepared for the degree of Brides and Bridegrooms to Jehovih,
ready for the third resurrection.

17\. Messengers had arrived in Craoshivi daily from Cpenta-armij, so
that God knew when she would return. <span id="page_324a">p. 324a</span>
And accordingly he had prepared all things in readiness, and she was
received in the name of the Father, in due ceremony.

18\. And Cpenta-armij ascended the throne of God and sat in the midst,
and a light like a sun settled around about her. Her companions, Gods
and Goddesses, now sat not near her, though on the throne to the right
and left. Whilst they were taking in their respective places, the
es'enaurs were chanting anthems, and the awe and majesty of the scene
were magnified to the utmost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah230)
