[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah215)  [Next](oah217.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IX

1\. THEN God bewailed the state of the earth, because man ceased to love
anything thereon. His whole mind and heart were set upon heavenly
things, and the earth was becoming like a neglected farm grown up with
weeds and briars. So Jehovih answered God's prayers, saying: Behold, I
will bring darkness around about the earth on every side. See to it
then, My Son, for not only will man desire of the earth, but the angels
in thy high heavenly places will forsake them, and go down to the earth.

2\. So it came to pass, Jehovih brought ji'ya upon the earth, and it was
in a state of darkness for four hundred years, and the sun shone not,
but was like a red ball of fire, and mortal beings were without lights
and shadows.

3\. And men's minds and hearts took after the nature of the corporeal
world, losing sight of Ormazd and His heavenly promises, and they
bethought them of the desires of earth, and of the pleasures of
flesh-life. Now during ji'ay there fell perpetual atmospherean substance
on the earth, and it was of the nature and kind of substance of which
the earth is made, but atmospheric, and this is that which is called
ji'ya.

4\. And the plateau of Haraiti and Zeredho were driven down to the earth
and near the earth; and the belt of meteoris was moved nearer by
thousands of miles, and meteoric stones fell in many places upon the
earth, like a rain shower, but burning hot, and with suffocating smell.
And the affairs of mortals were changed; they built new cities, and
became great hunters, applying the wisdom of their forefathers to the
matters of the earth.

5\. And the heavenly places of delight were broken up and descended to
the earth; and the angels were cast upon the earth, turning away from
faith in Ormazd, seeking joy in the affairs of earth. And God and his
Lords were powerless unto righteous works, either with mortals or
angels. But man and woman became prolific, and they grew large, and full
of resolution and power.

6\. The Voice of Jehovih spake to God, saying: Maintain thou thy
kingdom; and thy Gods and thy Lords under thee shall also maintain their
kingdoms. Nor suffer thou My people to be discouraged with My works.

7\. Because I have sent darkness upon the earth to benefit mortals in
mortality, so have I also given My heavenly hosts lessons in My es
worlds. Nor shall they call this a judgment upon them, nor say, I do
these things in anger, nor as punishment, nor for benefit of one to the
injury of others.

8\. Because thou wert guided by My voice and My commandments in
bestowing the Divan law, behold the strength and wisdom of thy pupils!
For inasmuch as they learn to master the elements I created in
atmospherea, so will they become triumphant in My etherean worlds.

9\. God perceived, and he and his Lords and sub-Gods fortified their
kingdoms on all hands, and provided assistance to their colleges,
factories, hospitals and places of education, in order to maintain the
angels who had sought resurrection.

10\. Nevertheless, it came to pass, many angels believed a new order of
light was coming on the earth, wherein the earth would become the all
highest abode for angels and Gods. Others having lived two or three
hundred years in atmospherea, and never having been in etherea, began to
disbelieve in the higher heavens, and finally to disbelieve in Jehovih,
also.

11\. And in two hundred years later, God and his Lords lost influence
and power with both angels and mortals. And the latter took to war, and
the angels who had ministered unto them became wanderers and
adventurers, without organization, and cared neither for truth nor
wisdom, but flattered mortals for their own glory.

12\. And the kings and queens of the earth built temples for their
familiar spirits, who assumed the ancient names of Gods and Lords. Now,
when the next arc of dan was near at hand, God enumerated his upraised
hosts, and there were prepared as Brides and Bridegrooms for Jehovih's
higher heavens twelve thousand millions.

13\. And because it was less than the number of his predecessor, he
cried out unto Jehovih, bewailing his weakness. And Jehovih answered
him, saying: Bewail not, My Son! Thou hast done a great work. Neither
ask thou that thou mayst remain another dan, for the next will not be so
fair a harvest. So God grieved no more, but <span id="page_291">p.
291</span> bestowed his kingdom on his successor; and his Lords did
likewise, and so did his sub-Gods and all other persons having protégés.
And God called together the Brides and Bridegrooms of Jehovih; and the
latter sent down from etherea five great ships of fire, and delivered
God and his hosts into the emancipated worlds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](oah217.md)
