[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah276)  [Next](oah278) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter XI

OF THE DEITY, ALIAS DYAUS, ALIAS DE'YUS, ALIAS DEUS; ORIGIN AND POWER IN
THE HEAVENS AND ON EARTH.

1\. ANUHASAJ said: I, the Lord, your God, being the All Highest, through
your choice, decree, for sake of harmony and concert in our labors, the
establishment of a De'yus.

2\. As the Craoshivians have had a Diva (Divinity), so will I have a
De'yus. And by virtue of mine own authority I proclaim ye, my Lords and
Lordesses, as the holy members thereof.

3\. As the Diva hath been taught in these heavens, so also be the
De'yus, whereof I assume the chief head.

4\. As the Diva had laws, so also shall our De'yus; and they shall be
promulgated on the earth, and taught to mortals as the laws of De'yus
(Deity). Therefore by my own voice I dissolve the Diva of heaven; and it
shall not be from this time forth forever. And whosoever of ye being
members thereof, shall this day resign the Diva, and send word to the
ruler of Craoshivi, for his benefit, and for his kingdom's benefit.

5\. And the ruler of Craoshivi shall continue in his own place and
kingdom; for it is his.

6\. And the ruler of Vara-pishanaha, called Ahura, shall continue in his
own place and kingdom, for it is his.

7\. First, then, I take unto myself Anubi, the Lord loved by you all,
and he shall be my associate, and his title shall be MASTER OF THE
SCALES OF HEAVEN, for he shall determine the grades of the spirits and
send them to their respective departments. On earth his title shall be
SAVIOR OF MEN, SON OF DE'YUS.

8\. Second, thou, Hi-kas, shalt be RULER OVER JAFFETH and its heavenly
kingdom; and thy title shall be TE-IN, and of the first rank of GOD OF
THE EARTH.

9\. Third, thou, Wotchissij, shall be ruler over Vind'yu, and her
heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be SUDGA, and of the first rank of
GOD OF THE EARTH.

10\. Fourth, thou Che-le-mung, shalt be ruler over Arabin'ya, and her
heavenly kingdom, and thy title shall be OSIRIS, and of the first rank
of GOD OF THE EARTH.

11\. Fifth, thou, Baal shalt be ruler over Heleste and her heavenly
kingdom, and thy title shall be BAAL, and of the first rank of GOD OF
THE EARTH.

12\. Sixth, thou, Ashtaroth, shalt be ruler over Parsa, and its heavenly
kingdom, and thy title shall be ASHTAROTH, of the first rank of GODDESS
OF THE EARTH.

13\. Seventh, thou, Fo-ebe, shalt be ruler over Uropa and her heavenly
kingdom, and thy title shall be FO-EBE, and of the first rank of GODDESS
OF THE EARTH.

14\. Eighth, thou, Ho-jab, shalt be ruler over Japan and her heavenly
kingdom, and thy title shall be HO-JAB, and of the first rank of GOD OF
THE EARTH.

15\. After that the false God made appointments for the other divisions
of the earth and their heavenly places, and after that he said unto
them:

16\. All my Gods and Goddesses shall have thrones in their places, and
holy councils and attendants as becometh Gods of the first rank. And
every one shall have a capital city, with subsidiaries according to the
number and place of their spirits and mortal subjects.

17\. And every God and Goddess shall manage his or her own kingdom in
his or her own way; but every one shall nevertheless be tributary to my
kingdom, according to the exactions I put upon him or them.

18\. That ye may resign the Diva, and choose your assistants, before
being crowned, I declare a day of recreation, to assemble at the
trumpeter's call.

19\. Hereupon the hosts relaxed from duty and made their resignations of
the Diva, and sent them with messengers to God in Craoshivi, but not one
of them mentioned the new state of affairs resolved upon. On the next
day, at the trumpeter's call, they assembled again; and Anuhasaj said
unto them: Come ye with me, and I will show you the place of Hored and
its boundaries; for it shall not be my kingdom alone, but yours also,
for my kingdom shall be the kingdom of your kingdoms.

20\. And they entered an otevan, and, coming in the fourth belt below
meteoris, in the sign of the twelfth arc of Chinvat; and Anuhasaj said:
From this time forth this belt shall be called <span id="page_382">p.
382</span> Hored, and it shall be my place forever. It shall be the
central kingdom of all the earth's heavens.

21\. And the multitude said: HAIL, KINGDOM OF HORED, THE HOLY HILL,
PLACE OF THE MOST HIGH GOD! And it was known thereafter as the belt of
Hored, hill of God. It was a three-quarters belt, and the base thereof
was ten thousand miles from the earth, and the summit was fifteen
thousand miles high; habitable within and without. And its ascending
rank in grades was twenty, that is, it was easily habitable by spirits
that attained to that grade; being above the grade of infants and
drujas, and above the region of hells and knots, save in cases of great
panic. Now, from the first place of Hored, where Anuhasaj crowned
himself, which was the eastern base of the hill, to the place for his
capital city, he made a roadway and called it Loo-hored, and it was the
only opened roadway to the kingdoms below.

22\. So it came to pass Anuhasaj had two capital cities; and the first
was called the CITY OF THE GATE OF HEAVEN, that is, Anubi; and the other
was called the PLACE OF EVERLASTING REST, that is, Sanc-tu. Anuhasaj
said to Anubi: Behold, the City of the Gate of Heaven shall be thy
place. And thou shalt determine the rate of all souls who desire to
enter the Place of Everlasting Rest. Thou shalt be judge over them. And
whosoever is not for me shall not enter, but shall be cast into the
kingdoms of hada. And those that are for me, thou shalt send unto me.

23\. And thou shalt have a Holy Council of one hundred thousand; and of
examiners thou shalt have one million. And thy capital shall be guarded
on every side but one, with pillars of fires, so that none can pass but
by the Gate of Heaven. And of guardsmen thou shalt have seven millions,
divided into seven watches, one for each day. Of messengers betwixt thy
place and mine, thou shalt have ten thousand; but betwixt thee and the
Gods and Goddesses of the lower kingdoms, thou shalt have five hundred
thousand. But, of thine own choice, shall be the number of es'enaurs,
trumpeters and marshals, and thy attendants also.

24\. And all Gods and Goddesses coming to me, or sending messengers to
my holy place, shall come through thy city, even through the Gate of
Heaven; and they shall come according to certain rites and ceremonies
which I will give unto thee. Come, therefore, and receive thy crown.

25\. Thus was crowned Anubi; and after him were crowned the other Gods
and Goddesses; and Anuhasaj bequeathed to each one his own kingdom,
according to the custom of the ancients. And when these matters were
completed, he again spake before them, saying: Behold the example I have
made before you; even before I provided myself for mine own kingdom I
have given unto every one all things required. It is meet and proper,
therefore, that ye contribute unto me and my place workmen and
materials, that I may build in great glory also.

26\. For, as I am exalted, and my kingdom made glorious, so have ye
whereof to preach gloriously to your inhabitants of the place in store
for them. Thus, did Anuhasaj put Gods and Goddesses under obligations to
himself, and they acquiesced in his proceedings, saying: Nay, we will
not only contribute man and women for this purpose, but we will labor
with our own hands for the space of twenty days, helping to build the
capital city, and to open roads, in all directions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah278)
