[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah217)  [Next](oah219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

1\. THE next dan was five hundred years, and God and his heavenly
kingdoms prospered before Jehovih. But as to the Lord's kingdoms on
earth, and as to mortal kingdoms and empires, not much light was
manifested in them.

2\. Ahura, who had thus falsely taken, and was known by, the name of
Ahura'Mazda, established Lords to rule over mortals. And these Lords
were in direct opposition to God's Lords; for the latter taught the
higher heavens and the All Person, Jehovih, or Ormazd, according to the
language of mortals. But Ahura's Lords taught only one heavenly kingdom,
which was Ahura's, called Ctusk, the All Holy Highest Heaven.

3\. God's Lords inspired mortals to everlasting resurrection; Ahura's
Lords inspired mortals to Ahura's kingdom, and there the end. And since
mortals had built temples for their priests (rab'bahs), who were gifted
with su'is, the spirits congregated in the temples, and oft appeared in
sar'gis, teaching openly their several doctrines. And the ashars that
labored for Ahura extolled the glory and the delight of Ctusk, and the
wonderful majesty and power of Ahura. But the ashars of God's hosts
inspired and taught of the Great Spirit, Unapproachable.

4\. For five hundred years were God's hosts confronted with this
opposition; and it came to pass that mortals, especially in Vindyu, were
divided into two great classes of worshippers. And just before God's
successor came into dominion, he propounded the matter in Diva;
whereupon all the members spake at great length. Afterward, Div decreed:

5\. Whatsoever is worshipped, having comprehensible form or figure, is
an idol. He that worshippeth an idol, whether of stone or wood, or
whether it be a man or an angel, sinneth against the Creator. This was
given unto all of God's Lords, and by them to the ashars, and commanded
to be taught to mortals by inspiration and otherwise.

6\. When the time of dan came there were seven thousand million Brides
and Bridegrooms raised up to Jehovih's emancipated worlds, and the
succeeding God and Lords came into dominion under more favorable
auspices, but which were not to continue long.

7\. The Diva had extended to fourteen members; and God's Lords had
succeeded in securing kingdoms in the principal parts of Jaffeth,
Vind'yu and Arabin'ya. On the other hand, the emissaries of Ahura, the
false, had been most active in extending the kingdom of their idol.
Ahura was <span id="page_294">p. 294</span> most cunning with the last
Divan act: Instead of interdicting it, he altered it, so it read as
followeth, to wit: Whatsoever is worshipped, having comprehensible form
or figure, is an idol. He that worshippeth an idol, whether of stone or
wood, or whether it be a man or an angel, sinneth against the All
Highest, who is personated in Ahura'Mazda, the Holy Begotten Son of all
created creations!

8\. And next, Ahura, determined to found a second heaven, decreeing to
his emissaries as followeth, to wit: Behold Gir-ak-shi, the heavenly
region belonging above the lands of Heleste! Thither will I build a new
heaven, greater than all other heavens, save Ctusk. And Gir-ak-shi is
well founded, I will people it with many millions of mighty angels, Gods
and Lords. And my hosts shall descend to the corporeal earth, to the
lands of Parsi'e and Arabin'ya, and they shall obsess mortals day and
night, and inspire them to go to Heleste, where they shall build great
cities and kingdoms unto me and my hosts.

9\. And when these things are fulfilled, behold, I will send my hosts to
Uropa, and build there also heavenly kingdoms and mortal kingdoms; and
when these are established, behold, I will send into other countries,
one after another, until my heavenly kingdoms embrace all places, and
until all the earth is mine.

10\. For I will be God over all, and ye that labor with me shall be my
Lords and sub-Gods forever. And my kingdoms and your kingdoms shall be
bestowed with glories and ornaments, the like of which never was.
Neither shall the Gods of other worlds come against me or mine to carry
away my people. They shall no longer flatter them, calling them Brides
and Bridegrooms to Jehovih, a thing, none can see or comprehend.

11\. And Ahura and his emissaries set to work to carry out these
decrees, and in two hundred years they had inspired the Parsi'e'ans and
the Arabin'yans to emigrate by tens of thousands to the land of Heleste,
which was inhabited by druks and wanderers, full of wickedness. Ahura
inspired his immigrants to fall upon the native druks, and destroy them.
Wherein had come to pass that which Jehovih spake in Mouru, saying: They
who cannot be risen by persuasion may be aroused by less scrupulous
masters.

12\. For whilst Ahura's hosts were slaying the druks of Heleste by tens
of thousands, God's heavenly hosts were receiving their spirits and
conducting them away to other atmospherean regions.

13\. These, then, were the divisions of mortals on earth at this time:
First, the I'hins, who were the original Faithists. And they were
capable of prophecies and miracles to such an exten that all other
people called them the sacred people. Neither did the great warriors of
other nations and peoples molest them. The I'hins lived secluded and
separate from all other people. Nevertheless, they were the seed of
everlasting life on the earth, and the foundation for raising up
prophets and seers unto other peoples. Even as the mother of Zarathustra
was of the I'hins, so was it with all men and women born into the world
with su'is and sar'gis. For being near Jehovih, they had faith in Him,
and Him only. The second race, equally ancient, was the druks, the
barbarian hordes, incapable of inspiration, save for their stomachs'
sake. And though they were told a thousand times: Behold, ye have a
spiritual body! they understood not, cared not, and forgot it a moment
after. And though it were said to them: Behold, there is a Great Spirit!
they heard it not, nor understood, nor heeded the words. The third race
was the I'huans, born betwixt the I'hins and the druks. To this race, in
its early days, a commandment was given by God not to marry with the
druks, and they had maintained that law amongst themselves by the sign
of circumcision. This, then, was the first beginning of persecution
against Faithists in Jehovih.

14\. When Ahura usurped his heavenly kingdom, and appointed guardian
angels over mortals, he determined to leave nothing undone in order to
overthrow the doctrine of Jehovih, the All Person. So he decreed as
followeth, to wit:

15\. Since, by the mark of circumcision, they have pride in being
Faithists, I will not have circumcision. After the third generation (one
hundred years) whosoever hath this mark upon him is my enemy. He shall
be pursued, and no profit shall fall to his lot. Suffer not little
children to be maimed for my sake; rather let them be circumcised in
heart.

16\. And Ahura put no restriction upon his mortal followers marrying,
and it came to pass that those druks not slain in Heleste married with
the worshippers of Ahura.

17\. And about this same period of time Jehovih brought the earth into a
light region for two hundred years. And when the Diva was in session,
<span id="page_295">p. 295</span> Jehovih's Voice spake to Div, saying:
Let My Sons be not cast down because of the sins of Ahura; rather be ye
wise and appropriate from his wickedness that which will be good in the
end. For as it was not lawful for My people to marry with the druks,
behold, Ahura hath made a law on his own account against circumcision,
and it shall come to pass that by their sins even druks shall be raised
up to learn of Me and My kingdoms.

18\. And it came to pass that a fourth race rose up in the world, and it
was mongrel, being dark and short and less noble. The I'huans were red,
and brown, and tall, and majestic; the I'hins small, and white, and
yellow. And Jehovih put these marks upon His peoples that the races
might be read in thousands of years.

19\. Ahura perceived this. One of his Lords said unto him: Behold, the
marks of su'is are written! Then Ahura sought to disprove Jehovih in
this. He said:

20\. Behold, there are two senses to all men, the es and the corpor.
When one is in abeyance the other acteth. This is su'is. Call together
thy companions, and find a remedy; for I will prove all things in heaven
and earth.

21\. For fifty years Ahura and his hosts tried by other means to have
born into the world a great prophet and seer, but failed. Ahura said: I
know the way of the loo'is: They decoy the I'hin men to go with the
I'huan damsels. But I have sworn there is no Jehovih; how, then, shall I
go to the sacred people? And, after all, such a prophet might prove
treacherous to my kingdom. So Ahura commanded his emissaries to weigh
the matter for other fifty years, and then to solve the problem.

22\. So Ahura's emissaries inspired thousands of experiments to be made,
whereby a prophet or seer could be made amongst the mongrels. And
Jehovih suffered them to discover that by pressing down the front brain
of infants they could be made capable of su'is. And infants were
strapped on boards, and another board strapped on the forehead to press
the head flat; and every day the head-board was strapped on anew,
tighter and tighter, until the forehead, which holdeth the corporeal
judgment, was pressed flat, and the judgment of the brain driven up into
light-perceiving regions at the top of the head.

23\. Ahura thus raised up prophets and seers, and they were willing
instruments in his hands. And he sent into all the divisions of the
earth tens of thousands of angels, teaching this to mortals, thus lying
down the foundation for his grand scheme of reducing heaven and earth
into his own kingdoms.

24\. Jehovih spake in the Diva, saying: Even this permit ye. The druks
will heed more what one of their own people saith as a seer, than if the
same thing were said a hundred times over by an I'hin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah219)
