[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah232)  [Next](oah234.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

1\. WHEN they were assembled for the resurrection, the thousands of
millions, Cpenta-armij went and stood at the right hand of Ahura, and
next to her stood Owks; and on the left hand stood See-wah-Gon and
Ha-o-ha, and the Voice of Jehovih fell upon Ahura, saying: Extend My
lines to the four corners of the world; give into My labor the highest
grades.

2\. Accordingly, the marshals drew <span id="page_337a">p. 337a</span>
the line on the plateau, and the hosts of etherea stood equally toward
every corner, arranged in phalanxes of ten millions each; each having
the form of a quarter of a circle; leaving the lines of power from
centre to circumference, and the distance thereof was equal to the width
of Vind'yu on the corporeal earth. And the centre of the plateau was
high raised, so that Ahura stood on the highest place, which laid near
the CAPITAL OF THE COUNCIL.

3\. Now it so happened that the jealous Anuhasaj stood twelfth on the
east line, being the thirteenth from Ahura's left hand. Cpenta-armij
said to Ahura: Behold, the line is shattered. Ahura said: I feel
nothing; how sayest Thou, The line is shattered? She answered him,
saying: He who doeth Jehovih's work must deal as Jehovih dealeth. Only
those who are in concert with thee must labor with thee. Otherwise thy
best endeavors will be thwarted. Ahura said:

4\. O thou far-perceiving Goddess! In my much love and sympathy I
admitted Anuhasaj to the lines. He hath been my best friend.
Cpenta-armij said: Thou shalt know but One Friend, Jehovih.

5\. Ahura perceived, and he now felt the shattered place, and he sent
his chief marshal to Anuhasaj to bring him from the rank. And when
Anuhasaj was before Ahura, the latter said unto him: Because thou
servest thyself, thou shalt not stand in line; behold, there is but ONE
to serve, even Jehovih. Anuhasaj said: A joy upon thee and thy scheme.
Because thou art powerless, thou hast singled me out as an excuse before
these Gods and Goddesses!

6\. Ahura made no answer, but spake before Jehovih, saying: Give me
strength for Thy Children's sake, O Father! Behold, I have cut loose the
foundations of Ailkin; with high-extending cords I have bound her to
Vara-pishanaha. By virtue of Thy power in me I will raise her up. In Thy
name, let my hosts in will command: ARISE! UPWARD! ONWARD! O AILKIN!
ARISE, UPWARD, ONWARD, O AILKIN! ARISE, UPWARD, ONWARD, O AILKIN!

7\. With the third enunciation, which came from the thousands of
millions in concert, behold, the plateau moved from her foundation;
turned a little, then slowly, upward arose. Loud shouted all the
inhabitants of that heaven; with their own universal will the Great
Spirit stretched forth His hand and raised up the heavenly continent.
Even as with His hand He <span id="page_338a">p. 338a</span> toucheth a
corporeal continent and sendeth it beneath the ocean, so raiseth He His
heavenly places toward His emancipated worlds. Yea, because of His
Spirit upon His people, they desire it risen; with them and Him, ALL IS
ONE.

8\. And now, the Gods, with unbroken will, held their places as it were
a day for the corporeal earth, and not a God or Goddess from the single
purpose in thought strayed a moment of time and no distracting thought
intervening; for such is the will and mastery of Gods over their own
thoughts. Even then, to keep up the concerted force joyously, those who
had the drujas in charge sat the games and tournaments going, with
racing and music, such as should leave not one idle moment for all the
hosts of Ailkin, nearly five thousand millions.

9\. Upward and onward rose the great plateau, making straight course for
Vara-pishanaha. Ahura stood in the eyes of the unlearned populace as the
greatest and most masterly of all the Gods. One alone, even Anuhasaj,
stood a while transfixed with disappointment and chagrin, even hoping
some mishap to Jehovih's proceedings. And finally, he went wandering
about, sore and out of sorts with all righteousness. Thus was raised the
heavenly place, and no longer called Ailkin, but Vara-pishanaha, home of
Ahura and his hosts. And now, when they were securely established in the
place, and the Gods and Goddesses broke from line, they all came
greeting to Ahura. And, even in the same moment of time, a messenger
came from God, who was with Brahma on the corporeal earth, bringing to
Cpenta-armij the following commandment, by proxy, to wit:

11\. In Jehovih's name, give thou a throne and crown to Ahura for Me,
and in My name. I promised him thus!

12\. The light came upon Cpenta-armij, and Jehovih spake through her,
saying: Behold the work of My hand, O Ahura, My Son! In the substance of
heaven fashion I thee a throne and high-raised capital. And with Mine
own hands weave thee a crown. From this time forth thou shalt be My God,
and I will abide with thee.

13\. Whilst the words were being spoken, the throne rose up before
Cpenta-armij's hand, and a high-raised capital came and stood over and
about the throne. And there descended from the heavens above bows of
light and color, which in Cpenta-armij's fingers were shaped and woven
into a crown which alighted on Ahura's head. And there went up from the
hosts a universal <span id="page_339a">p. 339a</span> shout of praise
and thanksgiving. Then broke in the trumpeters, seven millions, and
after they prayed a while, the es'enaurs chanted, THE CONCERTED HOSTS OF
JEHOVIH!

14\. Thus was founded Jehovih's heavenly kingdom, Vara-pishanaha; thus
established Ahura his dominions where rebellion and seccession were cut
off forever. And Cpenta-armij gave to Ahura a thousand messengers, and
opened a roadway to Craoshivi. Ahura ascended his throne, and the Gods
and Goddesses saluted him, GOD OF VARA-PISHANAHA, and they and their
attendants departed to their several places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah234.md)
