[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah224)  [Next](oah226.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVIII

1\. THUS drew to a close the cycle of Fragapatti, being three thousand
and one hundred years. And at this time there were but few people on
earth or in heaven but were capable of everlasting life, even the druks
and drujas also.

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

2\. Jehovih spake to God, saying: Now shalt thou enumerate earth and
heaven, as to all that I have created capable of everlasting life; and
of My harvests since the habitation of the earth, when man first walked
upright. And thy numbers shall be entered in the libraries of heaven, to
remain forever.

3\. So God called together a council of mathematicians, and they
numbered mortals and angels, and recorded their labor in the libraries
of heaven, where the wise men of heaven and earth may read the records.

4\. In Fragapatti's cycle were born alive ninety-two thousand millions.
Of these ninety percent were born to everlasting life. Ten percent went
into dissolution, as a drop of water evaporateth before the sun and is
seen no more.

5\. In Osiris' cycle, ninety-one thousand millions. Of these
eighty-seven percent were born to everlasting life. Thirteen percent
went into dissolution and were seen no more.

6\. In Thor's cycle, eighty-eight thousand millions. Of these
eighty-five percent were born to everlasting life, and fifteen percent
to dissolution.

7\. In Apollo's cycle, eighty thousand millions. Of these seventy-two
percent were born to everlasting life.

8\. In Sue's cycle, eighty-seven thousand millions. Of these sixty-two
percent were born to everlasting life, and thirty-eight percent went
into dissolution.

9\. In Aph's cycle, sixty-six thousand millions. Of these fifty-four
percent wer born to everlasting life, and forty-six percent went into
dissolution.

10\. In Neph's cycle, before the submersion of Pan, one hundred and
twenty-four thousand millions. Of these twenty-one percent were born to
everlasting life, and seventy-nine percent went into dissolution.

11\. And this comprised one-sixth of the people that had been created
alive on the earth since man walked upright; that is to say, three
thousand six hundred and seventy-eight billions.

12\. But in the early days of man only a small percentage were born to
everlasting life; and, first of all, only one percent.

13\. And God gave thanks unto Jehovih, the Creator, because all the
races of men on earth were now capable of everlasting life.

14\. Of the hells and knots springing out of hada since the days of Wan,
this was the proportion, to wit:

15\. In the cycle of Fragapatti, two hundred and seventy-six hells, of
average duragion, thirty years. Involved in these hells, two thousand
million angels. Sixty-four knots, of average duration, two years.
Involved in these knots, one thousand million angels.

16\. In the cycle of Osiris, three hundred and eighty-nine hells, of
average duration, four hundred years. Involved in these hells, seven
thousand millions. Two hundred and twelve knots, of average duration,
three years. Involved in these knots, three thousand millions.

17\. In the cycle of Thor, five hundred and ninety-one hells, of average
duration, six hundred years. Involved in these hells, nine thousand
million angels. Four hundred and thirty-six knots, of average duration,
six years. Involved in these knots, four thousand million angels.

18\. In Apollo's cycle, seven hundred and forty-two hells, of average
duration, eight hundred years. Involved in these hells, ten thousand
million angels. Six hundred and four knots, of average duration, twelve
years. Involved in these knots, five thousand millions.

19\. In Sue's cycle, twelve hundred and seventy-three hells, of average
duration, one thousand years. Involved in these hells, thirteen thousand
million angels. One thousand and five knots, of average duration, thirty
years. Involved in these knots, eight thousand millions.

20\. In Aph's cycle, three thousand five hundred hells, of average
duration, two thousand years. Involved in these hells, twenty-eight
thousand million angels. Two thousand knots, of average duration, fifty
years. Involved in these knots, twenty-five thousand millions. And these
were the numbers of spirits cast into hell and into knots,from the
submersion of Pan to the end of the cycle of Zarathustra; but at the
dawn of each and every cycle, both the hells and the knots were
delivered by the etherean Gods. Save in Fragapatti's cycle, when they
were almost entirely delivered by the atmospherean God.

21\. Prior to the submersion of Pan, commonly called the flood, more
than half the people entering the first es world went into hells and
knots. And in all ages of the world there have been thousands and
millions of spirits who delight in hell for certain seasons, even as is
manifested in mortals who delight in debauchery, and vengeance, and war.
Nor is a hell widely different, as regards the spirit, from what war is
amongst <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> mortals. And as mortals of
this day glorify themselves and their generals and captains for the
magnitude of their havoc in war, so in the olden times, in atmospherea,
there were great boastings and laudations for such as inflicted the
greatest torments and horrors in hell.

22\. As mortals of the druk order oft leave their evil ways for a
season, and become upright and virtuous, loving decency and
righteousness, and then break away and indulge in a season of
debauchery, so in the es world hath it been with millions and thousands
of millions of angels. In one day the teachers and physicians were
rejoicing before Jehovih because of the steadfastness of their wards to
righteousness; and in the next day were left to deplore the loss of
hundreds and thousands who had broken faith and gone off for
indulgence's sake in some of the hells. And these had to be rescued,
persuaded, threatened and coaxed back again and again to the nurseries
and hospitals, or to the factories and colleges.

23\. Neither knoweth any one, save Jehovih, the labor and fretting and
anxiety that were undergone by the teachers and physicians, and Lords
and Gods, who had such drujas in charge. For even as it is beholden on
earth that men of great learning and high estate oft fall, becoming
lower than the beasts of the fields, so in heaven were there hundreds of
thousands, and even millions, oft high raised in the grades, that would
stumble and fall into the lowest of hells, and even into the knots.

24\. So Jehovih brought the earth and her heavens into another dawn of
dan, in the arc of Spe-ta, in the Nirvanian roads of Salk-watka, in
etherea.

25\. Now, up to the last, God and his Lords maintained the Diva; and
mortals somewhat understood the matter, that there were certain Divine
laws in heaven that ruled over mortal kingdoms and empires. So that the
words Div, and Diva, and Divine rights, began to be realized as a
concerted power in heaven greater than man's power.

End of Book of Divinity.

<span id="img_31000"></span> ![](img/31000.jpg)  
Plate 14.--THE DIVINE SEAL (see p. 613}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](oah226.md)
