[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah202)  [Next](oah204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXVI

1\. WHEN the king was restored, he was as another man, having su'is, and
believing with a full conviction; and he asked Zarathustra <span
id="page_238b">p. 238b</span> what now he should do that he might escape
the fires of hell after death.

2\. I'hua'Mazda spake through Zarathustra, saying: Think not what thou
canst do to escape hell fire, for that would be laboring for self. Think
what thou canst do to save others. For which reason thou shalt practice
the Ormazdian law. One year shalt thou dwell with the poor, carrying the
alms-bowl, according to the Zarathustrian law. After that thou shalt
preach the I'hua'Mazdian law, of the denial of self for the good of the
city, teaching the turning away from earthly things, and striving for
spiritual things, having faith in Ormazd.

3\. The king said: All these things can I do, yet one thing I cannot do,
which is having faith in Ormazd. If He be a Person, and created all the
creation, is He not the foundation of evil as well as good? If He
heretofore created evil, or by incompetence suffered it to enter into
creation, may He not do so in after time, even after death?

4\. I'hua'Mazda said: When a potter hath a pot half made, sayest thou it
is an evil pot? Nay, verily, but that it is not yet completed. Even so
are all men, created by Ormazd. Those who are good are completed, but
those who are evil are unfinished work. But the Creator also gave to man
knowledge, that he might see himself in the unfinished state, and the
Creator gave to man power and judgment, that man might turn to and help
complete himself, thereby sharing the glory of his creation. The man
that doeth this is already clear of hell fire; he that doeth it not
shall not escape.

5\. The king inquired concerning animals, to which I'hua'Mazda answered,
saying: Animals are of the earth creation, and are completed in the
place of their dwelling. Neither hath any animal aspiration to make
itself better or wiser, that it may contribute to the creation. And some
men have no more aspiration than an animal serving the beast (the
flesh-man) only. Only the torments of hell can stir them up.

6\. When I'hua'Mazda explained the Ormazdian law, the quarter of which
is not here related, the king comprehended, whereupon he took the vows
on the altar, and under the eye, according to the Zarathustrian law.
<span id="page_239b">p. 239b</span> So when those people were restored,
Zarathustra left one of his traveling companions with them, as God-ir in
Chief, and Zarathustra departed, taking his other companions with him.

7\. Whereof it is recorded in the libraries of heaven, showing that the
next city kingdom was likewise delivered, and the people became
Zarathustrians.

8\. And again Zarathustra departed, and came to another city, which was
overthrown and delivered also. Until it came to pass that Zarathustra
overthrew and delivered twenty and four cities and kingdoms in Jaffeth.

9\. After that he departed to the upper lands of Shem, where he also
overthrew and delivered many cities and kingdoms, establishing the
Zarathustrian law. For two whole years he labored in Shem; and so great
was the power of Ormazd upon Zarathustra that all the cities and
kingdoms of Shem threw off the bondage of the Sun Kingdom of Parsi'e.

10\. After that Zarathustra traveled toward Ham, which was called
Arabin'ya. But in those countries Zarathustra had not so great success,
because the people were not learned in books, nor in the stars, nor
tablets. Nevertheless, Zarathustra delivered many cities.

11\. So I'hua'Mazda said to Zarathustra: Go back, now, to thine own
country; and thou shalt overthrow yet seven cities and seven great
kingdoms; and after that thou shalt return to Oas, and it shall fall
before thy hand, that the prophecies of thy childhood be fulfilled.

12\. So Zarathustra returned to Parsi'e and went to the seven great
cities and kingdoms, and overthrew them; and many of them were destroyed
utterly by fire and by war; but Zarathustra delivered the faithful and
established the Zarathustrian law with all of them.

13\. And now he returned to his native city, Oas, according to the
commandment of I'hua'Mazda.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII](oah204.md)
