[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah347)  [Next](oah349.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_458b">p. 458b</span>

# Book of the Arc of Bon

BEING A HISTORY OF CAPILYA, MOSES AND CHINE, THE THREE GREAT
LEADERS-FORTH OF THE FAITHISTS IN THE TIME OF LIKA, SON OF JEHOVIH. AS
THE UPPER BOOK IS OF THE HEAVENS, SO IS THIS LOWER BOOK CHIEFLY OF
EARTHLY AFFAIRS IN THE ADMINISTRATION OF GOD.

### Chapter I

HISTORY OF CAPILYA.

1\. IN the mountains of Dharma, in the high country of Yatinghadatta, in
Vind'yu, God, Son of Jehovih, chose the family of Capilya for gathering
together the scattered Faithists, and establishing them in safety and
prosperity.

2\. Six generations previous to the time of Capilya God came down from
his holy hill in heaven, to visit the land of Shem, now called Vind'yu.

3\. And God called aloud over all that land, but no man could hear his
voice.

4\. Then God called his angels, saying: Come hither. Behold, here is a
great country, with millions of people, but they cannot hear the voice
of God.

5\. God commanded the angels to go down amongst mortals, and to dwell
with them for six generations.

6\. To the angels God said: By inspiration and otherwise, lead ye man
and woman together as husband and wife, to the profit of the voice of
God. Raise <span id="page_459b">p. 459b</span> me up a man that can hear
me, for I will deliver the Father's chosen.

7\. The angels of God, half a million of them, then came down to the
earth. The angel, Hirattax, was commander over them. He divided his
angel hosts into groups, and allotted to them certain places in the land
of Vind'yu, where they were to dwell and to labor.

8\. In those days the Faithists were known by the names: Vede, and
Parsi'e, and Hiyah, and Syiattahoma, beside various other names of less
note.

9\. In some places they were slaves, in other places serfs, and in still
other places hid away in wildernesses and amongst the mountains; being
non-resistant and timorous, having suffered great persecution by the
idolators of Dyaus and other false Gods and Lords.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](oah349.md)
