[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah354)  [Next](oah356) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter VIII

1\. WHEN the king and the Royal Council beheld the great wisdom of
Capilya, they were struck dumb in their seats. After a while the king
said: Was it not by blood that our forefathers established Dyaus?
Scattering the Faithists with great havoc? Shall we gather up the
escaped races and nurse them and have them turn upon us and bite us?
Shall we not with our valiant arms defend Dyaus?

2\. To this Capilya answered: Sufficient unto his own battles is the God
of Vind'yu. If the king must need fight Dyaus' battles, then Dyaus is a
weak God indeed. Heaven forbid that Capilya believe in such a God, or
labor for one so weak!

3\. But thou art right, O king; by blood our forefathers established
Dyaus; but where is there, either in ancient or modern learning, a
commandment that Dyaus shall be maintained by blood? Didst not thou
thyself receive a commandment to stop the sacrifice of human blood on
the altar? Is it, then, indeed a holier place on the battle-field, that
these things must continue?

4\. Man loveth vengeance; and more for this than for righteousness he
desireth to inflict or destroy others. Nevertheless, all things are
answered accordingly as they are; vengeance answereth vengeance; blood
answereth blood; war answereth war. And the same rule applieth to
virtue, which begetteth virtue; love, which begetteth love; peace,
peace; good works, good works. For in these things our souls play a
greater part than do our external bodies.

5\. One of the Royal Council said: How sayest thou of rites and
ceremonies? Capilya answered: Without rites and ceremonies the spiritual
person of the state and of the community, and of the nation, is like a
man that hath thrown away his clothes, and then, with disgust, drowned
himself. <span id="page_478b">p. 478b</span> As the soldiers of the army
have drill, which is discipline, so shall the worshippers have rites and
ceremonies, which are the drill to keep one's soul in reverence for the
Creator.

6\. But it falleth not to my lot to say unto you what rites or what
ceremonies; for these also come under the head of LIBERTY.

7\. Another one of the Royal Council asked: Some men, who are bad men,
have great pleasures and enjoyments; some men, who are virtuous and
wise, have great trials and misery: What, then, is the prize which thy
philosophy offereth to them that practice righteousness and good works?

8\. Capilya said: Could thine eyes see as mine have seen, or thine ears
hear as mine have heard, then it were easy to answer thee. Nevertheless,
I declare unto thee a great truth, which is also revealed in the
doctrines of the ancients, that this is not the real life, but the
embryotic state. And many that have great pleasures and enjoyments in
this life, waken up as babes in heaven; whilst many who are virtuous and
wise, but suffer great misery, in this life, wake up in heaven in
strength and glory. More are trials and exertions to be desired than
ease and enjoyment; for the former causeth the soul to look upward; but
the latter causeth the soul to look downward. Nevertheless, severe
trials are a great injustice to any man.

9\. When the king and Royal Council beheld that Capilya had greater
wisdom than any other man, the king said unto them: No man in all the
world hath wisdom sufficient to try my son. How say ye? And they
answered: That is true. Whereupon the king said: Capilya, hear thou the
king's decree, and it shall be a law unto thee in all the kingdoms of
the world, which is, that thou hast been tried by the greatest king on
the earth, and art acquitted and declared to be above the dominion of
mortals. And thou shalt go whithersoever thou wilt in any land, doing
whatsoever thou desirest, and no man shall arrest thee or forbid thee in
anything whatsoever. And whatsoever law thou makest no king shall make
another law, above thine, to set it aside. Wert thou not mine own son I
would say thou wert begotten by the Gods!

10\. The king's decree was recorded in the House of Records, and copies
of <span id="page_479b">p. 479b</span> the decree sent to the tributary
cities and kingdoms throughout Vind'yu. Yokovrana had also a copy made
of Capilya's speech, and it was also recorded and signed by the king and
Council, under the name, THE FOUNDATION OF LAWS.

11\. Jehovih said to Capilya: I have suffered this land to endure war
for hundreds of years, that they might be ready for this. Behold, they
are not slow to accept doctrines of peace and liberty.

12\. Capilya inquired concerning the laws, and Jehovih said: Trouble not
thyself more; My hand is upon the king and Council. They will pass laws
endorsing what thou hast said. Go forth, then, My son, amongst My
chosen, and thou shalt establish them anew in rites and ceremonies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](oah356)
