[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah382)  [Next](oah384.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV

1\. MAN said: What, then, shall I believe? If great learning have not
proven anything real; if science is based on falsehood, and if there be
no natural laws, shall I not give up my judgment? Whatever is at
variance with my judgment, shall I not turn away from it?

2\. It hath been said: The soul of man never dieth. No one can know
this, save Jehovih.

3\. It hath been said: Jehovih is a person. No one can know this, for
His magnitude is incomprehensible.

4\. Is the soul of man made of oxygen or hydrogen? Give me light that is
real. I can say of what man's mortal body is made.

5\. Jehovih said: My divisions are not as man's divisions. Behold, I
create one thing within another. Neither space, nor place, nor time, nor
eternity standeth in My way. The soul is es.

6\. Man inquired: If the dwelling-place for the spirits of the dead be
up in the firmament, how is it created? What resteth it upon?

7\. And how dwelleth the soul of man in heaven? If the es-man hath feet
and legs, how doth he walk?

8\. Hath his arms changed into wings? Or rideth he on the lightnings?

9\. God said: Already goeth thy soul thitherward, but it can not take
thy body with it. Thy corporeal judgment can not cope with spiritual
things.

10\. As thought traveleth, so is it with the spirit of the dead. When
thou hast quit thy corporeal body, behold thy spirit will be free;
whithersoever thou desirest to go thou shalt go.

11\. Nevertheless thou shalt go only as thought goeth. And when thou
hast arrived at the place, thou shalt fashion, from the surroundings,
thine own form, hands and arms, and feet and legs, perfectly.

12\. The Gods build not only themselves, but plateaux for the
inhabitation of millions and millions of other souls risen from the
earth.

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

13\. Man said: Alas, me! Why was I born in darkness?

14\. Why was I not created knowing all things from my youth up?

15\. Why did not the Creator send His angels with me every day, to
satisfy my craving for light from the Almighty?

16\. Kosmon answered: Hadst thou not craved for light, thou hadst not
been delighted to receive light. Hadst thou been created with knowledge,
thou couldst not be an acquirer of knowledge.

17\. Had the Creator given thee angels to be forever giving thee light,
then they would be slaves.

18\. Liberty is the boon of men and angels; the desire for liberty
causeth the soul of man to come out of darkness.

19\. Whoso feeleth that he hath no need of exertion, groweth not in
spirit. He hath no honor on the earth or in the heavens thereof.

20\. Man said: This is my comfort. Man nowadays is not so foolish as the
ancients.

21\. They worshipped before idols of stone and wood.

22\. They built temples and pyramids so costly that they ruined
themselves.

23\. Seffas said: O vain man! In the day thou abusest the ancients, thou
sendest thy son to college, and enforcest him to study the ancients.

24\. Thy standing armies hold the nations of the earth in misery greater
than did the temples and pyramids. And as for drunkenness and dissolute
habits, and for selfishness, thou art worse than the ancients.

25\. God said: O man, turn thou from the dead past; learn from the Ever
Living Present!

26\. What is thy wisdom for the raising up of the poor and the
distressed, more than was that of the ancients?

27\. Is it better for thee to hold up a book and say: Behold a most
sacred and holy book! than for the ancients to say: Behold a sacred and
holy temple!

28\. Seffas said: Consider the established things; in one age one thing;
in another age another thing.

29\. To make man break away from all the past, and live by the Light of
the Ever Present, is this not the wisest labor?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](oah384.md)
