[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah364)  [Next](oah366) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_514b">p. 514b</span>

### Chapter XVIII

1\. PHARAOH called his chief superintendent and said unto him: As to the
Hebrew brickmakers, thou shalt no longer supply them with straw, but
they shall gather stubble themselves, and they shall continue to make
the same number of bricks. And as to the tillers of the soil, thou shalt
no longer suffer them to have cattle to draw the plows, but they shall
draw the plows themselves, and they shall likewise break the same
quantity of ground. And in this way the king put extra hardships upon
the Israelites because he was angered at what Moses said.

2\. Moses perceiving this, cried out unto Jehovih, saying: O why didst
Thou send me before Pharaoh? Behold matters are worse than before. O
that I had guarded my tongue and been of persuasive speech!

3\. Jehovih said to Moses: Rebuke not thyself, for thou hast done My
commands. And it shall come to pass now, what otherwise would not. For
such Israelites as hesitated about going out of Egupt, will now decide
for themselves as to what they will do. And the hardships that Pharaoh
hath newly added, shall be a blessing to thy people.

4\. And it came to pass that the Israelites went away from their
task-masters, and the rab'bahs sent them to the Heads; and the people of
Israel were stirred up from one end of Egupt to the other. And as for
the Eguptians, save the courtiers and nobles, they were likewise stirred
up, but without any purpose or order; so that all the great land of
Egupt had no tillers nor builders; and cleanliness departed away from
them; and the country stank as a dead carcass, so that insects and
vermin filled all the air of heaven.

5\. But of the Faithists, the flesh was good; and vermin came not upon
them; nor were they stricken with fevers, or lepers, or scabs, like the
Eguptians.

6\. Pharaoh ordered his army of two hundred thousand men to take the
field, but lo and behold, they were scattered and afflicted so that they
were only as vagrants, without head or discipline.

7\. Jehovih spoke to Moses, saying: Now will I show her philosophers a
miracle in the air above the earth. Have they not said: All thing come
<span id="page_515b">p. 515b</span> up out of the earth? for they have
tried every way to put Me aside, and to explain My creation away as an
idle tale. They shall look and see the sun, and declare of a truth there
is no cloud; but whilst they look up, they shall see a cloud high up in
the heavens, and it shall be broad as the land of Egupt, a very black
cloud. And it shall descend to the earth, and it shall prove to be
locusts, come without any seed; and they shall be so numerous that in
three days they will eat up every green leaf of every tree and herb in
all the land. Neither shall they be like any other locusts that have
been on the earth or ever shall be; for man shall comprehend that they
are not of the seed of the earth.

8\. Moses sent with a herald this prophecy to the king, and he added
thereto: Why hast thou put more hardships on my people? Seest thou not
that the evil thou hadst hope to accomplish hath cured itself even
before it came to pass? For the Israelites now work not at all, and
their task-masters are left in the lurch. Again I call upon thee to let
my people go.

9\. The king replied not to this, but silently put his officers to work,
drilling and equipping his armies and collecting them together; the
which, when Moses beheld it, he understood to be the sign, as the Great
Spirit had previously said, when the cloud would appear. And it came to
pass on a very clear day, at noon, a cloud formed high up in the
firmament, and it grew blacker and blacker, until it descended upon the
earth; and it was locusts, and was even as a snow-storm that covereth
the land of the earth; in places to the depth of the shoes and ankles.
And they fell to, eating every green leaf, and herb, and grass, so that
in two days there was not a leaf to be found far or near. And on the
third day, the locusts being still unappeased as to hunger, fell upon
the Eguptians, old and young, feeding upon their clothes, and even upon
the flesh of the Eguptians.

10\. And on the fourth day Jehovih caused a great wind to come, and it
blew the locusts off into the sea. And again Moses sent heralds to the
king, saying: Consider now my words and be wise. I have told thee that
the hand of the Creator is upon this land. In thy heart thou sayest:
Moses is a <span id="page_516b">p. 516b</span> fool! Only a wind-storm
fetched the locusts from a far-off country.

11\. But I say unto thee, O king, this is not so. And thou shalt still
further behold Jehovih's power. For as the locusts came down out of the
firmament, and thou hast a philosophy for the occurrence, behold, now
another mirace shall come in another way: For there shall suddenly come
up out of the water frogs and reptiles, and they shall likewise be so
numerous on the land that man shall not find where to put his foot that
it shall not come upon them. And the first day they shall be harmless;
but on the second day they shall crawl upon the people, and under their
clothes, and in their houses; and on the third day they shall eat the
flesh of the Eguptians. But they shall not touch one Hebrew in all the
land.

12\. Nor shall any man find whence came so many frogs and reptiles, for
they shall not be like the seed of other frogs and reptiles. And on the
fifth day they shall suddenly disappear, neither by wind nor rain. But a
stench, as of rotten flesh, shall strangle the Eguptians nigh unto
death.

13\. Again I appeal unto thee, O king, to suffer my people to depart out
of Egupt in peace. This is the last time I shall solicit thee. And if
thou answerest not me, then shall it come to pass in the month Abib, and
on the ninth day and night thereof, Jehovih will raise His hand over
Israel; but as for Egupt, thy Lord shall strike her in death. For in
every family of Eguptians, far and near, on that night shall the
first-born fall dead; and that thou shalt not say the prophecy killed
them, behold the first-born of every beast shall die also, even of
goats, and sheep, and cattle, and asses, and of dogs and cats, and of
every living creature man useth. For on that night, behold, four
millions of Israelites shall make with Jehovih the covenant of death.
And on the morning thereafter they will rise up to not lie down again in
Egupt. And this shall be the testimony of innocent blood against thyself
and all thy people, for what the Hebrews have suffered.

14\. The king answered not Moses; and it came to pass that Egupt was
overspread with frogs and reptiles, in every particular even as Moses
had prophesied. Nevertheless, Pharaoh pursued his course.

15\. Jehovih spake to Moses, saying: <span id="page_517b">p. 517b</span>
Moses, My son, look upon man and pity him, for he believeth not in Me,
though I multiply signs and omens continually, and give him prophecies
without end. One thing only turneth man's eyes inward; that is, flesh of
his flesh, lying dead before him.

16\. Now on the night of the passover, when the Israelites made the
covenant on the blood of the lamb, a hot wind blew upon the face of the
earth; and the first-born of the Eguptians fell dead, both man and
beast. And Pharaoh's son died, and his brother's son; and the first-born
of every courtier, and every noble's first-born, and all other people,
their first-born, so that in every family there lay one dead.

17\. Pharoah was now stricken, but not unto repentence, for evil was in
his heart, and he cursed Moses and the Israelites, and swore an oath to
destroy Israel, man, woman and child, so that never more should there be
one on the earth. And such a commandment he sent to his officers, to
fall to, and begin the slaughter.

18\. As for the Faithists, not many of them had slept all the night, but
were providing for the journey; so that when morning came, and at the
time of sunrise, they every one started. From all the different regions
of Egupt they went forth to Sukkoth, westward. The Heads led the way,
and every commune was led by a rab'bah, and every man's family by the
father of the family or by the eldest son. And at the start they spake
through their leaders, saying: In thy name, O Jehovih, we depart out of
the land of our birth, where we were born, and our sons and daughters
were born, to return not forever! Neither shall Egupt prosper more till
Thou hast subdued the whole earth unto Thee.

19\. But things had changed wonderfully as to the Eguptians, for when
they beheld the Israelites were indeed going, and knew the miracles that
had taken place, they relented, and brought them gifts of gold and
silver; and also asses and camels for the Hebrew women and children to
ride upon; and gave them food to eat. But the Israelitish women said:
Nay, and we take these things we will be under obligations to the
Eguptians. The Israelites accept not what they can not pay for. Then the
Eguptians bewailed in fear, saying: That we be not accursed by the Gods,
take them, we beseech you in the name of your God also.

<span id="page_518b">p. 518b</span>

20\. So the Faithist women accepted the presents of asses and camels,
and of other things besides; and they mounted the asses and camels, and
rode them.

21\. When Moses heard of this afterwards he rebuked Israel, saying:
Because ye have accepted these things it will be said, ye borrowed them
and begged them so as to despoil the Eguptians.

22\. When they arrived near Sukkoth, Jehovih spake to Moses and Aaron,
saying: Stand ye here for twelve days that ye may behold my people as
they pass, and that ye in turn may be seen by them. So Moses and Aaron
pitched their tents by the way, on a high piece of ground, and remained
there twelve days, and Moses showed himself before them, speaking and
encouraging.

23\. After this the Israelites passed through Etham, on the borders of
the wilderness, and thence toward Migdol, near Baal-zephon, the place of
the oracle of the God, Baal, and they encamped before Pi'hahiroth, where
Moses commanded them to remain some days to rest.

24\. Now as for Pharaoh he had not made any attack on the Israelites,
for the Lord held his army in confusion. Pharaoh, finding that the
Israelites were not injured, decided to take the field himself; and
accordingly, having impressed all the chariots of Egupt, went ahead,
leading his army in person. The Israelites were wearied and foot-sore,
and discovering that Pharaoh was after them, many of them complained and
grumbled, saying: O Moses, why broughtest thou us from home? Better was
it for us to have remained in servitude to the Eguptians than to be
slain.

25\. Moses rebuked them, saying: Profess ye to be Faithists but yet have
not faith in Jehovih? Put your trust in Him; for he will deliver ye
safely, as He hath promised.

26\. Jehovih spake to Moses, saying: They shall behold the salvation of
My hand; for the Eguptians who pursue them this day shall pursue them
not again forever. For when thou fetchest them to the sea, thou shalt
lift up thy rod, and I will divide the sea, and My people shall walk
across on the land of the bottom of the sea. And Pharaoh's army shall
pursue, but be swallowed up in the waters. And it so came to pass.

<span id="page_519b">p. 519b</span>

27\. Jehovih brought a strong wind and divided the waters of the sea and
swept them back, and the Israelites went over on land. But Pharaoh's
army, who were in pursuit, were caught in the flood of the tide and
drowned.

28\. Thus delivered Jehovih the Israelites out of Egupt; and Israel
believed in Him and in Moses, his servant.

29\. Now from the place Sukkoth unto the other side of the sea, a pillar
of cloud preceded the Israelites by day, and a pillar of fire stood over
them by night, and the people looked thereon and saw, every one, the
cloud and the light. And the name of the place they reached when they
crossed over was Shakelmarath; and they camped there many days.

30\. From the time Moses began to put on foot the migration of Israel
until he reached Shakelmarath, was four years two hundred and seven
days. And the number of Israelites that thus went forth out of Egupt was
three million seven hundred and fifty-thousand men, women and children.
And the number of other people who accompanied them was four hundred
thousand; and because they were of the uncircumcised tribes of ancients,
the Hebrews named them Levites, i.e., imperfect flesh.

31\. And Moses commanded the Levites to camp aside, and not to mix with
the Israelites, and they obeyed him in all things; maintaining that they
were the true descendents of Abraham.

32\. And Moses made a song unto Jehovih, and Miriam, his sister sang it
and played on the timbrel, and the women of Israel danced before
Jehovih.

33\. This, then, is the song of Moses:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](oah366)
