[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah319)  [Next](oah321.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LIV

1\. ABOUT the time Baal and Ashtaroth had destroyed the inhabitants of
the earth in Parsi'e and Heleste, they applied to Osiris, demanding
promotion to separate kingdoms of their own. They said:

2\. Thou knowest of a truth that for sake of confederacy we merged our
own kingdoms into thine; to make thee powerful against the wars of Te-in
and Sudga in heaven. And to do thy will we have laid desolate the mortal
kingdoms of Parsi'e and Heleste. For which things thou didst promise us
in the start we should have great kingdoms in heaven.

3\. Now behold, heaven is but one vast scene of war! And this also do we
perceive, that the mighty contests are without any prospect of an end.
As these heavenly wars raged hundreds of years ago, even so do they this
day. Yea, the heavenly forces are becoming less disciplined and less
scrupulous from year to year.

4\. By evidence of which it is plain that thy heavens, and Te-in's, and
Sudga's, will soon or late be cast into interminable hells. To prevent
which, we ask of thee, our God, go give us each a section to ourselves,
and we will subdue the places and govern them in our own way.

5\. Osiris answered them, saying: Of all the Gods, who but I hath done a
hand's turn to raise mortal subjects to a higher plane? Te-in's course
was destruction; so was Sudga's. And by much importuning ye twain
persuaded me to have the mortals of Parsi'e and Heleste destroyed. And
now, in the time when most of all we should be united, ye importune me
to have my great kingdom disruptured and divided. Perceive ye not that
we have the balance of power in our favor? And also, that if in these
troublous times ye espouse new kingdoms, we will all be at the mercy of
Te-in and Sudga.

6\. For which reason I beseech you both to postpone the matter till we
have driven our enemies from our doors. Let us be faithful to the
confederacy.

7\. Now in this affair Baal and Ashtaroth came not to Osiris in person,
but sent messengers, as if they were ashamed of their own proposal. And
yet, on the other hand, Osiris invited them not to his kingdom.

8\. Ashtaroth said to Baal: See what Osiris hath done! He taketh us for
children; giving us sweet promises if we will but keep right on serving
him. I tell thee, Baal, thou mayst serve Osiris; but from this time
forth I am none of his! Behold, I will mark out a kingdom of mine own,
and I will establish it and rule it in mine own way. Moreover I will
send word to Te-in and Sudga; and if Osiris balk me, they shall know his
vulnerable points.

9\. Baal said: Even so will I; and I will establish a kingdom alongside
of thine, and if our enemies attack us we can the better defend
ourselves.

10\. So said, so done. And Baal marked out for his heavenly kingdom over
Heleste and north-western Arabin'ya; and Ashtaroth marked out for her
heavenly kingdom over Parsi'e and north-eastern Arabin'ya. And the twain
no sooner chose their generals and captains, and founded their heavenly
thrones, than they sent word to Osiris and to Te-in and to Sudga.

11\. A general dismemberment of these mighty kingdoms took place. In
Osiris' heaven there revolted one Kabbath, who took the name Thammus. He
was a general, whom tens of thousands of angel officers delighted to
serve. He marked out his heavenly place over western Egupt, and
established his throne and officers, and had himself proclaimed to
mortals through the oracles as THE ONLY SON OF THE GREAT SPIRIT, THE
SAVIOR OF MEN.

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

12\. Teos-judas also revolted from Osiris, and established a heavenly
kingdom over south Arabin'ya (Africa). Besides these there were: Marcus,
Delos, Acta, Hebron, De-bora, Julta, Wab, Thais and D'nor, great
generals and captains in Osiris' heavenly kingdom, all of whom revolted
and began setting up heavenly kingdoms of their own.

13\. And in Sudga's heavenly kingdom more than one thousand generals and
captains revolted and began to establish heavenly kingdoms of their own.
Of these the most prominent were: Judsa, Vishnu, Eorata, Chrisna,
Histaga, Vivaulias, Hiras, Haroyu, Ahhoma, V'ractu and Tiviressa.

14\. And in Te-in's heavenly kingdom more than eight hundred generals
and captains revolted, and established kingdoms of their own. Of these
the most powerful were: Chong, Ho-Tain, Dyut, Cow, Ghan, Su-Lep, Djhi,
Hiss, Me Lee, Wang, Hop-jee and Kaab.

15\. And all the revolted ones called themselves Gods or Lords or
Saviors, and endeavored to establish an earthly habitation as well. And
all of them took with them millions and millions and tens of millions of
angel followers; and some of them had more than a hundred million
subjects to start with.

16\. So anarchy began to reign in hada. Order was broken down; warfare
was divided in a thousand ways, and neither angels nor Gods could more
discover what this war or that war was about, save to inflict torments
on others. And so great was the conflict that over more than half the
earth all the lowest heaven was but one continuous succession of knots
and hells. To inflict pain and disorder and destruction was the work of
twenty thousand million angels in darkness; war, war, war; hell, hell,
hell!

17\. And now, alas, over all the earth where war had reveled hundreds of
years, were thousands of millions of spirits in chaos, not knowing in
fact they were in the spirit world, but still battling against all who
came along, to the left and to the right, before and behind, screaming,
bawling with madness, striking out in madness, in unceasing agony, in an
unending nightmare of madness.

18\. And from the mighty hosts of darkness, the drujas, deep born in
darkness, now pestering the people on earth, were hundreds of millions
of familiars taking to fetalism! Vampire spirits who suck the blood and
the flesh of mortals till the brain and heart are wild and mad! Till the
mortal is driven to nameless deeds of horrors, desperate with the foul
obsession. Spirits who bring poison and horrid smells to afflict mortals
with; spirits who delight to feed on the flesh of mortals which is
corrupted with scabs and running sores. Spirits that teach
re-incarnation and lust as the highest, most exalted heaven.

19\. And now the mighty hosts of Anuhasaj, alias De'yus, the Lord God,
the false, broke in on every side, and spread here and there for
foulness and for fuel to feed their thousands of hells.

20\. And these in remembrance of Osiris' hated name and treachery went
for his great kingdom, followed by thousands of millions of angels,
desperate with long-continued slavery, roused for deeds of vengeance.
Forth into his capital, Agho'aden, they rushed, beating down the pillars
of fire and high archways and rushing into the throne of Osiris, seized
him and his vice-Gods and high marshals and dragged them off and cast
them into foul-smelling hells, hideous with the wail and roar of maniacs
and tantalizing drujas, and with kicks and blows and poundings covered
them up in foul darkness, heaped deep and smothering in suffocating
gases.

21\. Then off ran other legions for Te-in and his high officers, and to
pillage his kingdom also. And him and them they seized and bore off in
triumph to equally horrid hells. And then others for great Sudga ran,
even more desperate for vengeance sake; and him they also caught,
despoiling his mighty kingdom and cast him into hell.

22\. And for many of the lesser Gods they ran, and broke them down
utterly, and cast them into hells. Only two Gods of the past days in
these regions escaped, Baal and Ashtaroth, who fled to save themselves
for a more opportune season to carry out their wicked schemes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV](oah321.md)
