[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah359)  [Next](oah361.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIII

History of Moses of Egupt.

1\. GOD commanded his loo'is, in the high heavens, saying: Descend ye to
the earth, to the land of Egupt, and raise me up a son capable of my
voice.

2\. The angels descended as commanded and searched over the land of
Egupt and in the adjoining countries, examining into the flesh and the
souls of men. And they called unto God, saying: The land of Egupt is
overrun with spirits of darkness (drujas), and mortals have attained to
see them; and they dwell together as one people, angels and mortals.

3\. God said: Go ye amongst my chosen until ye find a man capable of
understanding betwixt truth and fable. Him inspire ye to an I'hin woman
for my voice.

4\. In Ellakas the loo'is found a man, Baksa, a Fonecean, a Faithist,
born a su'is, and they said unto him: Why art thou alone in the world?
Baksa said: Alas, mine eyes have never seen God; mine ears never heard
him. I am searching for God in the life of a recluse.

5\. The loo'is perceived what manner of man he was, and they led him to
take an I'hin woman to wife, and she bore him a son, Hasumat.

6\. The loo'is guarded Hasumat till he was grown, and they spake to him,
trying him also as to his power to distinguish angel voices.

7\. Him they also inspired to take an I'hin woman to wife, and she bore
a <span id="page_496b">p. 496b</span> son, Saichabal, who was guarded in
the same way. And the angels inspired Saichabal, to marry Terratha, of
the line (house) of Zed. Terratha bore a daughter who was named Edamas.
And Edamas bore a son by an I'hin father without marriage, and she
called his name Levi, signifying joined together (because his toes were
not separate on the right foot, nor the fingers separate on the right
hand). And Levi grew to be a large man, larger than two large men.

8\. Levi, being of the fourth birth of I'hin blood, was not acknowledged
an heir of the chosen race, the Faithists. Therefore Levi established a
new line, which was called, the House of Levi.

9\. Levi, not being eligible to a Faithist wife, was inspired by the
loo'is to take an I'hin, Metissa, to wife. Metissa bore him a son,
Kohath, who, at maturity, was admitted to the Order of Avah, the third
degree of Faithists, whereupon he was circumcised, and afterward called
an Israelite, the name given to the Faithists of Egupt.

10\. Kohath took to wife, Mirah, a devout worshipper of Jehovih. Mirah
bore him a son, Amram, who took to wife Yokebed, sister-in-law to
Kohath, and she bore him a son, who was Moses.

11\. Before Moses' birth the loo'is perceived that he would be capable
of the Father's voice, and they called unto God saying: In the next
generation, behold, thy son will be born.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](oah361.md)
