[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah338)  [Next](oah340.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVIII

1\. AFTER the judgment of Anuhasaj and Chesota at Theovrahkistan, Ahura
asked Lika for assistance to remove the remainder of Vara-pishanaha to
Hao-yusta, which Lika granted, allotting ten millions of his etherean
hosts to accomplish it. With these Ahura and Anuhasaj and Chesota
accomplished the removal.

2\. In not many days after this, Sudga was delivered from the hells of
Auprag, of which event Ahura had been previously informed, as to the
time thereof, and he accordingly went to Auprag, to be in readiness to
receive Sudga, and help restore him if required.

3\. Sudga, on his delivery from the knot, where there had been thirty
millions bound, was bereft of reason, but not gentle like Anuhasaj, but
fierce, battling right and left, a very maddened maniac that neither saw
nor heard, but raved and cursed with all his strength, choked up with
madness. For all the curses of his broken-down kingdom recoiled upon
himself; the projective curses of his thousands of millions of slaves
were piercing his soul from every quarter.

4\. But they held him fast and carried him into the ship, which sailed
for Hao-yusta, whither he was landed in the same condition. Ahura was
with him, and Ahura caused a circle of deliverance to assemble and labor
in the restoration. And it required thirty days and nights to bring him
round, so he could even see and hear; but as for his judgment it was yet
a hundred days more before it manifested.

5\. So Ahura could not wait longer with him, but returned to the hells
where Te-in was bound, the Ak-a-loo-ganuz, for Te-in was to be
delivered. But herein was Ahura also disappointed, for Te-in was neither
frightened nor wild nor mad; but limpid, helpless as water and without
knowledge, more than a vessel of water. His energies had all been
exhausted, and in a dead swoon he lay in the heart of the knot. Him they
also carried to Hao-yusta, and Ahura provided for his restoration.

<span id="page_500a">p. 500a</span>

6\. But yet, ere Te-in awoke from his stupor, Ahura departed for Osiris,
who was bound in the hells of Prayogotha. Osiris had been in hell now
for more than a hundred years, and in a knot for fifty years.

7\. When the false Osiris was delivered, he was deranged, but preaching
Jehovih, calling everybody Jehovih, and everything Jehovih. Him they
also carried to Hao-yusta and provided restoration for him. And Ahura
went thither also to assist with all his wisdom and strength.

8\. Thus were delivered all the self-Gods who had rebelled against
Jehovih and established the great confederacy, of which not one vestige
was now left.

9\. But of all the angels delivered out of the hells and knots not one
in ten was of sound judgment, whilst more than half of them were only
drujas at best.

10\. Thus was founded the new kingdom of Hao-yusta, but yet in charge of
the ethereans, who were to commit it to Anuhasaj and his one-time
confederates, for their deliverance.

11\. It came to pass in course of time that Sudga and Te-in and Osiris
were restored to judgment, and in this matter Anuhasaj and Ahura and
Chesota were constant workers. And when they were all restored, they in
turn fell to, to restore others, to which labor they were committed till
the close of dawn.

12\. Osiris and Te-in and Sudga all desired to go before Lika, to be
adjudged and sentenced; and they all sentenced themselves, which was
granted unto them. On this occasion Osiris said:

13\. Thy lessons are near at hand, O Jehovih. But who will learn them?
Mortals go insane, because they have not learned to throw their cares
upon Thee. To throw government upon Thee, O Jehovih, is not this wisdom?
To cast riches and kingdoms into Thy lap; to own nothing; to have
nothing; is not this the sum of the highest happiness?

14\. Whoso doeth this will battle against no man for anything in heaven
or earth. But he who doeth otherwise will soon or late descend into
hell. For what is hell but the opposite of bliss? What is battling
against others, but sowing the seed of anarchy in one's own soul? To
battle against others is to gain the lower, by sacrificing the higher,
of which latter Thou, O Jehovih, art the summit.

15\. To go against Thee, O Father, is to go against one's fellows; to go
against one's fellows is to go against Thee. And <span id="page_501a">p.
501a</span> who can go against Thee but will soon or late evolve his own
fall?

16\. Thou hast given to mortals, kings, queens, and shown them that soon
or late their kingdoms will fall to pieces. And yet Lords and Gods,
seeing these things, will not believe. Every one, in his own conceit,
imagineth his particular kingdom will be governed more wisely than all
his predecessors. And yet his also falleth.

17\. Now will I turn to find Thee, O Jehovih, and the search shall be
everlasting. Kingdoms are nothing to me; all possession, save wisdom and
love, are but vanity and vexation. I know Thou art above all else, and
yet Thou art that that hath given Thyself all away, so that none can
look upon Thy face. Verily hast Thou hid Thyself away; to be like unto
Thee is to hide away the self of one-self; and that that will remain
will be Thy mouth-piece and Thy hand.

18\. Then spake Sudga unto Jehovih, saying: Why was I puffed up, seeing
that I created not even mine own self. Neither had I anything in earth
or heaven to use or to work with, but the substance was made already.
Yea, I leapt into Thy garden which Thou hadst planted.

19\. I raised up my voice against Thee; because Thou wert too Holy for
my gross senses to behold, I condemned Thee. I wanted Thee gross that I
could look upon Thee; that I could walk around Thee, and behold Thy
stature. I saw that all men were like unto me in this.

20\. Therefore I made a figure-head of myself; I said unto Thy children:
Behold me! And at first they were pleased, because they imagined they
had found a Creator they could measure. But Thine eye was upon me, Thine
hand pointed the way and the manner of my iniquity. And they searched me
out and found I was but a man, like unto themselves. Wherefore they
condemned me.

21\. The fool acknowledgeth no person save he can grapple therewith, and
find the arms, and the length thereof, and the feet and their standing
place. How vain I was in this, O Jehovih!

22\. He that professed Thy Person I denounced as a fool; because I saw
not Thy completeness Thou sufferedst me to pursue my vanity. Because I
had risen above acknowledging Thy Person I was forced to make man the
All Highest; and this drove me to make myself the all highest man. But
Thou camest not against me to beat me from my iniquity, but gavest me
full play to do my utmost.

23\. On all sides hast Thou encompassed <span id="page_502a">p.
502a</span> Thy creation with liberty. Even Thine enemy Thou hast not
restrained. He standeth in public, saying: Jehovih, I deny Thee. If Thou
art mightier than I, strike me down. Behold, I deny Thee and Thy Person!
Thou Void Nothingness! Thou fool Creator, with Thy half-created world.
Thou who hast created sin! And created misery! Thou Father of evil! O
Thou dumb Nothing.

24\. Yea, even to him hast Thou given free speech; and he buildeth up
his own soul in his own way. And for a season he is the delight of the
druk and the druj; yea, they fasten upon him, and he gaineth a multitude
of evil ones, divided one against another, but the seed of his curses
taketh root in them, and he becometh encompassed with foulness and
bondage.

25\. To find harmony in Thee, O Jehovih; to measure the Goodness of
Thee; to rejoice in one's joys; to treasure Thy best gifts; to laud Thy
love; to love Thee because Thou hast given me power to love, and things
to love; to rejoice in Thy fruits and flowers and all perfected things;
to harp forever upon Thy glories and the magnitude of Thy creation; to
sing praises to Thee for harmony wherever found; to love to comprehend
all good things; to find the good that is in all men and women; to
rejoice in delights; to teach others to rejoice, and to search after all
perfected beauties and goodness and righteousness and love; these shall
be my service unto Thee, my everlasting Father.

26\. To seek not to find imperfections; to seek not to find inharmonies;
to seek not to find evil; to seek not to find ugliness; to seek not to
find evil in others, nor their darkness nor shortcomings; to seek not to
prove imperfections upon Thee, O Jehovih; to find no fault with Thee; to
complain not against Thee; to complain not for trials nor for hardships,
nor for the evil others inflict me with; to quibble not, because I can
not comprehend Thy vastness; to quibble not for myself; to speak not
evilly against anything Thou hast created. O make Thou me strong and
wise forever.

27\. Te-in spake to Jehovih, saying: Wherein is the limit of experience,
O Jehovih! And how short have I not been before Thee, My Father! Behold,
I had learned all philosophies; I had been taught for a long season in
the right way, but I rebelled against Thee, my Creator.

28\. I had been taught to horde not up anything; to own nothing; to
desire nothing but wisdom and love. And Thy teachers, O Jehovih, showed
me <span id="page_503a">p. 503a</span> the evidence of thousands of
great rulers, and every one of them had come to evil and destruction.
Why then, O Father, was I not wise in the evidence before me? But I rose
up against all this testimony, and I fashioned a mighty kingdom. Yea,
Thou sufferedst me to try in mine own way to the full.

29\. I went not by peace but by war; I raised me up standing armies and
great warriors without limit; by force I established myself, but only as
a tree that groweth up and is cut down. But what was I in Thy great
universe, O Jehovih. What was my experience but the repetition of others
who had been before me.

30\. Now will I be wise; most cautious in my wisdom, and slow to
proceed. But how can I make my experience profitable unto others? Thou
hast stood me afar off; whoso heareth me will say: Ah, had I tried it I
had succeeded better. Thou prickest each one to go in and try, but they
all fail. Yea, they reiterate their failure; but where is the profit of
this experience unto others? How can I ever reach them, O Jehovih!

31\. What profit have I more than a mortal that dwelleth on the earth?
Have not the angels testified for thousands of years that the rich man
was crippling his own soul, and that the king and queen were binding
themselves with chains for the habitation of hell? But they will not
heed; every one hopeth he at least will find a way to escape; to gain
prestige over others; to be a leader; to have servants; to be idle; to
live at ease; to have great possessions; to revel in luxuries. Are not
these more powerful than experience; greater in the eyes of the ignorant
than all the wisdom of earth and heaven.

32\. Thou hast wisely shaped Thy creatures, O Father! Thou makest great
servants of us in a way we know not of. Behold, I desired a mighty
kingdom in heaven, and Thou gavest one into my hand. Yea, I flattered
myself with my success; I laughed at the Gods who had been before my
time. How things are changed now, O Jehovih!

33\. Thou hast made me a servant of servants; yea, by mine own hand have
I bound myself about. Have I not heard mortals say: O that I had a
kingdom to rule over! O that I had great riches, how good I would be!
And because Thou deniest them for their own good, they complain against
Thee. Who shall answer for the vanity of men and angels! They have not
patience with Thee, who created them alive and knowest what is best.

<span id="page_504a">p. 504a</span>

34\. One saith: Yonder is a great king, why doeth he not a great good?
Or, yonder is a rich man, why doeth he not a great good also. O that I
were in their places.

35\. How shall I show them, O Father, that to be a king is to go away
from doing good; that to be a rich man is to deny goodness? Yea, by the
very act of possession is he testimony in the opposite way. For he that
is good giveth all; even as Thou gavest all and so made all things. And
the greater the possession the greater the bondage. Who hath so small
responsibility as he who hath nothing? This is the sum of wisdom, O
Jehovih; and all men and angels soon or late will acknowledge it.

36\. Better hast Thou made it for the servant than for the master;
better for the poor than the rich; and these things will also come to
their understanding in course of time. But how can I, O Father, make
them to know wisdom without experience, to accept the testimony of
others' tortures in hell?

37\. Behold, Thou gavest me great learning when I was of the earth; and
when in hada great advantages to attain to deep wisdom; but, after all,
I was caught in a snare of my own setting. How much, then, O Father,
must I expect of the multitude? Happy is he who hath nothing, and
desireth only wisdom and love. To cultivate such a garden, what a
harvest will ripen out unto him.

38\. When the three had thus spoken before the throne and before the
high Council, Ahura stood aside and spake also. He said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX](oah340.md)
