[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah331)  [Next](oah333.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XI

1\. JEHOVIH spake to Lika, saying: Appoint thou other servants unto Me
for the other great divisions of the earth, and for the islands in the
oceans of the earth; and give unto them each ten millions of My servants
which thou broughtest from Nirvania. And they shall go down amongst
mortals, and by inspiration and otherwise collect together in groups the
scattered Faithists who worship Me. And thy servants shall also provide
successors to come after them, to abide with mortals, making the seasons
of watch short unto them that they shall not be weary thereof.

2\. Then Lika appointed T'chow, N'yak, Gitchee, Guelf, Ali and Siwah,
and allotted them to different divisions of the earth, and he gave them
each ten millions of the hosts brought from the Orian worlds. And these
were selected after the same manner as the previous ones; and they also
saluted and departed for the earth.

3\. Again Jehovih spake in the light of the throne, saying: Because many
are risen in wisdom and truth, I will have Theovrahkistan for My holy
place unto them; and it shall be the region for My Brides and
Bridegrooms at the resurrection of dawn. But at the end thereof it shall
be divided and sub-divided that none may find the place of My standing.
For it hath come to pass, that man on the earth learning the name of one
of My heavens glorifieth it, and aspireth to rise to it, but to rise to
no other heaven.

4\. Because My true Gods taught man of Hored in the early days, man
desired Hored. Whereupon Mine enemies, the false Gods, each one cried
<span id="page_479a">p. 479a</span> out: Behold, my heavenly place is
Hored! I am the All Heavenly ruler! Come hither to me! For, by this
means, the name I gave in truth, was usurped and made as a snare to
enslave my earth-born.

5\. And I will not more give to mortals a name of any of My heavenly
places; nor shall they be taught of any heavens save the higher and the
lower heavens, which shall designate My etherean and My atmospherean
heavens. And by these terms shall man on the earth be fortified against
the strategems of false heavenly rulers.

6\. And man shall perceive that when angels or men or Gods or Saviors
say: Come ye unto me, and I will give you of my heavenly kingdom! that
they are false, and but tyrants to enslave My people. But if they say:
Go ye, serve the Great Spirit, and not me, for I am only a man as thou
art! then shall it be known that they are of My Nirvanian hosts.

7\. And if they say: Come ye to this heaven or that heaven, for with me
only is delight, it shall be testimony against them. But if they say:
Verily, Jehovih is with thee; cultivate thyself within Him, and thou
shalt find delight in all worlds, then shall it be testimony they are
from My emancipated heavens.

8\. Lika said: Seventy new kingdoms shall ye found in the lowest heaven,
where ye shall begin again with schools and colleges and factories,
teaching the spirits of the dead the requirements for resurrection.

9\. Two hundred millions of my Orian angels shall be allotted to these
seventy heavenly places, and during dawn it shall be their work to carry
out these commandments. And they shall provide for successors after
them, who shall continue for another season; and they shall provide yet
other successors, and so on, even till the coming of the kosmon era.

10\. Lika then selected the two hundred million angels, and divided them
into seventy groups and companies around about the earth, in the lowest
heaven, and after they were duly officered and organized, they saluted
before the throne of Jehovih and departed to their several places.

11\. Then came the voice of Jehovih to Lika, saying: Behold, of thy five
hundred millions, are still left one hundred and seventy and five
millions. This, then, is the work thou shalt put upon them: They shall
begin at one end of hada and go to the other, delivering all the hells
of the false Gods as they go; untying the knots thereof and providing
passage for the drujas <span id="page_480a">p. 480a</span> into one
great plateau. For as the false Gods began in confederacy I will bring
them back into confederacy, even all of them that are cast into hell.
And thou shalt officer them safely; and when they are thus established,
behold, thou and thy Rapon hosts shall go and raise them up and deliver
them into the a'ji'an Forest of Turpeset, where they shall be habitated
and begin a new life of righteousness and love.

12\. And Anuhasaj, once-crowned Lord God, shall be over them; and Osiris
and Sudga and Te-in and all the other confederated Gods shall be under
him; for even as these Gods labored to cast Me out, behold, I give unto
them their harvest.

13\. Then Lika commissioned the one hundred and seventy-five million
ethereans, and officered them, and sent them into the hadan regions of
the earth to deliver the hells thereof.

14\. Jehovih said to Lika: The rest of thy eight hundred millions shall
remain in Theovrahkistan, for the labor here is sufficient for them. And
so they remained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](oah333.md)
