[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Oahspe](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](oah316)  [Next](oah318.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LI

1\. WHEN Thothma was quite dead the priests carried his body into the
temple, fully believing his spirit would return from heaven and
transform the body from corruptible into incorruptible flesh to live
forever. And they laid the corpse in the place previously designated by
the Gods, and sealed it up according to the commands of the false
Osiris, Savior of men.

2\. Osiris had said: Whoso believeth in me, him will I save unto
everlasting life, and though he lose his body, yet again shall he find
it, and the corruptible flesh shall be changed in the twinkling of an
eye, and become incorruptible unto life everlasting, with the spirit
that abideth therein.

3\. On the fifth day the priests opened the chamber, for according to
the LAWS OF MIRACLES, on that day, the spirit should accomplish the
feat; but lo and behold, it came not, and the body still lay cold and
dead. But the Gods came in sar'gis and said unto the priests: Seal ye up
the body for other five days. And the priests did as commanded; and
after that they examined it again, but life had not returned. Again they
were commanded to seal it up for other five days, which they did, but
life returned not.

4\. Houaka, who was now the high <span id="page_449">p. 449</span>
priest, inquired of Osiris concerning the matter. And Osiris, through
his servant God, Egupt, answered him, saying: Go fetch a young man who
is warm in the blood, which is life in the flesh, and he shall be the
seventh son of an adept, and know how to CAST HIMSELF IN DEATH.

5\. The priests brought Xaian, who was in his twenty-fourth year, and
when he came into the Holy Chamber he was bid cast himself in death for
benefit of the king's soul. And Xaian thus cast himself, and he was
sealed in the chamber of death for five days along with the king's
corpse. And in five days the priests brought both bodies into the Holy
Chamber, according to instructions. And Osiris came and commanded them
to stand around the bodies, and when they had done so, the angels from
Osiris' kingdom came and spirited away the body of the king, and they
brought back the spirit of Xaian to inhabit the body of Xaian, and put
it in possession thereof, making believe it was the spirit of Thothma
returned.

6\. Houaka said to the Gods: Where is the body of Thothma? Hath it been
transformed? And the Gods answered: It hath gone to heaven, and will
return after many days. But as to the spirit of the king, behold, he is
with thee. And the priests spoke to Xaian, believing it was Thothma. And
after three days they came forth out of the temple and recrowned Xaian,
Thothma the Second, and they proclaimed it abroad that these things were
true, howbeit they knew to the contrary.

7\. As to the spirit of Thothma, at the time of death, it was taken to
Agho'aden and put amongst the servants of Osiris' heavenly kingdom, and
thus enslaved. So Xaian became king of Egupt.

8\. Now, as regardeth the false Gods, Osiris and his confederates, they
never tried to reincarnate the spirit of Thothma; but because of the
virtues and the wisdom of Thothma, they used him for benefit of Osiris'
heavenly kingdom, and to establish Osiris everlastingly on the earth as
the all highest God.

9\. As to the kingdoms of the land of Egupt, which succeeded Thothma,
the inhabitants of the earth already know the chief part. For hundreds
and hundreds of years the Eguptians were the most learned people in the
world, and especially in a knowledge of the stars, and the sun and moon,
and in adeptism and miracles.

10\. But woe came unto them; the land became flooded with hundreds of
millions of drujas; and as to the people of Egupt, the chief desire was
to be able to return in spirit after death and dwell with mortals. And
the things which followed are not even lawful to mention.

11\. Suffice it, these spirits lost all sight of any higher heavens than
to dwell on the earth; they knew no other. And they watched about when
children were born, and obsessed them, driving hence the natural spirit,
and growing up in the new body of the newborn, calling themselves
re-incarnated; and these drujas professed that when they previously
lived on earth they were great kings, or queens, or philosophers.

12\. And they taught as their master, Osiris, the false, did: That there
was no higher heaven than here on the earth, and that man must be
re-incarnated over and over until the flesh became immortal. Not all of
these spirits drove hence the natural spirit; but many merely engrafted
themselves on the same body; and whilst such persons lived, these
spirits lived with them and dwelt with them day and night; not knowing
more than their mortal companion. And when such person died, behold, the
druja went and engrafted itself on another child, and lived and dwelt
with it in the same way; and thus continuing, generation after
generation.

13\. And because of these indulgences many of the spirits came in
sar'gis in the families of the Eguptians; eating and drinking with them
corporeally; yea, and even doing things whereof no man may speak,
whereby dire disease seized upon the flesh of mortals; and their blood
and their flesh became inhabited with vermin. The people became idlers
and vagrants; the lands were not tilled, and the places of learning
became deserted ruins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chaper LII](oah318.md)
